Title: 

URL Source: https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/case_studies_of_environmental_risk_analysis_methodologies.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 09 Dec 2024 16:08:40 GMT

Markdown Content:
1Editors I

# Editors 

Ma Jun (Special Advisor to PBC Governor; Chair of the NGFS workstream “Supervision”; Director of Research Center for Green Finance Development at Tsinghua University) 

Ben Caldecott (Director, Oxford Sustainable Finance Programme & Associate Professor, University of Oxford; COP26 Strategy Advisor for Finance, Cabinet Office, UK Government) 

Ulrich Volz (Director of the SOAS Centre for Sustainable Finance & Reader in Economics, SOAS, University of London; Senior Research Fellow at the German Development Institute) Disclaimer 

II 

# Disclaimer 

With the exception of chapter 1, the views and opinions expressed in this volume are those of 

the authors alone and do not reflect those of the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for 

Greening the Financial System (NGFS) or the editors. Table of Contents 

III 

# Table of Contents Table of Contents 

IV Table of Contents 

VList of acronyms 

VI 

# List of acronyms 

AAL  Average Annual Loss 

BAU Business -as-Usual 

BCBS  The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 

BGS  Brown -Green -Score 

BMBF  German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 

BMG  Brown -Minus -Green 

CARIMA  Carbon Risk Management 

CGE  Computable General Equilibrium 

COGs  Cost of Goods Sold 

DSCR  Debt Service Coverage Ratio 

EAD  Exposure at Default 

EBITDA  Earnings Before Interests, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization 

EL  Expected Loss 

EP  Exceedance Probability 

EPR  Extended Producer Responsibility 

ERA  Environmental Risk Analysis 

ESG  Environmental, Social and Governance 

EVs  Electric Vehicles 

FIs  Financial Institutions 

GIZ  The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH 

IAMs  Integrated Assessment Models 

IAIS  International Association of Insurance Supervisor 

ICBC  Industrial and Commence Bank of China 

IEA  International Energy Agency 

IIASA  The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 

IOs  International Organizations List of acronyms 

VII 

IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IPSF  International Platforms for Sustainable Finance 

IRB  Internal Ratings Based Approach 

JGCRI  Joint Global Change Research Institute 

KRI  Key Risk Indicators 

LGD  Loss Given Default 

LTV  Loan -to-Value 

NCD  Natural Capital Declaration 

NCRA  Natural Capital Risk Assessment 

NGFS  The Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial 

System 

NPLs  Non -Performing Loans 

OECD  Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development 

PD  Probability of Default 

PIK  Potsdam Institute for Climate Research 

RCRA  Resource Conversation and Recovery Act 

RMS  Risk Management Solutions 

RCP  Representative Concentration Pathway 

SSPs  Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 

TCFD  Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures 

TEV  Total Economic Value 

UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme 

VaR  Value -at -Risk 

VfU  Verein für Umweltmanagement und Nachhaltigkeit in Finanzinstituten e.V. /

German Association for Environmental Management and Sustainability in 

Financial Institutions Glossary 

VIII 

# Glossary 1

Business -as -usual 

(BAU) 

Also referred as Baseline or Reference, describing scenarios based on the 

assumption that no mitigation policies or measures will be implemented 

beyond those that are already in force or legislated or will be adopted .2

Collateral  An asset or third -party commitment used by a collatera l provider to 

secure an obligation vis -à-vis a collateral taker. 3

Credit risk  The potential that a bank borrower or counterparty will fail to meet its 

obligations in accordance with agreed terms. 4

Environmentally 

unsustainable 

asset 

Polluting or high carbon asset, according to the terminology commonly 

used in the financial industry .

ESG integration  An SRI strategy that aims at enhancing traditional financial (risk) analysis 

by systematically including ESG criteria in the investment analysis to 

enhanc e risk -adjusted returns. 5

ESG scoring  The scoring methodologies assessing a company ’s performance in 

environmental, social and governance aspects based on different 

approaches, such as generating a final numeric score based on weighted 

scores of indicator s in the three dimensions. 6

Exposure  The inventory of elements/assets exposed to a hazard or risk. 7

Green asset  Asset that provides environmental benefits in the broader context of 

environmentally sustainable development. 8 

> 1

Definitions, unless otherwise indicated, are taken from the occasional papers or this  report . 

> 2

Adapted  from  IPCC  reports ( Allen, M. R., Barros, V. R., Broome, J., Cramer, W., Christ, R., Church, J. A., Dubash, N. K. (2014). 

IPCC fifth assessment synthesis report -climate change 2014 synthesis report. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 

Geneva, Switzerland. ).  Note that  BAU is defined at a general conceptual level here, thus the acute definition of it depends 

on the purposes of the studies and varies in terms of detailed assumptions.  

> 3

Adapted  from glossary of online database of  European Central Bank (2020) , All Glossary E ntries, retrieved April 2020 from 

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/html/glossc.en.html  

> 4

Adapted  from BCBS. (2000). Principles for the Management of Credit Risk.  

> 5

Adapted  from NGFS. (2019). A sustainable and responsible investment guide for central bank's portfolio management.  

> 6

Note that ESG scoring methodologies var y according to users and purposes, thus the definition here is a general 

conclusion based on some ESG scoring  practices by institutions like  AXA Investment Managers (2020) , Our framework and 

scoring methodology. retrieved from  https://www.axa -im.com/responsible -investin g/framework -and -scoring -

methodology  

> 7

Adapted  from background papers commissioned by the Global Commission on Adaptation to inform its 2019 flagship 

report: Stadtmueller, D., Jarzabkowski, P., Iyahen, E., Chalkias, K., Clarke, D., & Zwick, A. (2019). Insur ance for Climate 

Adaptation : Opportunities and Limitations.  

> 8

Adapted from the definition of “green finance” in the report by  Green Finance Study Group (2016) . Please note that the 

scope and definition of “green” now still varies across institutions accord ing to different purposes (See OECD publication: 

Inderst, G., Kaminker, C., & Stewart, F. (2012). Defining and measuring green investments: Implications for Institutional 

Investors' Asset Allocations. ). Glossary 

IX 

Hazard  Potential events with possibilities of occurrence and severity of any 

particular potential disaster, such as a tropical storm or flood, at a given 

location, within a specified time period. 9

Legal risk  The risk of a loss being incurred from unexpected appl ication of a law or 

regulation s or a contract that cannot be enforced. 10 

Liquidity risk  The risk that the firm will not be able to meet efficiently both expected 

and unexpected current and future cash flow and collateral needs 

without affecting either daily operations or the financial condition of the 

firm. 11 

Market risk  The risk of losses arising from movements in market prices of assets, 

including but not limited to equities, bonds, foreign exchanges, and 

commodities. 12 

Non -performing 

loans (NPLs) 

Loans that satisfy either or both of the following criteria: (a) material 

exposures which are more than 90 days past due; (b) the debtor is 

assessed as unlikely to pay its credit obligations in full without realization 

of collateral, regardless of the exis tence of any past -due amount or of the 

number of days past due. 13 

Operational risk  The risk of loss es resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, 

people and systems or from events, including legal risk s, but exclud ing 

strategic and reputational risk s.14 

Physical risks  Economic costs and financial losses resulting from the increasing severity 

and frequency of extreme climate change -related weather events (such 

as heat waves, landslides, floods, wildfires and storms) as well as longer 

term progressive shifts of the climate (such as changes in precipitation, 

extreme weather variability, ocean acidification, and rising sea levels and 

average temperatures), and rises in sea levels. In addition, losses of 

ecosystem services (e.g., desertificatio n, water shortage, degradation of 

soil quality or marine ecology), as well as environmental incidents (e.g., 

major chemical leakages or oil spills to air, soil and water/ocean) also fall 

into the category of physical risks. 15                          

> 9Adapted from background papers commissioned by the Global Commission on Adaptation to inform its 2019 flagship
> report: Stadtmueller, D., Jarzabkowski, P., Iyahen, E., Chalkias, K., Clarke, D., & Zwick, A. (2019). Insurance for Climate
> Adaptation: Opportunities and Limitations.
> 10 Adapted from glossary of on line database of European Central Bank (2020) .All Glossary Entries. Retrieved April 2020
> https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/html/glossc.en.html
> 11 Adapted from BCBS. (2008). Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision.
> 12 Adapted from BCBS. (2016). Minimum capital requirements for market risk.
> 13 Adapted from glossary of online database of European Central Bank (2020) . All Glossary Entries. Retrieved April 2020
> https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/html/glossc.en.html
> 14 Adapted from publication of BCBS. (2011). Principles for the Sound Manag ement of Operational Risk.
> 15 Partly adopted from NGFS. (2019). First comprehensive report: A call for action: Climate change as a source of financial
> risk. Note that t he definitions of physical and transition risks in this work are slightly different from (i.e., broader than) the
> definitions provided in the NGFS first comprehensive report where physical and transition risks only focus on climate -
> related impacts, while in this report both environment and climate related risks/impacts are taken into account.

Glossary 

X

Representative 

Concentration 

Pathway (RCP) 

Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations of the 

full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and chemically active 

gases, as well as land use/land cover. The word representative signifies 

that each RCP provides only one of many possible scenarios that would 

lead to the specific radiative forcing characteristics. The term pathway 

emphasizes that not only the long -term concentration levels are of 

interest, but also the trajectory taken over time to reach that outco me. 16 

Stress test  The evaluation of an FI ’s financial position under a severe but plausible 

scenario to assist in decision making within the FI. The term “stress 

testing ” is also used to refer not only to the mechanics of applying specific 

individual tests , but also to the wider environment within which the tests 

are developed, evaluated and used within the decision -making process. 17 

Transition risks  The risks relate to the process of adjustment towards a low -carbon 

economy. The process of reducing emission s is likely to have significant 

impact on all sectors of the economy affecting financial assets values. 18 

Underwriting risk  The loss on underwriting activity in the insurance or securities industry 19 .

For the insurance industry, is the risk that an insurance company will 

suffer losses because the economic situations or the occurring rate of 

incidents have changed contrary to the forecast made at the time when 

a premium rate was set. 20 

Vulnerability  The level of damage which would be expected at diffe rent levels of 

intensity of a hazard. For example, when a storm surge hits an area with 

weak building regulations and few flood mitigation measures, it is more 

vulnerable to loss compared to an area with strong flood control 

infrastructure and strong build ing regulations. Vulnerability assessment 

may include secondary impacts such as business interruption. 21                  

> 16 Adapted by IPCC (2014), AR5 Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change ; TCFD (2017), Final Report:
> Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosure.
> 17 Adapted from BCBS. (2009). Principles for sound stress testing practice s and supervision .
> 18 Adapted from NGFS. (2019). First comprehensive report: A call for action: Climate change as a source of financial risk .In
> its work, the NGFS has incorporated the risk associated with emerging legal cases related to climate change for
> governments, firms and investors, e.g. liability risks, as a subset of physical and transition risks . See also footnote 15 .
> 19 Adapted from Kumar, R. (2014). Strategies of banks and other financial institutions: Theories and cases: Elsevier.
> 20 Adapted from FSA Japan. (2020). Insurance Underwriting Risk Checklis t and Manual.
> 21 Adapted from background papers commissioned by the Global Commission on Adaptation to inform its 2019 flagship
> report: Stadtmueller, D., Jarzabkowski, P., Iyahen, E., Chalkias, K., Clarke, D., & Zwick, A. (2019). Insurance for Climate
> Adapt ation: Opportunities and Limitations. Preface

XI 

# Preface 

by Frank Elderson, Chair of the NGFS Dr. Ma Jun, Chair of the NGFS workstream “Supervision” Over the last few years, the idea that environment‐related risks can strand assets in different sectors of the global economy has become much more widely accepted. The threat of stranded assets, particularly from climate‐related physical and transition risks, has spurred work by financial supervisors and central banks. NGFS members have announced new supervisory expectations and climate stress tests to help improve the solvency of individual financial institutions, as well as the resilience of the financial system as a whole. We know we must act. But financial institutions and their supervisors are still at an early stage in developing and deploying suitable datasets, models, and tools. We urgently need better data and analysis in order to properly measure and manage exposures to environment‐related risks. There are barriers that need to be overcome and we know what these are: poor availability of consistent, comparable, and trusted data; costs of data and accessing resources to conduct analysis; missing standards and norms that hinder the use and flow of data; a lack of transparency into data and methods used, resulting in a trust deficit among users; and underdeveloped internal capabilities to analyse and interpret data and analysis to aid decision making. The NGFS is committed to helping the entire global financial system quickly overcome these barriers, so environment‐related risks can be properly measured and managed, and that is why we are excited to see the publication of our first NGFS Occasional Paper, Case Studies of Environmental Risk Analysis Methodologies. This anthology contains dozens of examples of environmental risk analysis in practice, with chapters written by a wide range of different research providers and practitioners. The methods and tools they describe can be used by wide range of different financial institutions, including banks, asset managers and insurance companies. While we are not recommending any particular service or provider, the point of the paper is to showcase the scale and pace of innovation currently underway. The Occasional Paper is relevant to all central banks, NGFS members, as well as non‐members. It offers valuable insight into the state of environmental risk analysis and many technical details that will be helpful for financial institutions and supervisors. The fact that it showcases the adoption of environmental risk analysis by some financial institutions in the world will also serve as an important inspiration for many others to follow suit. The views expressed in the Occasional Paper are those of the individual authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the members and observers of the NGFS. Finally, we would like to thank all those that contributed to this report, particularly the editors of this Occasional Paper—Prof. Ben Caldecott and Prof. Ulrich Volz—as well the NGFS Preface XII Secretariat and Dr. Ma’s team including Dr. Sun Tianyin, Dr. Li Jing, and Zhu Yun for their great efforts in organizing the participating authors and editing this volume. Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

1

# Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by 

# Financial Institutions 

By 

Central Banks and Supervisors ’ Network for Greening the Financial System 1

# 1 Introduction 

This NGFS Occasional Paper , Case Studies of Environmental Risk Analysis Methodologies , aims 

to provide a comprehensive review of the tools and methodologies for Environmental Risk 

Analysis ( ERA ) used by a few dozen financial institutions (FIs) including banks, asset managers 

and ins urance companies. The term “environmental risks ” used in this document refers to both 

environment - and climate -related risks. Climate -related risks are a subset of the broader 

category of environmental risks. 

As stated in the April 2019 NGFS Comprehensive Report, environment -related risks refer to 

risks (credit, market, operational and legal risks, etc.) posed by the exposure of financial firms 

and/or the financial sector to activities that may potentially cause or be affected by 

environmental degradation ( such as air pollution, water pollution and scarcity of fresh water, 

land contamination, reduced biodiversity and deforestation) and actions to address these 

environmental challenges. Climate -related risks refer to risks posed by the exposure of 

financial f irms and/or the financial sector to physical or transition risks caused by or related to 

climate change (such as damage caused by extreme weather events or a decline in the asset 

value s of carbon intensive sectors). 

Environment - and climate -related risks a ssociated with environmentally unsustainable assets 

are still underestimated by many FIs , while many green and low -carbon investment 

opportunities are under -appreciated by them, causing an excessive allocation of financial 

resources to environmentally unsu stainable assets and under -deployment of financial 

resources to green assets. This misallocation of resources reflects many institutional, policy 

and technical problems that contribute to the difficulties in measuring and pricing 

environmental externalitie s. In areas of green finance, these problems include, to name a few, 

the lack of clear definitions of green and environmentally unsustainable assets, inadequate or 

lack of user friendly environmental and climate data, the lack of public knowledge and capacity 

to conduct ERA, and the lack of policy and regulatory incentives for green financial activities. 

Based on the detailed case studies cont ained in the following chapters, this introduction 

provides an accessible review of the tools and methodologies developed by FIs, third -party 

service providers, research institutions and NGOs. These tools and methodologies cover a 

wide -rang e of environment al/climate scenario analyses and stress tests as well as 

environmental, social and governance ( ESG ) analysis and natural capital risk assessment, that 

can be used to analyze the potential impact on FIs from transition and physical risks associated 

with cli mate and other environmental factors. This introduction also identifies major barriers   

> 1This chapter is a condensed version of NGFS publication on Overview of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions.
> Link: https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/overview_of_environmental_risk_analysis_by_financial_ins
> titutions.pdf Chapter 1

2

to the wider adoptions of ERA by the financial services industry and concludes by 

recommending several steps for stakeholders to help enhance the awareness of the need f or 

ERA, develop capacities and ERA data sets , support pilot projects, and promote the disclosures 

of ERA results (including stress tests and scenario analyses). 

The rest of this introduction is divided into four sections. Section 1 presents a taxonomy of 

environmental risks, explains how these risks may translate into credit, market, underwriting, 

and operational risks for FIs, and highlights the importance of these risks by reviewing 

literature on the potential magnitude of financial losses they may cause. Section 2 reviews the 

ERA tools and methodologies that have been developed by financial institutions, third party 

services providers, research institutions, and NGOs. Section 3 discusses the major gaps 

between research and application of ERA tools. Sectio n 4 presents a number of 

recommendations for stakeholders, including FIs, central banks and regulators, industrial 

associations, NGOs and academic institutions on how to promote ERA in the financial industry. 

Classification of environmental risks 

According to the G20 Green Finance Study Group (2017) , NGFS (2019 a), and other literatures 

such as Ma et al . ( 2018 ), the environmental and climatic sources of financial risks can be 

mapped to two key risk categories – physical and transition risks 2:

1) Physical risks that arise from the impact of extreme climatic events (such as 

exacerbated extreme weather events), rises in sea levels, losses of ecosystem services 

(e.g., desertification, water shortage, degradation of soil quality or marine ecology), 

as well as environmental incidents (e.g., major chemical leaks or oil spills to air, soil ,

water or ocean); 

2) Transition risks that arise from human efforts to address environmental and climate 

challenges, including changes in public policies, technolog ical br eakthroughs, shifts in 

investor or public sentiments and disruptive business model innovations. 

Physical and transition risks have many categories and subcategories. For instance, “extreme 

weather events ” as physical risk s include tropical cyclones and typ hoons, floods, winter storms, 

heat waves, droughts and hailstorms, among others. Public policy changes, as a category of 

transition risks, include carbon trading systems, carbon taxes, subsidies for renewable energy 

or electric vehicles (EVs) and energy sa ving projects. There are numerous examples of physical 

and transition risks that may have financial implications for firms and the financial institutions 

that finance their operations.  Table 1-1 presents a brief taxonomy of environmental and 

climatic sources of risks under the headings of physical and transition risks.       

> 2Note that the following descriptions of physical and transition risks are broader than those used in the NGFS
> Comprehensive Report ( NGFS, 2019 a), as we now cover both environment -related physical and transition risks and
> climate -related physical and transition risks, while the NGFS (2019a) report focused only on climat e-related risks. Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions

3

Table 1-1 Sources of environmental risks 

Physical Risks  Sub -categories/examples 

Extreme weather events  Tropical cyclones/typhoons, floods, winter storms, heat 

waves, droughts, wildfires, hailstorms 

Ecosystem pollution  Soil pollution and degradation, air pollution, water 

pollution, marine pollution, environmental accidents 

Sea -level rise  Chronic sea -level rise or sea surges 

Water scarcity  Drought s or insufficient supply of water 

Deforestation/desertification 

Deforestation s leading to extinction s of species, changes to 

climatic conditions, desertification, and displacement of 

populations 

Transition Risks  Sub -categories/examples 

Public policy change s Energy transition policies, pollution control regulations, 

resource conservation regulations 

Technological changes  Clean energy technologies, energy saving technologies, 

clean transportation, and other green technologies 

Shifting sentiment  Changes in consumer preference s for certain products, 

changes in investor sentiment s on certain asset classe s

Disruptive business models 

New ways to run businesses that can rapidly gain market 

shares from traditional businesses (e.g., virtual meetings 

that significantly reduce business travels; vertical farming 

that challenges traditional farming) 

Source: Caldecott et al. (2013) ; CICERO (2017) ; G20 Green Finance Study Group 

(2017) ; Ma et al. (2018) ; NGFS (2019 a)

Transmission from environmental risks to financial risks 

As an essential task of FIs, risk management forms the basis of financial stability. 

Conventionally, FIs manage risks through a framework often under regulated prudential 

requirements. They include credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk, underwriting risk 3 and 

operational risk. Risks arising from environmental factors have not been serio usly considered 

or even recognized by many FIs, especially those in developing countries, and are therefore 

not yet properly priced. One reason for the lack of ERA and management is the limited 

understanding of the transmission mechanism between environmen tal and financial risks. This 

section elaborates on how financial firms ’ exposures to environmental and climate risks are 

transmitted to financial risks. 

While FIs may have direct exposures to environmental risks (e.g., headquarters of some FIs 

may be loca ted in coastal areas under risks of a sea -level rise), most exposures are indirect and 

arise from their clients ’ and investees ’ exposures to these risks. As illustrated in  Figure 1-1

(NGFS, 2020c) , transition risks will affect the operations of businesses and the wealth of 

households, creating financial risks for lenders and investors. They will also affect the broader 

macroeconomy through investment, productivity and relative price channels, particularly if 

the transition leads to stranded assets. Physical risks affect the economy in two ways. Acute   

> 3The definition of underwriting risks could be referred to publications by FSA Japan (2020); Kumar (2014) .Chapter 1

4

impacts from extreme weather events can lead to business disruption and damages to 

property: historically these impacts were considered transient , but this will change with 

increased global warming. These events can increase underwriting risks for insurers and impair 

asset values. Chronic im pacts, particularly from increased temperatures, sea levels rise and 

precipitation, may affect labor, capital and agriculture productivity. These changes will require 

a significant level of investment and adaptation by companies, households and governments .

Figure 1-1 Schematic illustration of transmission from environmental risks to 

financial risks 

Source: Adapted from NGFS (2020c) 

Table 1-2 describes 24 categories and sub -categories of environmental risks. Each may result 

in financial risks such as credit (default) risk, market risk (valuation loss), and liquidity risk, as 

well a s operational risk with FIs .4 There are therefore numerous scenarios for environmental 

risks to transmit to financial risks.  Table 1-2 shows almost 100 p ossible scenarios of 

environmental risk transmission to financial risks; we select 10 cases to illustrate how such 

transmissions could work. Note that these are just examples of how physical and transition 

risks may result in selected financial risks and o perational risks . This does not mean that these 

events could not result also in the other types of risks. For instance, typhoons and floods may 

have implications at the same time for credit, market, liquidity and operational risks of 

financial institutions .    

> 4For formal definitions of these financial risks, please see BCB S(2000, 2008, 2011, 2016 ).Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions

5

Table 1‐2 Examples of environmental risks transmitted to FI financial risks 

Financial risks For FIs Environmental risks Market risk Credit risk Liquidity risk Other risks Physical Risks Sub‐categories Extreme weather events Tropical cyclones/Typhoons   

Floods   

Winter storms Heat waves  

Droughts 

Wildfires 

Hailstorms Ecosystems pollutions Soil degradation and pollution 

Water pollution Marine pollution Environmental accidents   

Sea‐level rise Water scarcity Deforestation Desertification Transition Risks Sub‐categories Public policy change Energy transition policies  

Pollution control regulation Polices on resource conservation Technological changes Clean energy technologies  

Energy saving technologies Clean transportation Other green technologies Shifting sentiment   

Disruptive business model 

Sources: adapted from G20 Green Finance Study Group (2017); NGFS (2019a); Ma et al (2018); CICERO (2017); Caldecott et al. (2013); EIOPA (2019). Note: Examples of other risks include operational risk, legal risk, underwriting risk and liability risk. 5Chapter 1 

6

Case 1: Transmission from tropical cyclone/typhoon risk to market risk, credit risk 

and underwriting risk 

1) Climate change exacerbates the intensity and frequency of tropical cyclones/typhoons 

(physical risk) ;

2) Higher intensity and frequency of tro pical cyclones/typhoons lead to more severe 

damages to real estate assets located in coastal areas, reducing the value of properties 

(market risk); 

3) Lower property values reduce collateral values of mortgage loans, and increase loss 

given default (LGD); 

4) Low er collateral values of mortgage loans and disruption to economic activities (e.g., 

income) due to extreme weather events increase mortgage default rates, and higher 

default rates and LGD increase expected losses of banks (credit risk) ( Sun & Ma, 2020 ); 

5) Fo r insurers that provide property insurance for real estate assets in coastal areas, 

larger than expected damage losses of property could result in unexpectedly high 

claims (underwriting risk). 6

Case 2: Transmission from flood risk to operational risk, cre dit risk and liquidity risk 

1) Climate change will result in more severe and frequent floods (physical risk) ( Blöschl 

et al., 2019 ); 

2) Floods disrupt supply chains and plant operations of some non -financial firms (e.g., 

due to power and transportation disruption) that are banks ’ clients, or threaten banks ’

business continuity by damaging their buildings (operational risk); 

3) Business disru ptions reduce revenue s and increase repair/maintenance cost s, thus 

reduce profit of the affected non -financial firms; 

4) Reduced revenue s and profit s of these firms weaken their ability to repay bank loans 

and increase loan default rates and LGD (credit risk) ;

5) Insurers that provide flood insurance may be under pressure to liquidate assets at a 

loss to cover claims due to major flooding (liquidity risk). 

Case 3: Transmission from high temperatures/heat waves to credit risk and 

operational risk 

1) Climate change r esults in longer, more frequent and more dangerous heatwaves 

(physical risk) ( Pierre -Louis, 2019 ); 

2) Heatwaves decrease labor productivity ( Deryugina & Hsiang, 2014 ), and may disrupt 

transportation, power generation (e.g. , due to a lack of cooling water) of non -financial 

firms that are banks ’ clients;             

> 5Note that legal risk is included in the definition of operation r isk by the Basel Committee (BCBS, 2011 , Page 3). For liability
> risk, please see the report of Bank of England (2015) .
> 6Hurricane Andrew in 1992 in Florida, c aused an estimated $15.5 billion (1992 dollars )in total insured losses, resulted in
> the insolvency of 11 insurance companies , link: https://www.air -worldwide.com/news -and -events/press -releases/Twenty -
> Five -Years -after -Hurricane -Andrew --AIR -Analyzes -the -Impact -if -it -Were -to --Strike -Again -Today/ Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions

7

3) Decline in productivity and business disruption s reduce revenues and increase facility 

maintenance and repair costs of these non -financial firms; 

4) Reduction in profitability of these firms will increase default rates and LGD for banks 

(credit risk); 

5) Damages to transportation and power facilities may cause disruption of banking 

services (operational risk) ( Euronews, 2019 ). 

Case 4: Transmission from drought to credit risk 

1) Climate change causes more severe drought conditions and water shortages (physical 

risk) (Calanca, 2007 ; Loukas et al., 2008 ); 

2) Water scarcity may lead to power shortages; 

3) Water scarcity and power shortages reduce revenues and increase operating costs of 

non -financial firms that depend heavily on water (such as those in agriculture, food 

manufacturing, textile & dyeing, and other water intensive industries) and power; 

4) These changes in revenue and cost of non -financial firms may result in higher default 

rates of loans to the companies (credit risk ). 

Case 5: Transmission from wildfire to legal risk and credit risk 

1) Climate change leads to global warming and more frequent and intensive droughts 

(Herrera et al., 2017 ); 

2) Exacerbated droughts increase the probability of wildfires (physical risk); 

3) Wildf ires destroy infrastructure and equipment, thus lowering productivity and 

revenues of some non -financial firms. Wildfires may also increase their repayment 

costs ;

4) Losses incurred from more wildfires could also be in the form government penalties 

or legal c laims to liable companies that caused or exacerbated the wildfires; 

5) From a lender ’s perspective, higher cost, lower revenue and impairment of collaterals 

could reduce the affected non -financial firms ’ ability to repay bank loans and increase 

default rates and LGD (credit risk). 

Case 6: Transmission from soil degradation to credit risk 

1) Land degradation (physical risk) lowers agricultural yields ( UNDP, 2019 ; Young, 1994 ); 

2) Expenditure for remediation measures lead to lower profitability of agricultural firms; 

3) For banks lending to these agricultural firms, lower firm profitability may result in 

higher default rates and LGD (credit risk) ( Ascui & Cojoianu, 2019 ; UNEP FI, 2018b ). 

Case 7: Transmission from environmental accidents to legal risk and market ris k

1) Environmental accidents by non -financial firms (e.g. , BP ’s oil spill) may result in serious 

water and land pollution (physical risk); 

2) Litigation may result in heavy penalties for these companies and associated reputation 

risk; Chapter 1 

8

3) Lawsuits and penalties lead to extra costs and tarnish these companies ’ reputation 

and reduce their future sales; 

4) From an investor/lender ’s perspective, the above -mentioned changes in revenue and 

cost as well as reputational losses of the non -financial firms could lead to a fall in their 

valuation (market risk) and an increase in the probability of loan default s and LGD 

(credit risk) ;

5) From an insurer ’s perspective, these could result in an increase in environment -related 

claims under liability policies (liability risk). 7

Case 8: Transmission from energy transition policies to market and credit risks 

1) Energy transition policies may include measures (e.g. , carbon tax/pricing scheme) to 

limit utilization of fossil fuels (transition risk); 

2) These measures may result in higher costs for oil & gas companies, coal mining 

companies, and coal -fired power producers, reducing demand for their products; 

3) Higher cost s and reduced revenue s cut profits and reduce future cash flow s of these 

companies; 

4) From a FI perspective, these result in lower asse t valuation (market risk) and/or higher 

loan default rates and LGD of carbon -intensive companies (credit risk). 

Case 9: Transmission from technological changes to market risk and credit risk 

1) Technological innovation that results in a decline in renewa ble energy costs (transition 

risk) reduces market share and pricing power of “environmentally unsustainable 

companies ” such as oil & gas companies, coal mining companies, and coal -fired power 

producers; 

2) From a FI perspective, the reduced sales and profits of “environmentally unsustainable ”

companies lead to decreased asset value (market risk) and/or higher default rates and 

LGD (credit risk). 

Case 10: Transmission from shift in market sentiment to market, credit and liquidity 

risks 

1) Market sentiment towards carbon -intensive assets could change suddenly (transition 

risk) due to introduction of new climate policies such as carbon taxes, carbon trading 

mechanisms, reduction in quota for fossil fuel energy, and regulatory restrictions on 

fossil fuel financing, a nd new technology development in the form of a sharp decline 

in renewable energy costs and energy saving technologies ;

2) For FIs, such sentiment shifts could lead to a sudden decline in price/valuation of 

carbon -intensive assets they hold (market risk); for banks, such a decline in 

price/valuation could increase the default risk and LGD if these assets are held as loan 

collaterals (credit risk); it may also result in difficulties in selling such assets by FIs 

(liquidity risk).    

> 7For details, refer to Bank of England (2015 ). Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions

9

Financial significance of envir onmental risks 

The lack of recognition and pricing of environmental risks could lead to significant financial 

losses of corporates and FIs that provide financing for those exposed to such risks. It also 

implies an under -estimation of the potential costs (o r externalities) of financing or investing in 

environmentally unsustainable assets (including polluting and high carbon assets) by FIs, thus 

leading to excessive allocation of capital into environmentally unsustainable sectors and 

delaying the green transi tion of the global economy. 

To convince senior managers of FIs to take action to manage environmental risks, it is critical 

for them to get a sense of the potential magnitude of the financial impact of their FIs ’ exposure 

to environmental risks. This sect ion reviews literature s that estimate the potential financial 

losses that may be caused by environmental risks. 

As stated earlier, physical risks such as sea level rises and extreme weather events could 

seriously damage or destroy physical assets like real estate in coastal areas, leading to declines 

in property valuation, increases in non -performing Loans (NPLs), and heavy insurance losses. 

Examples of such losses estima ted in the literature s are: 

1) A Blackrock study estimates that the financial losses of 15 US cities could amount to 

US$ 8 trillion due largely to sea level increase and more frequent extreme weather 

events, as a result of climate change ( BlackRock, 2019 );

2) An EIU study estimates that, from a private sector investor ’s perspective, global 

warming of around 4°C could result in a present value loss of US$4.2 trillion of financial 

assets globally, 5°C warming could result in a present value loss of US$7 trillion, wh ile 

6°C of warming could lead to a present value loss of US$13.8 trillion. These losses are 

caused by direct and indirect harms to portfolios ’ growth and returns derived from 

more destructive floods, droughts and severe storms. However, from the public -sec tor 

perspective, which implies the employment of a lower discount rate, 6°C of warming 

could lead to a present value loss of US$43 trillion ( EIU, 2015 );

3) A DNB report entitled ‘Waterproof ’ estimates that, in case of 1.5°C to 3.5°C of warming, 

the number of claims on property insurance in 2085 would rise to 131% of that in 2016 

(Regelink et al., 2017 );

4) Swiss Re estimated insured losses in 2016 amounted to less than one -third of the 

approximately US $175 billion in total disaster -related losses, leaving a prot ection gap 

of US $121 billion. The global protection gap has widened by about 20% 8 over the past 

25 years ( EESI, 2018 ; Swiss Re, 2016 ). 

Transition risks, arising from the process of policy - and technology -driven adjustment s towards 

a greener and low -carbon economy, could take the following forms: 

1) Technology innovation, leading to a sharp fall in renewable energy costs and thus 

reduced pricing power and market share for fossil fuels. For example, Bloomberg New 

Energy Finance (Bloomberg NEF, 2019 ) estimates that the global average wind and 

solar power costs would fall to 87% of coal fired power prices by 2027 and to 73% by 

2030;  

> 8The protection gap he re refers to the ratio of total uninsured losses to total economic losses. Chapter 1

10 

2) Policy changes, including those leading to a sharp increase in carbon prices. Based on 

World Bank estimate (Ramstein et al., 2019 ) current global average carbon price is at 

US$ 2 a ton, a mere fraction of the estimated US$ 75 a ton in 2030 required to achieve 

a 2 -degree target; 

3) Change s in consumer preference: According to an Accenture survey in 2019 ( Lo ng et 

al., 2019 ), around 72% of respondents indicate that they are currently buying more 

environmentally friendly products than they were five years ago, and this shift in 

consumer preference will likely strengthen going forward. 

These significant transit ion forces will likely lead to very sizeable financial impact on carbon 

intensive assets in many countries and markets. According to the IEA ’s 2012 World Energy 

Outlook ( Van der Hoeven, 2013 ), it was estimated to have a 50% chance of limiting the rise in 

global temperature to 2°C, only a third of current fossil fuel reserves can be burned before 

2050. Another study published in Nature Climate Change ( McGlade & Ekins, 2015 ), globally, a 

third of oil reserves, half of gas reserves and over 80% of current coal reserves should remain 

unused from 2010 to 2050 in order to meet the target of 2°C. In other words, if the world is to 

meet the Paris climate targets, these unburnable fossil fuels must become stranded assets. An 

example of such a risk is the potential sh arp decline in demand for coal -fired power generation 

in a few years when renewable energy prices become even more competitive, undercutting 

the economics of new as well as existing coal fired power plants and resulting in stranded 

assets in the coal minin g and coal -fired power sectors. The following summarizes the 

preliminary findings of several studies on the financial impact of transition risks: 

1 A study by Tsinghua University estimates that the non -performing loan ratio of 

representative coal -fired power companies could exceed 20% by 2030, up from the 

current level of less than 3%, due to the expected fall in clean energy costs and the 

resulting downward pressure on pricing power of the coal -fired power companies, the 

rise in carbon prices, a decline in d emand, and an increase in funding costs for pollution 

and carbon intensive companies (Ma & Sun , 2020) ;

2 A study by HSBC Global Research estimate s that unburnable fossil fuels may result in a 

40%~60% decrease in enterprise valuations EBITDA for some major resource -focused 

global companies, including Shell, BP, Total and Statoil ( Robins et al., 2013 );

3 Studies on the transition risks of climate change have estimated the potential for losses 

as ranging from US $ 1-4 trillion when considering the energy sector alone Mercure et al., 

2018 , or up to US $ 20 trillion when looking at the economy more broadly ( NGFS, 2019 a);

4 Summarizing the results of 31 models, the IPCC concludes that the mitigation costs of 

limiting warming to 2°C, including consumption losses due to risks of food and water 

security, loss of livelihoods and income, breakdown of infrastructure networks and critical 

services and alike, would be between 1 -4% of global aggregate consumption by 2030 

compared to current economic forecasts under cost -effec tive scenarios with all key 

mitigation technologies available and no delay of mitigation ( Allen et al., 2014 );

5 A climate stress -test of the financial system that examines the impact of transition risk for 

the top 20 listed banks in Europe finds, even foc using only on the banks ’ portfolio of 

equity holdings, the Value at Risk amounts to about 1% of the banks ’ regulatory capital, 

while losses vary between 8% to over 30% of capital across banks under “severe ”

scenarios (Battiston et al. 2017). Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

11 

# 2 Overview of ERA tools for financial institutions 

This section reviews the framework for ERA and various ERA methodologies. Many of these 

methodologies are developed by specialized third -party vendors and research institutions and 

are used by FIs on a pilot basis due to their complexity and resource intensity. 

Three aspects of the ERA methodologies and their applications are reviewed :9 first, the major 

steps for analyzing environmental and climate -related risks are summarized; second, the 

methodologies for scenarios a nalysis and stress test are classified by the types of users 

including banks, asset managers and insurance companies, and by the types of risks including 

physical and transition risks; third, alternative methodologies used by FIs in measuring 

environmental risks and opportunities are presented, including ESG ratings and the natural 

capital risk assessment approach. This section also includes a few boxes that describe technical 

details of several ERA methodologies, including frequently used climate scenarios .

Steps for environmental risk analysis and management 

The framework for environmental risks analysis and management typically involves four 

steps: 10 

• Risk identification : conducting strategic assessment of the types of environmental 

factors that may cause financial risks (e.g., value impairment from sea -level increases, 

extreme weather events, declining demand for or prices of fossil fuels, devaluation of 

associated infrastructure, interruption of supply chains, increased natural capital cost s,

and increase d emission and pollution costs); 

• Risk exposure : measuring the sizes of FIs ’ exposures to these risks (e.g., 15% loans 

exposed to certain risks); 

• Risk assessment : estimating probabilities and magnitudes of financial losses arising 

from these risks (using ER A methods such as scenario analysis and stress test). The 

results of these ERA could feed into risk pricing; 

• Risk mitigation : taking actions to reduce risks via introducing internal policies and 

processes that discourage exposures to environmentally risky assets. For example, FIs 

can reduce their exposures to carbon -intensive infrastructure assets now to avoid 

carbon lock -in and the risks of holding stranded assets in the longer term; they can 

also assist the green transition and environmental risk managem ent of non -financial 

companies via more active shareholder engagement, requesting better information 

disclosure and providing risk management products. 

Models used for assessing different types of risks 

This subsection reviews the various models used to assess, on a forward -looking basis, the 

financial impact of environmental risks in the forms of scenario analysis and stress tests. 

Models for assessing physical risks 

Most ERA models assessing physical risks first capture the impact on companies ’ financial s due 

to environmental risks . The financial impact, such as declining revenues or rising costs, can be       

> 9There could be more dimensions for classifying the ERA methodologies, e.g., by micro/sectoral/macro perspective , or by
> dynamic/static approach .
> 10 As indicated by the “Guide to climate scenario analysis for central banks and supervisors, NGFS (2020b) ”, it must be
> recognized that this field is still relatively in its infancy and that there is no universally agreed approach. Chapter 1

12 

the direct result of environmental or climate events that cause property and other damages, 

or an indirect or secondary effect of physical events. The most common secondary impact is 

business interruptions and reduced economic activities. Examples include electricity outages, 

disruptions to supply chains and declining demand for the company ’s products due to an 

economic slowdown. The resulting cha nges in financial statements are then integrated into 

financial models (e.g., probability of default ( PD ) and LGD models or securities ’ valuation 

models) to quantify the financial risks (e.g., credit risks for lenders and market risks for 

institutional investors) both on a portfolio basis and individual transaction/client basis. Results 

of these analyses are typically presented as a scenario analysis or a stress test. Examples of 

physical risks analyses include Tsinghua University ’s modelling framework for assessing the 

impact of future trajectories of typhoon s on default probabilit ies of mortgage loans in Chinese 

coastal cities under various climate scenarios in Chapter 6, and VfU ’s analysis of the impact of 

wat er stress on corporate bonds ’ credit risks, in Chapter 9. Similar approaches should be 

applicable to analyzing impact on stocks and other securities. 

Models for assessing transition risks 

Like physical risk models, typical ERA models assessing transition risks try to first capture the 

financial statement impact of policy and technological changes at the company level driven by 

environmental and climatic factors under various scenarios. 

In a climate -related transition risk analysis, the typical first step is the creation of temperature -

based or event -based scenarios using underlying models, such as sector -specific models, 

macroeconomic models or Integrated Assessment Models (IAM). Given these scenarios, the 

financial models can then quantify the impact of energy transition policies (e.g., increasing 

carbon prices and contracting demand for fossil fuel products) and technology changes (e.g., 

causing downward pressure on the sales and prices of fossil fuel products) on companies ’

revenues and costs in carbon -intensive sectors such as oil & gas, coal mining, coal -fired power 

generation, steel, cement and transportation. These changes in corporate financial statements 

are then integrated into risk models by FIs to assess financial risks (e.g., credit and market risks) 

both on a portfolio basis and an individual transaction/client basis. 

A major challenge in modelling climate -related transition risks is handling the interactions 

between economic variables, energy sector parameters and corporate reactions. IAM pro vide 

input to tackle these challenges. Among many methodologies incorporating IAM included in 

the Occasional Paper, two examples are CLIMAFIN methodology in Chapter 4 that explains 

how to use the outputs of IAM (across scenarios) to assess transition risks for investor 

portfolios (Battiston et al. 2017), and the methodology in Chapter 11 that uses an IAM –

incorporating both energy and land -use systems into a macro model – to translate the 

assumptions under different transition scenarios into key economic v ariables. The IAM 

approach produces a series of outputs on the energy sector, which are then used to translate 

scenario outputs into shocks on the real economy. Shocks are divided into two types: direct 

shocks ( such as carbon price increases), which affect asset value streams through a company ’s

operations or costs, and indirect shocks (such as a decline in demand and a resulting change 

in commodity prices), which affect asset value streams through changes in demand or selling 

prices. 

ERA methods have also been developed to analyze the financial impact of other environment -

related transition risks (such as pollution and water stress), a lthough the number of such 

studies are significantly fewer than those on climate -related risks. For pollution -related 

transi tion risk analysis, a typical first step is to construct scenarios related to environmental 

policy and regulatory changes, which would have an impact on the costs and/or revenues for 

companies in high -polluting sectors. For example, an ICBC environmental s tress test models Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

13 

the impact of possible increases in government levies on air pollution. The impact of such 

policy changes on companies ’ financial statements are estimated, and the resulting changes 

in financial variables, such as costs, revenues, profits , and asset/liability ratios are fed into 

valuation models or PD models to quantify the changes in market and credit risks of the 

affected companies and/or investment portfolios (in Chapter 5). 

Models used by different types of FI s

Models used by banks 

Most ERA models for commercial banking business es assess the impact of environmental 

factors on credit risk metrics, such as PD and LGD (see for example the UNEP FI ’s pilot project 

for banks, ( UNEP FI, 2018a , 2018b ). These models – including transition risk models and 

physical risk models – work by first estimating the environment -related losses or changes of 

some metrics that constitute explanatory variables for the loan -related risk models, then using 

these result s as inputs for banks ’ credit risk models to generate adjusted risk measures 

including PD, LGD and credit ratings. Thus, the adjusted risk metrics produced from the second 

step have incorporated environmental factors, i.e., translated environmental risks i nto credit 

risks .

The above -mentioned ERA methodologies apply to banks ’ lending business. Banks engaged in 

securities and investment businesses also apply ERA models to analyze the impact of various 

environmental and climate factors on the performance of b onds, equities, other securities and 

their portfolios. These models are in principle the same as those described in the following 

subsection on models used by asset managers. 

Models used by asset managers 

ERA models for asset management first estimate the changes induced by environmental risks 

or factors to metrics that later constitute the determinant variables of valuation models of 

assets such as equities, bonds, real estate and infrastructure. Very often, the direct 

determinant variables of valuatio n models are dividends or cash flows. In a typical ERA model 

used by asset managers, environmental factors (e.g., energy transition policies) lead to 

declining revenues and increasing costs for a carbon -intensive company or portfolio, which in 

turn reduce the present values of their future dividends or cash flows. The estimated changes 

in the valuation of a security, an asset (e.g., stock, bond, property or infrastructure) or a 

portfolio under various scenarios are the typical “output ” of the ERA model. 

Ot her outputs of the ERA exercise could take the forms of Value -at -Risk metrics (e.g., 5%

probability of over y% drawdown) as illustrated in Chapter 23 of this report by AVIVA or a 

sensitivity analysis (e.g., a x% share/bond price decline for a 1% increase i n carbon price) as 

introduced in Chapter 16 by CUFE. 

Some researchers have used regressions to derive “Carbon -Beta ” to capture the “risks and 

opportunities ” of stocks or other assets arising from the climate transition, based on stock 

market prices and ca refully constructed “environmentally unsustainable ” and “green ”

portfolios. The Carbon Beta estimates the impacts or effects on firms, and their values or stock 

prices, of possible changes in expectations that may occur as the present economy moves 

towards a green economy (see for example the CARIMA approach in Chapter 34 ). The Carbon 

Beta can be determined for different asset classes such as stocks, corporate bonds, loans, 

portfolios, and funds. In portfolio management, the Carbon Beta can be integrated in to 

investment strategies, such as Factor Investing and Best -in -class approaches, and can be used 

for hedging carbon risks. Chapter 1 

14 

Models used by insurance companies 

Insurers ’ business consists of two categories: (i) underwriting business providing insurance 

serv ices and solutions to policyholders; and (ii) investment business acting as a major 

institutional investor. For the underwriting business, insurance companies mainly face risks of 

increased liabilities from physical risks, such as more frequent and severe weather events. 

Most ERA methodologies applied to the insurance sector (especially by property & casualty 

insurance and re -insurance companies) in this context use catastrophe models to estimate 

potential loss and price premia, see for example case studies by RMS in Chapter 24 . They also 

integrate forward -looking climate scenarios in such models to represent the changed patterns 

of possible future losses compared to historical records. 

Other methodologies 

Two alternative methodologies are also used in ERA b y FIs. One is ESG scoring and integration, 

used mainly by institutional investors in assessing the “current ” ESG performance s of the 

issuers of securities, which may have forward -looking implications. The second, natural capital 

risk assessment, focuses on assessing risk factors that fall into the ecological category, such as 

water availability and soil quality, and how these risks may impact financial performances of 

borrowers or other corporates. 

ESG scoring and integration 

ERA methodologies, often pres enting results in the form of scenario analysis and stress tests, 

focus on forward -looking assessments of the financial implications of environment - and 

climate -related risks. Investment managers and banks also evaluate the ESG performance of 

their clients or assets held to facilitate investment/lending decision -making. Some empirical 

studies show that the ESG performance of listed companies and bond issuers has a positive 

correlation with their long -term financial performance. 

ESG scoring and integratio n methodology can be considered as another major category of 

tools for assessing environmental risks for investment holdings. The assessment of ESG 

performance is typically summarized in ESG scores of the securities (e.g., stocks and bonds), 

which are usua lly estimated by specialized ESG rating providers. The ESG scores are used 

(integrated) in the investment management practices for selecting securities with a view to 

managing the relevant financial risk exposure (e.g., by excluding stocks and bonds of low er 

ESG scores in the portfolio) and/or capturing upside opportunities (e.g., by giving preference s

to selecting stocks and bonds with higher ESG scores in the portfolio). 

Major credit rating agencies have incorporated “material ” ESG factors in their cred it analysis 

(see Chapter s 26, 2 7). “Material ” factors are those that increase the likelihood of default and 

credit loss currently or potential ly in the future. Several financial data service providers such 

as MSCI and Bloomberg have developed ESG databases that cover most listed companies and 

bonds. Many asset managers use ESG indicators provided by these data vendors, but some 

asset managers also developed their proprietary methodologies for ESG scoring and 

integration. For example, one asset manager constructed an ESG scoring methodology that 

considered six aspects of environmental performance, including “emissions and energy 

management ”, “ enviro nmental impact of production ”, “ water management ”, “ reputation risk ”, 

“emission reduction initiatives ” and “measures of environmental impact ”. A growing number 

of banks ha s initiated ESG analysis of their loan applicants and other clients. 

The increasing demand for reliable and timely ESG data has given rise to ESG data providers 

that use technology – such as artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms – to 

screen vast quantities of unstructured data from sources external to a company, such as news 

articles, NGO reports, social media and other sources. Automated search tools using pre -Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

15 

defined keywords linked to specific ESG issues (e.g., climate change, water scarcity, labor 

relations, corporate governance) can scan vast quantities of data to id entify risk incidents and 

controversies related to a company ’s ESG performance and sustainability. T hese data can then 

be used to compile ESG scores and metrics, which are used by banks, institutional investors 

and investment managers for due diligence and risk management (Rep Risk ’s Chapter 30 ). 

Natural capital risk assessment 

In 2016, a coalition including environmental NGOs, companies and accounting organizations 

published the natural capital protocol, which called for the application of the natural capi tal 

risk assessment (NCRA). NCRA is a toolkit to help businesses measure and value the natural 

services that they rely on and their natural capital liabilities, which include the environmental 

damage that may result from their operations. Natural capital i n this context refers to factors 

that fall into the ecological category that may have an impact on production activities, such as 

the quantity of natural capital (e.g., water availability, soil depth), quality of natural capital 

(e.g., water, air or soil q uality) or the availability of ecosystem services (e.g. water filtration or 

pollination). 

The aim of natural capital risk assessment is to identify the natural capital risks likely to be 

material to corporates and investments in securities. Currently, the most relevant and studied 

sector is agriculture, given its relevance to both the impacts and dependencies on natural 

capital. As in the case of National Australian Bank, the risk assessment model in this sector 

evaluates the future trend of these natural capital risks and their potential impacts on 

agricultural production, which in turn could determine farmers ’ profitability and therefore 

ability to repay their loans, see Chapter 8. The result of NCRA could take the form of a ‘traffic 

lights ’ system which classified loan applicants ’ natural capital risks into high, medium, and low 

risks. These risk measures can be factored into a bank ’s overall loan decision -making process. 

# 3 Gaps in ERA analysis and applications 

While an increasing number of financial supe rvisors and FIs have recognized the significance 

of ERA for ensuring financial stability and the resilience of FIs to environment - and climate -

related risks, its application s remain limited. Consultation meetings with a few dozen FIs 

indicate that only a f raction of large FIs in OECD countries and China have begun to utilize 

some ERA methods for assessing environmental risks and many of these applications remain 

at the experimental stage. Many FIs are not yet engaged, and most small FIs, especially in 

devel oping countries, have limited awareness of ERA. This finding is also consistent with the 

NGFS Status Report on Financial Institutions Experiences from working with green, non -green 

and environmentally unsustainable financial assets and a potential risk dif ferential. The 

barriers to wider ERA applications may include the following: 

1) A lack of awareness of environmental risks and appreciation of their relevance 

Many FIs, especially those in developing countries, remain unaware of the significance of 

environmen tal risks and their potential implications of these risks on their operations. This is 

in part due to the lack of public knowledge, such as media coverage and education, and clear 

and explicit expectations from central banks and other regulators. In recent years, many FIs in 

OECD countries have gained awareness of climate -related risks, in part due to the efforts of 

the NGFS, but some of them remain largely unconcerned, partly because their investee 

companies or borrowers have yet to be significantly impact ed by these risks, and partly 

because such risks are perceived to be distant and imprecise. 

2) Inadequate environmental data Chapter 1 

16 

Effective ERA requires granular data that describe the environmental aspects of companies 

and securities, historical patterns of envir onmental and climate changes, associated losses, 

forward -looking scenarios and assumptions for future environmental and climate changes and 

losses, as well as impacts of such changes on economies, sectors and companies. To a varying 

degree, the lack of app ropriate data forms another barrier to ERA applications. 

In some jurisdictions where corporates and FIs look to regulators for developing or 

recommending specific unsustainable finance taxonomies, the absence of such taxonomies 

becomes a key bottleneck for ERA. Without taxonomies, corporates and FIs are unable to 

clearly define and measure their green and environmentally unsustainable activities, and FIs 

are therefore unable to clearly quantify their green and environmentally unsustainable 

exposures which m ake it more difficult to conduct ERA. 

In some jurisdictions, there is a lack of regulatory guidance and standards for ESG information 

disclosure. While other jurisdictions have disclosure requirements, the reported data are not 

sufficiently granular nor appropriate for risk assessment purposes. There are many sources of 

publicly available environmental information (G20 GFSG, 2017), but many of them are not 

presented in a usable or friendly format for FIs, or are not easily accessible to FIs. 

3) Limited capa city to develop ERA methodologies 

For a typical financial firm, the development of ERA tools and models requires significant 

resources, including researchers specializing in economics, finance, environment, climate and 

statistics, and spending on manpower, data, and consultants. When the urgency or future 

benefits of such analysis remains unclear, the high cost of development, which is immediate, 

tends to deter many FIs from investing in such an effort. Another explanation for the lack of 

investment in ERA methodologies is that many ERA components are public goods eventually 

to be used widely, but there are no mechanisms for sharing the R&D spending or access to 

data. 

4) Limited application to environment -related risks and emerging market economies 

Compared with the methodologies for assessing climate risks, risk metrics and ERA methods 

for assessing environment -related risks (e.g., pollution, water risk, and biodiversity losses) –

which are of greater concerns in many developing countries than in OECD countr ies , are less 

developed. While many developing countries (e.g., some African and ASEAN countries) are 

facing greater challenges due to climate change and environmental degradation, their financial 

sectors ’ awareness of environmental risks and capacities fo r conducting ERA are much more 

limited than those of OECD countries. 

5) Gaps in methodologies and data quality 

a. Most ERA methodologies available today focus on the transmission of environmental 

risks to financial risks via the corporate channel, by working out the impact of 

environmental/climate scenarios on financial statement and using the results for 

quantifying the credit and market risks for investments/loans in financial models. 

These approaches tend to ignore the macroeconomic feedback loop despite that 

environmental and climate changes may well impact many macroeconomic and 

macro -financial variables affecting a company ’s performance. The lack of “feedback ”

analysis reflects the underdevelopment of methodologies for capturing the complex 

mechanisms of ris k transmission between the real economy, energy sector and the 

financial system. 

b. Very few transition risk analyses have taken into account future adaptive measures of 

the affected entities in estimating their future financial performance (e.g., energy Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

17 

co mpanies ’ internal efforts to allocate resources to renewable energies). This problem 

may result in some overestimation of financial risks arising from FIs ’ exposure to such 

entities. 

c. Most physical risk analyses focus on direct physical damages of propert ies, 

infrastructure and agriculture assets, with limited reference to impact of climate 

events on variables affecting firms ’ operating environment. For example, it has been 

challenging for these analyses to quantify the relationships between natural disast ers 

and the resulting damages to local economic growth, household income, 

unemployment rate, and supply chain conditions. 

d. Most ERA studies by NGOs and academic institutions focus on listed equities and 

publicly traded bonds, as data for these securities are more readily available. This also 

means that environment - and climate -related risks are under -researched in sectors 

such as commercial banking, private equity, real estate and infrastructure. 

e. The baseline, business -as -usual (BAU) scenario selected in many models directly 

impacts the magnitude of results under the policy or transition scenario. Selecting a 

baseline scenario requires an implicit assumption on the current level of policy and 

technical developments, which directly affects results. The fact that there is currently 

no widely accepted baseline scenario makes it difficult to compare results from 

different studies. 

f. On ESG ratings, one major issue is the inconsistency in data definitions between 

different data vendors. A related issue is the lack of transparency on the 

methodologies used to develop ESG ratings. A study published by MIT and University 

of Zurich found that “measurement divergence ” (i.e., the different ways ESG criteria 

are measured) explains more than 50 percent of the variations ac ross ESG ratings 

(Berg et al., 2019). In terms of data used, many ESG data vendors rely heavily on 

counterparties ’ self -reported information that may not be sufficiently reliable. 

# 4 Options for mainstreaming ERA 

Given the growing recognition by NGFS members of the significance of environmental and 

climate -related risks to the resilience of the financial system, and the usefulness of ERA 

approaches in helping FIs to identify and manage such risks, some collective efforts are needed 

– by FIs, industry associat ions, central banks and financial supervisors, NGFS, international 

organizations (IOs), third -party vendors, and academic institutions – to promote ERA 

applications in the financial sector. We recommend the following actions to the 

abovementioned stakehold ers, some of which have appeared in other NGFS publications , such 

as A Call for Action: Climate Change as a Source of Financial Risk (NGFS, 2019a), 

Macroeconomic and Financial Stability Implications of Climate Change (NGFS, 2019 b), Guide 

for Supervisors – Integrating Climate -related and Environmental Risks into Prudential 

Supervision (NGFS, 2020a), and A Status Report on Financial Institutions ’ Experiences Working 

with Green, Non -green and Brown Financial Assets and a Potential Risk Differential (NGFS, 

2020 d). 

Enhancing awareness of the need for ERA 

Central banks and financial supervisors should strive to enhance ERA awareness among FIs, 

including by: conducting ERA themselves to assess the impact of environmental factors on 

financial stability; clarifying the expectations for FIs to assess and manage environment - and Chapter 1 

18 

climate -related risks; sending policy signals that FIs ’ disclosures of ERA results could be made 

a semi -compulsory or compulsory requirement in the future (NGFS , 2020a). 

Industry associations servicing the financial community, NGOs and academic institutions and 

the media can also help to raise awareness by advocating the relevance of environment - and 

climate -related risks to financial stability and the green transition of the financial system via 

publications, seminars, and public -private sector dialogues. Such public efforts should 

highlight that the impact of many transition risks (e.g., those associated with energy transition) 

could be felt much earlier and risk hedging and mitigation are fe asible even as many physical 

risks associated with climate change may be visible only in the longer term. 

Developing analytical capacity and databases 

Industry associations, central banks and supervisors, IOs, NGOs and academic institutions 

could organize seminars and training activities on ERA methodologies, with some results 

delivered as public goods to the financial industry. These organizations could host or signpost 

ERA -related information on their websites, including working papers, case studies, as w ell as 

publicly available environmental data, models and tools. In developing ERA tools for internal 

use, FIs, central banks and supervisors that lack internal resources could work with external 

vendors, academic institutions and NGOs that have invested su bstantially in this area. 

Supporting demonstration projects 

The NGFS, IOs, central banks and supervisors should consider supporting (by organizing and/or 

mobilizing research grants for) a few demonstration ERA projects in key sectors such as 

banking, insur ance and asset management, and for key regions exposed to substantial 

environment - and climate -related risks. For example, an ERA demonstration project for 

analyzing transition risks to carbon -intensive assets may prove useful to a wide range of FI 

users. Demonstration projects for analyzing risks associated with water shortages, pollution 

and biodiversity losses could also help speed up methodological progress and enhance 

capacities in these areas. It may also be useful to support some case studies, especi ally in 

developing countries, to understand with more granularity the potential impact of physical 

and transition risks on regions highly vulnerable to environment - and climate -related risks (e.g., 

those with heavy dependence on fossil fuels or subject to higher risks of droughts and extreme 

weather events). 

Encouraging disclosures of environmental risk exposures and ERA results 

As stated in NGFS (2019a), the NGFS emphasizes the importance of a robust and 

internationally consistent climate and environmen tal disclosure framework. In countries 

where tools and capacity are relatively more developed, central banks and supervisors can 

encourage disclosures of FIs ’ exposures to environment - and climate -related risks (e.g., 

percentages of portfolios in high carb on assets and in heavily -polluting industries) and their 

ERA results (including environmental stress tests and scenario analyses) in line with TCFD 

recommendations. Semi -compulsory (e.g., the “comply or explain ” requirement) or 

compulsory disclosures can b e considered when capacities are further enhanced. 

As FIs ’ abilities to produce decision -useful disclosures depend critically on disclosures by firms 

in the real economy, central banks and financial supervisors could work with securities 

regulators and ex changes as well as environmental ministries to improve corporate level 

reporting on environmental and climate -related information and to ensure the reported 

information is user -friendly to FIs and market participants. Industry associations and NGOs can 

als o organize pilot projects for environmental information disclosures by corporates and FIs 

for demonstration purposes. Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

19 

Developing Key Risk Indicators (KRI) and statistics 

The NGFS and relevant IOs can conduct research and encourage market bodies and academi c

institutions to develop key risk indicators to identify and measure the most important 

environmental and climate -related risks with financial implications and enable data 

comparability and aggregation. Such indicators could be developed along sector line s (e.g., 

commercial banking, asset management, and insurance). Once developed, these indictors can 

be used as the basis for compiling environmental risk statistics for the financial sector at both 

country and global levels. Such statistics will be useful f or monitoring and assessing the levels 

and changes of environment - and climate -related risks a country or the global financial sector 

is exposed to, and will enable forward looking risk analysis on an aggregate basis. They could 

also contribute to better understanding of risk classifications, potential mitigants and 

recommended actions. 

Supporting development and adoption of unsustainable finance taxonomies 

NGFS (2019a) called for policymakers to bring together the relevant stakeholders and experts 

to dev elop a taxonomy that enhances the transparency around which economic activities 

contribute to the transition to a green and low -carbon economy and are more exposed to 

environment - and climate -related risks (both physical and transition). In jurisdictions w here 

the lack of unsustainable finance taxonomies forms a barrier to green finance development 

and environment - and climate -related risk analysis, regulators could take initiatives in 

developing such taxonomies or encouraging the adoption of certain intern ational taxonomies 

already available. For jurisdictions that need help in taxonomy development, IOs and NGOs 

could provide assistance. International platforms and relevant IOs, such as the International 

Platforms for Sustainable Finance (IPSF) and the ISO Technical Committee on Sustainable 

Finance, could explore options for harmonizing sustainable finance taxonomies. 

# 5 Organization of this Occasional Pa per 

The rest of this Occasional Paper, consist ing of 3 6 chapters, is organized as follows. Part I 

includes chapters on ERA methodologies that are or can be potentially applied by commercia l

banks, with a focus on analyzing credit risk implications of environment - and climate -related 

physical and transition ris ks. Part II includes chapters on ERA methodologies that are or can be 

potentially applied by asset managers to analy ze market and credit risks of environment - and 

climate -related physical and transition risks, as well as methodologies developed by or for 

insurance companies to assess liability risks arising from their climate -related exposures. The 

tools and methodologies presented in most of the chapters in Parts I and II take the form of 

scenario analysis and stress testing and thus provide forward -lookin g assessments of future 

impact of environment - and climate -related risks facing FIs. Part III include s chapters on ESG 

index and rating methodologies already adopted by some asset managers to quantifying the 

current exposure of ESG risks of investment port folios. Part IV include s chapters on a number 

of cross -cutting issues, including methodology comparison, scenario assumptions, and carbon 

risk assessment tools. Chapter 1 

20 

# Bibliography 

Allen, M. R., Barros, V. R., Broome, J., Cramer, W., Christ, R., Church, J. A., Dubash, N. K. 

(2014). IPCC fifth assessment synthesis report -climate change 2014 synthesis report. 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland .

Ascui, F., & Cojoianu, T. (2019). Natural capital credit risk assessment. NGFS ERA Occasiona l

Paper .

Bank of England. (2015). The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector .

https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ -/media/boe/files/prudential -

regulation/publication/impact -of -climate -change -on -the -uk -insurance -sector.pdf 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A Climate stress -

test of the financial system. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 283 –288. 

BCBS. (2000). Principles for the management of credit risk .

https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs7 5.htm 

BCBS. (2008). Principles for sound liquidity risk management and supervision. 

https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs144.htm 

BCBS. (2009). Principles for sound stress testing practices and supervision. 

https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs155.pdf 

BCBS. (2011). Principles for the sound Management of operational Risk. 

https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs155.pdf 

BCBS. (2016). Minimum capital requirements for market risk. 

Berg, F., Koelbel, J. F., & Rigobon, R. (2019). Ag gregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG 

Ratings. Working paper . Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

BlackRock. (2019). Getting physical: Scenario analysis for assessing climate -related risks .

https://www.blackrock.com/ch/individual/en/insights/physical -climate -risks 

BloombergNEF. (2019). Price Trends of New Energies Retrieved Feburary, 2020 .

https://about.bnef.com/new -energy -outlook/ 

Blöschl, G., Hall, J., Viglione, A., Perdigão, R. A., Parajka, J., Merz, B., Bilibashi, A. (2019). 

Changing climate both increases and decreases European river floods. Nature, 

573 (7772), 108 -111. 

Calanca, P. (2007). Climate change and drought occurrence i n the Alpine region: how severe 

are becoming the extremes? Global and Planetary Change, 57 (1 -2), 151 -160. 

Caldecott, B., Howarth, N., & McSharry, P. (2013). Stranded assets in agriculture: Protecting 

value from environment -related risks. 

CICERO. (2017). Shades of Climate Risk. Categorizing climate risk for investors .

https://pub.cicero.oslo.no/cicero -xmlui/handle/11250/2430660 

Deryugina, T., & Hsiang, S. M. (2014).  Does the environment still matter? Daily temperature 

and income in the United States . https ://www.nber.org/papers/w20750.pdf 

EESI. (2018). Fact Sheet: Strengthening Financial Resilience to Climate Change - The Role of 

Insurance. Retrieved from https://www.eesi.org/papers/view/fact -sheet -

strengthening -financial -resilience -to -climate -change. 

EIU. (2015). The cost of inaction: Recognising the value at risk from climate change .

https://eiuperspectives.economist.com/sites/default/files/The%20cost%20of%20ina 

ction_0.pdf 

Euronews. (2019). Faced with increasing heat waves frequency, European cities need t o

adapt. Retrieved from Euronews: Sci -tech website: 

https://www.euronews.com/2019/09/23/faced -with -increasing -heat -waves -

frequency -european -cities -need -to -adapt 

FSA Japan. (2020). Insurance Underwriting Risk Checklist and Manual. 

https://www.fsa.go.jp/en/r efer/manual/hoken_e/hoken -e.htm Synopsis of Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions 

21 

G20 Green Finance Study Group. (2017). G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report 2017 .

http://unepinquiry.org/wp -

content/uploads/2017/07/2017_GFSG_Synthesis_Report_EN.pdf 

Glauber, A., & Gunawan, I. (2016). The cost of fire: An economic analysis of Indonesia's 2015 

fire crisis. The World Bank .

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/643781465442350600/Indonesia -forest -fire -

notes. pdf .

Herrera, D. A., Ault, T., Fasullo, J., & Carril lo, C. M. (2017). Is climate change intensifying the 

drying -trend in the Caribbean? Paper presented at the AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. 

Kumar, R. (2014). Strategies of banks and other financial institutions: Theories and cases :

Elsevier. 

Lloyd's. (2014). Ca tastrophe Modelling and Climate Change .

https://www.lloyds.com/~/media/lloyds/reports/emerging -risk -reports/cc -and -

modelling -template -v6.pdf 

Long, J., Hart, M., & Guerriero, S. (2019). Chemical (Re)action: Growth in a circular economy .

Loukas, A., Vasiliad es, L., & Tzabiras, J. (2008).  Climate change effects on drought severity. 

Advances in Geosciences, 17 .

Ma, J., Zhou, Y., & Yin, H. (2018). Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions . China 

Financial Publishing House , Beijing. 

Ma, J., & Sun, T. Y.(2020). Quanti tative modelling approches for climate transition and 

physical risks and their applications in thermal power sector and mortgage loans. 

Tsinghua Financial Review .

McGlade, C., & Ekins, P. (2015). The geographical distribution of fossil fue ls unused when 

limiting global warming to 2 C. Nature, 517 (7533), 187. 

Mercure, J. F., Pollitt, H., Viñuales, J. E., Edwards, N. R., Holden, P. B., Chewpreecha, U., 

Salas, P., Sognnaes, I., Lam, A., & Knobloch, F. (2018). Macroeconomic impact of 

stranded fossil fuel assets. Nature Climate Change, 8 (7), 588 -593. 

Munich Re. (2020). Wildfires: Clear indicators that climate change is changing the risks. 

https://www.munichre.com/en/risks/natural -disasters -losses -are -trending -

upwards/wildfires -as -the -climate -changes -so -do -the -risks.html 

NGFS. (2019a). A call for action: Climate change as a source of financial risk .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/m edias/documents/synthese_ngfs -2019_ -

_17042019_0.pdf 

NGFS. (2019 b). Macroeconomic and financial stability Implications of climate change .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs_research_prioriti 

es_final.pdf 

NGFS. (2019 c). A sustaina ble and responsibel investment guide for central bank's portfolio 

management .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs -a-sustainable -

and -responsible -investment -guide.pdf 

NGFS. (2020a). Guide for supervisors: Integrating climate -related and environmental risks 

into prudential supervision .

https://www.ngfs.net/si tes/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs_guide_for_superv 

isors.pdf 

NGFS. (2020b). Guide to climate scenario analysis for central banks and supervisors .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs_guide_scenario_a 

nalysis_final.pdf 

NGFS. (2 020 c). NGFS Climate Scenarios for central banks and supervisors .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/820184_ngfs_scenario 

s_final_version_v6.pdf Chapter 1 

22 

NGFS. (2020 d). A status report on Financial Institutions’ experiences working with green, 

non -green and brown financial assets and a potential risk differe ntial .

https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs_status_report.pdf 

Pierre -Louis, K. (2019). Heat Waves in the Age of Climate Change: Longer, More Frequent 

and More Dangerous. Retrieved from The New York Times: Climate website: 

https:// www.nytimes.com/2019/07/18/climate/heatwave -climate -change.html 

Ramstein, C., Dominioni, G., Ettehad, S., Lam, L., Quant, M., Zhang, J., Leuschner, P. (2019). 

State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2019. The World Bank. 

Regelink, M., Reinders, H. J., & van de Wiel, M. V. e. I. (2017). An exploration of climate -

related risks for the Dutch financial sector .

Robins, N., Mehta, K., & Spedding, P. (2013). Oil & Carbon Revisited: Value at Risk from 

Unburnable Reserves. HSBC Global Research .

Swiss Re. (2016). Natural catastrophes and man -made disasters in 2015: Asia suffers 

substantial losses. sigma, 1 , 2016. 

UNDP . (2019). Combatting land degradation - securing a sustainable future. Retrieved from 

UNDP: Sustainable land manangement website: 

https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment -

energy/sustainable_land_management/combatting -land -degradation ---securing -a-

sustainable -future.html 

UNEP FI. (2018a). EXTENDING OUR HORIZONS -- Assessing credit risk and opportunity in a 

cha nging climate: Outputs of a working group of 16 banks -- piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations PART 1: Transition -related risks & opportunities .

UNEP FI. (2018b). Navigating a New Climate: Assessing Credit Risk and Opportunity in a 

Changing Climate: Outputs of a Working Group of 16 Banks Piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations PART 2: Physical risks and opportunities, UNEP Financial Initiative 

& Acclimatise. Publication: Geneva, Switzerland .

Van der Hoeven, M. (2013). World energy outlook 2012. International Energy Agency: Tokyo, 

Japan . https://www.iea.org/reports/world -energy -outlook -2012 

Young, A. (1994). Land degradation in South Asia: its severity, causes and effects upon the 

people : FAO. 23 

# Part I ERA f or Banks Chapter 2

24 

# An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate 

# Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

by 

Four Twenty Seven, a Moody ’s affiliate 1

# Abstract 

Banks ’ exposure s to physical climate risk are largely determined by extreme weather events 

and chronic changes to climatic patterns at the location of the assets underlying their loan 

portfolios. Banks can leverage forward -looking climate data from global climate models t o

identify and manage this emerging risk. Key elements of an effective physical climate risk 

assessment include mapping assets and assessing each asset ’s projected risk using the best 

available science, capturing relative change for each location, and inco rporating multiple 

datasets to capture different dimensions of risk across hazards. Four Twenty Seven ’s analysis 

includes climate risk scores for heat stress, floods, hurricanes & typhoons, sea level rise and 

water stress, leveraging the downscaled outputs of global climate models alongside other 

environmental datasets. These scores are based on the precise location of assets, but the 

consistent methodology allows for global comparison of risk. Once credit analysts have a view 

of the risk exposure of the as sets underlying a mortgage or commercial loan portfolio, for 

example, this knowledge can inform due diligence and annual mortgage review processes. The 

impacts of climate hazards on clients ’ probabilit ies of default depends on many factors 

including an as set ’s sensitivity to the hazards to which it is exposed, as well as asset -level and 

regional resilience efforts. Credit analysts can use forward -looking climate risk scores to ask 

informed questions around sensitivity and resilience to help clients and pot ential clients to 

mitigate these risks. 

Keyword s: physical risk , climate risk , resilience , credit risk , banks, asset -level risk 

# 1 Introduction 

Banks are under increasing pressure from regulators to integrate climate change 

considerations into their risk management driven by concern about systemic exposure to 

climate change through their loan portfolios (NGFS, 2019 a). Banks ’ exposure to risks from the 

physical impacts of climate change are in part based on the physical locations of the assets 

underlying th e loans or projects they finance. This chapter will present an approach to 

assessing physical climate risk exposure s for real assets and provide examples of how credit 

analysts can leverage th ese data. This process can be used to assess and manage climate risk 

exposure across asset types, including mortgages and real estate investments or debt 

financing, corporations, and infrastructure finance.      

> 1This chapter is written by Natalie Ambrosio, director of communications, Four Twen ty Sev en (now a Moody’s affiliate),
> email: nambrosio@427mt.com; Emilie Mazzacurati, founder and CEO of Four Twenty Seven ;Jing Zhang, Managing Director
> and Global Head of Research & Modelling at Moody's Analytics; Nik Steinberg, Director of Analytics, Four Twent y Seven .An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios

25 

# 2 Purpose: leverage climate data to assess risk exposure for banks 

From climate risk to credit risk 

Climate hazards can affect credit risk s through direct and indirect impacts on the assets 

underlying a loan, including through impacts on real assets, operations, supply chains, and 

markets, 2 which in turn affect credit indicators such as cash flows, capital expen diture, 

profitability, demand, and liabilities. Corporations ’ credit risk s are driven by climate change 

impacts on corporate facilities and across the value chain, while infrastructure finance and 

mortgages are directly affected by the exposure s of the ass et s underlying the loan. 

To manage their exposure s to physical climate risks, banks must first assess to which climate 

hazards the assets underlying their loan portfolios may be exposed. Working from the location 

of the assets underlying their lending port folios, lenders can obtain forward -looking data from 

global climate models for relevant locations. Banks should strive to use data that is consistent 

and comparable using the most accurate, up -to -date information on projected climate 

changes. The methodolo gy described in the next few sections illustrates how Four Twenty 

Seven recommends banks use climate data to understand and mitigate climate risk s in their 

lending portfolios. 

# 3 Physical climate risk assessment overview 

Map assets 

The relevance and potentia l impacts of climate change will depend on the physical location s

of the assets. Different regions have different elevations, topography and sensitivities and will 

thus be affected differently as the climate changes. It is essential for credit analysts to obtain 

the specific location and features of assets underlying their lending portfolios, including the 

asset type, to factor in the sensitivity of the asset to climate -related hazards. 

In addition to the asset -level view of risk exposure, whenever possible , it is also valuable to 

have a view of how an asset is exposed to climate risk throughout its value chain (Hubert et 

al., 2018). For example, a port may be exposed to increasing hurricanes or typhoons which 

increase repair costs that necessitate reallocat ions of the budget. However, this port ’s revenue 

may rely on transport of crops from agricultural land whose productivity is falling due to 

enduring droughts. Or it may export goods that travel by freight on a coastal railway that will 

experience chronic f looding due to its coastal location. Likewise, operations and revenues at 

corporate facilities often depend on supply chains with wide -reaching global footprints and 

varying exposure to climate hazards. For analysts to obtain a thorough view on the climate risk 

exposure in the value chain, they must understand the underlying geographic locations that 

underpin an asset ’s value chain. When available, this information can be leveraged to provide 

a more informed view of how an asset may be exposed to credit ris k from climate risk (Stiroh, 

2016). 

Assess forward -looking risk 

Working with climate models can be challenging – dozens of different models exist, with 

different granularity and time horizons ( Flato et al., 2014 ). Four Twenty Seven recommends 

banks strive to use data that is consistent and comparable – indeed, climate risk assessments 

need to be systematic and comparable across assets to allow for the comparison of risk among 

assets across regions. The data should also lean on best -available science. As cli mate science   

> 2Harnish, Molly. Central Banks and Climate Risks. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. 2019.
> https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/econ _focus/2019/q2 -3/feature1 Chapter 2

26 

develops, the precision of characterizing changes in different risks will improve. Thus, it is 

important to base climate risk assessments on the best -available, peer -reviewed science. 

Leveraging adaptable, science -driven inputs to inform thei r risk assessments allows analysts ’

understanding of their underlying climate risk exposure to grow as the science develops. 

Capturing relative change 

As each region is acclimated to specific historical climate conditions, the same extremity of 

event can h ave different impacts on economies and assets in different locations ( Gershunov & 

Guirguis, 2012 ). For example, the summer of 2019 saw record high temperatures around the 

globe, but these temperatures looked significantly different in different places, with 

Anchorage sweltering at 32˚ C and Paris seeking relief at 43˚ C (Baker, 2019) . Anchorage ’s high 

temperatures would have cause d less disruption s in Paris. Locations that experience the 

greatest relative change s are often the most vulnerable, even if the absolute temperature, for 

example, is not the highest. Those areas that do not yet experience significant heat waves or 

severe s torms are likely to be less prepared for their occurrence s than those that have at least 

some experience with these severe conditions. 

Four Twenty Seven ’s methodology takes into account the projected relative change, compared 

to a location -specific histor ical baseline. For example, extreme heat alerts that are based on a 

set temperature, rather than location -specific health thresholds tend to trigger alerts at higher 

temperatures than those systems based on temperatures at which the local population 

experi ences adverse health impacts. Thus, when projecting exposure s to extreme heat, 

assessments are most effective when leveraging thresholds that indicate when the local 

population is likely to be affected ( Steinberg et al., 2018 ). 

Incorporating multiple datas ets 

Four Twenty Seven ’s methodology integrates a diverse set of climate and environmental 

datasets to capture different elements of changing conditions. Understanding different types 

of climate hazards requires different types of data. While global climate models can be 

downscaled to provide informative projections of temperature and precipitation changes, 

other phenomenon such as floods and droughts are also affected by other interacting factors. 

Having a view on the different dimensions of risk exposure f or each hazard, and how each of 

these elements may change over time, provides for a more nuanced risk assessment. 

Identify hotspots 

The results of this systematic climate risk screening are rescaled from 0-100 and 

communicated in standardized metrics that can inform decision -making. The most important 

element is that data are applicable to a specific location but conveyed in metrics that are 

comparable across the world. Four Twenty Seven ’s analysis captures different dimensions of 

risk from climate hazards including floods, heat stress, hurricanes and typhoons, sea level rise, 

and water stress. Communicating the results with rescaled metrics, allows credit analysts to 

compare risks across a set of assets based on indicators that have different raw values. C redit 

analysts can leverage both standardized values communicating risk to each hazard, as well as 

raw measure values for the underlying risk indicators that can inform further analysis of what 

is driving an asset ’s risk. 

Since different levels of exposure s have different implications depending on the hazard in 

question, identifying different risk exposure thresholds can help analysts understand what a 

risk value may mean for the asset in question. Four Twenty Seven identifies five risk exposure 

thresholds defined based on the characteristics of the particular hazard to account for 

differences in potential disruption caused by different severities or frequencies of an event. 

Risk thresholds are described in more detail below. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

27 

How can asset managers assess t heir exposure to physical climate risks? 

Asset managers can also leverage science -driven climate risk assessments to understand 

and mitigate exposure to climate risk in their investment portfolios. While this chapter 

focuses on the ways in which banks can leverage Four Twenty Seven ’s physical climate risk 

data, asset managers are exposed to the impacts of climate change through the ways in 

which climate hazards impact the corporations in which they invest and can also leverage 

forward -looking data to unders tand this risk. Corporate exposure s to climate risk are driven 

by the exposure s and sensitivit ies of their facilities to climate hazards and the businesses ’

supply chains and markets in which they rely on for sales. As discussed above, corporations 

can experience disruptions due to climate impacts on each element of their value chains. 

Four Twenty Sev en also provides science -driven climate risk data that provides a view on 

companies ’ risk based on the exposure of their global facilities. This enables asset managers 

to identify and manage the climate risk s in their portfolios. They can leverage quantita tive 

risk scores to identify hotspots in their portfolios, such as corporations with above -average 

climate risk exposure s compared to others in the sector, or corporations that have high 

exposure s to specific hazards in multiple regions. This can allow for more thorough climate 

risk disclosure s by investors ( EBRD & GCA, 2018 ), can feed into passive investment strategies 

that hedge against climate risk, and can guide shareholder engagement around risk 

disclosure s and resilience ( LaManna, 2018 ). 

# 4 Detailed met hodology: location -based physical climate risk scores 

Climate data 

Four Twenty Seven ’s methodology currently includes five major physical climate hazards 

associated with climate change: heat stress, floods, hurricanes & typhoons, sea level rise and 

water s tress. 

For temperature and precipitation -based indicators, we currently use outputs from statistically 

downscaled Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) models and indicator 

results are based on an ensemble average of the models. 

Each model provides projections which begin in 2020 and extend to at least 2100, with slight 

variations depending on the indicator. We look at the period of 1975 -2005 as a historical 

benchmark, 3 and project future states in 2030 -2040 under the “Business as Usual ” sce nario 

(RCP 8.5 concentration pathway). While there are ongoing discussions about which RCP most 

accurately reflects long -term conditions based on “business as usual, ”( Hausfather & Peters, 

2020 ) we believe this scenario is the most valid for business purpos es because any potential 

policy actions will only have a discernable impact on climate change by around 2050 ( Steinberg 

et al., 2018 ).   

> 3This is the standard historical baseline used in climate modeling and provides a perspective on what society’s
> infrastructure and physiological acclimation is prepared for. Chapter 2

28 

Figure 2-1 Hazards included in Four Twenty Seven’s physical climate risk application 

*Wildfires forthcoming 

Risk indicators 

For each hazard we identify indicators that capture shifts in tail -end distributions, including 

both absolute and relative changes in conditions, and assess exposure at a specific site location. 

Indicator values are rescaled and normalized so that measures can be aggregated into facility 

risk scores that are comparable globally, despite the different units of the raw values. 

Heat Stress 

The heat stress score measures the relative change over time in both the frequency and 

severity of hot days, as well as average temperatures. It includes three different temperature 

indicators based on climate projections. This data is downscaled to a resolution of 25 x 25km. 

We derive heat stress indicators using d ata from global climate models that are part of CMIP5, 

overseen by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 4 and downscaled by the National 

Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). 5

Floods 

The flood score measures the severity and frequency of historical floods (both rainfall - and 

riverine -based flooding), the frequency of future heavy rainfall events, and the intensity of 

prolonged periods of heavy rainfall. It includes climate projections for precipitation changes, 

as well as modeled data on h istorical inundation and simulated extremes that could occur in 

the future based on local rainfall and topography. Flood risk is at a resolution of 90 x 90m. We 

use global climate models for the precipitation data used in our flood scores, alongside 

histor ical and simulated flood data from Fathom, 6 a flood risks analytics firm. 

Hurricanes & Typhoons 

The hurricane & typhoon score captures geographical exposure to hurricanes and typhoons, 

also known as tropical cyclones. Because climate models cannot predict specific instances of 

hurricanes & typhoons, we analyze historical data on wind speed and barometric pressure for    

> 4https://www.ipcc.ch/
> 5https://www.nasa.gov/
> 6https://www.fathom.global/ An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios

29 

1200 hurricanes & typhoons from 1984 -2017, from the World Meteorological Organization 7.

This tells us which areas have been most exposed to cy clones historically, and therefore will 

be most exposed to future increases in cyclone frequency and intensity. 

Sea Level Rise 

The sea level rise score estimates the absolute and relative increase in the frequency of coastal 

floods. It includes high -resol ution digital elevation model data, as well as estimates of local 

storm surge and sea level rise. The resolution is 90 x 90m. We use data from weather and 

climate data provider CLIMsystems 8 for sea level rise. 

Water Stress 

The water stress score measures t he projected changes in drought -like patterns over time, 

including changes in water supply and demand. To assess water stress risk we leverage climate 

projections for precipitation changes, and also include data on current water scarcity and 

projected wate r demand changes in the area, from the World Resources Institute 9. Th e data 

are at the watershed level. 

Sensitivity factors 

Four Twenty Seven adjusts some risk scores to consider the differing sensitivities of different 

facility types to certain climate ha zards. A facility ’s heat stress and water stress score will be 

partially determined by its dependence on resources affected by climate change such as water 

and energy, or its reliance on labor. For example, a data center is more energy intensive than 

an of fice and will thus be more sensitive to increasing temperatures ’ effects on energy supplies. 

As a result, an office would receive a lower heat stress score than a data center in the same 

area. We use peer -reviewed research to identify which types of facili ties receive adjustments 

for heat and water stress, based on a facility ’s industry. For example, to determine adjustments 

to heat stress scores for facilities that are supported by outdoor labor or operate in non -

climate controlled conditions, we reference the article, “Temperature and the allocation of 

time: Implications for climate change, ” in the Journal of Labor Economics (Graff Zivin & Neidell, 

2014 ).

Exposure thresholds 

After a facility receives a score for each climate hazard, we assign to it a risk rating. There are 

five risk ratings based on thresholds ranging from “no risk ” to “red flag. ” For heat stress and 

water stress, the thresholds are based on relative statistical thresholds referring to how 

exposed an asset is compared to other asset s in Four Twenty Seven ’s database of over a million 

corporate facilities. Floods, cyclones, and sea level rise are based on absolute thresholds due 

to the binary nature of risk for these hazards, where an asset is either susceptible or not to 

flooding due to its elevation or proximity to waterways, for example. 

# 5 Translating climate risk to credit risk 

As discussed previously, an ultimate goal for banks in incorporating climate assessment is to 

understand the credit consequence of climate factors. We discus s how we can achieve this by 

combining the insights discussed in the previous sections with the well -established credit risk 

modelling techniques for various asset classes.     

> 7https://public.wmo.int/en
> 8http://www.climsystems.com/
> 9https://www.wri.org/ Chapter 2

30 

Publicly Traded Firms 

The so -called structured model framework, first developed b y Merton, Black and Scholes in 

the 1970s, further developed and commercialized by KMV Corporation and later bought by 

Moody ’s, is widely considered as the industry standard for assessing the credit risk of listed 

firms (Nazeran & Dwyer, 2015) . In Moody ’s E xpected Default Frequency ™ (EDF ™) framework, 

the initial asset value of an entity can take on many different paths over time, and it captures 

the probability of these asset values falling below the default point (See  Figure 2-2).

Figure 2-2 Normal course of asset values over time for a particular entity 

Based on this framework, we acknowledge that negative climate shocks are characterized by 

uncertainty of timing, differential impacts across locations, and variations in the magnitude s

of depreciation across different entities and assets, affecting an entity ’s overall asset value. 

With acute weather events, asset value is more likely to be lower than expected, increasing 

future asset volatility and increasing default risk ( Figure 2-3 illustrates diff erent asset value 

paths) .

Figure 2-3 Adjusted asset value paths due to acute weather event 

We can incorporate physical climate risks as one dimension affecting an entity ’s asset value 

due to extreme weathe r events. To estimate the frequency and magnitude of these uncertain 

negative shocks, and ultimately their effect on credit risk, we undertake the following steps: 

• Leverage standard Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) to estimate expected 

worldwide damage due to physical climate risk under 2 degree s and 4 degree s

warming scenarios. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

31 

• Employ Four Twenty Seven ’s climate risk scores to estimate how this global damage is 

distributed to locations with different climate exposure. 

• To calibrate how much an extreme weather event of a certain magnitude affects the 

asset value of an entity, observed asset depreciations due to past extreme weather 

events are used as a proxy for the negative shocks associated with future events. 

• Based on an entity ’s location, we have a d istribution of the frequenc ies of extreme 

weather events facing the firm in the future.  Combining this with the calibrated 

distribution of the extent an event reduces the firm ’s asset value, we increase our 

forecast of asset volatility in the EDF model to reflect this additional source of risk. 

As asset volatility is a main driver of probability of default in the EDF model, the climate -

adjusted asset volatility forecasts result in climate -adjusted PD term structures for each firm. 

Sovereign and Muni 

Th e spread on a sovereign —either the spread in the CDS market or the difference between 

the sovereign yield and the risk -free rate —is closely linked with the sovereign's credit risk, as 

reflected by the rating. Climate change will affect the rating of a sove reign in many ways: 

weaker economic activity and infrastructure damage will reduce GDP growth while increasing 

growth uncertainty. Natural disasters will tax institutional and fiscal strength s of a sovereign. 

Demographic shifts could reduce a country ’s tax base while at the same time contributing to 

political tension. Well established approaches to converting a rating into a Through the Cycle 

PD and LGD as well as on credit spread exist. 

We can create a climate risk adjusted PD for a sovereign as follows: Integrated Assessment 

models (IAMs) models provide estimates of the reductions in  GDP growth. Four Twenty 

Seven ’s climate scores reflect the vulnerability to heat stress, water stress, sea level rise, floods, 

and hurricanes / typhoons as well as the streng th of the economy and social institutions, which 

Moody ’s will leverage to determine the impact of climate change on institutional, 

infrastructure and fiscal strength and the corresponding impact on rating at the country 

level.  We will use these scores and outputs from the IAMs models to assign the reduction in 

GDP to the countries that are most vulnerable to climate change. With the adjusted GDP 

growth, we will compute the relevant climate adjusted financial metrics. The reductions then 

enable estimation of the impact on the rating, the probability of default, and other 

corresponding risk factors. 

The municipal market includes local government, water and sewer, higher education, public 

power, housing, not -for -profit, airport, state governments, toll facilita tes and ports. Like 

sovereigns, municipal issuers ’ ratings are shaped by expos ures to heat stress, water stress, sea 

level rise, and extreme events as well as the strength s of the econom ies and social institutions. 

Quantitative models of muni bonds (e.g., Moody ’s Qrate Model) 10 estimate the rating as a 

function of the economic strength of the municipal issuers using measures like “airline 

payments per passenger, ” “ per capita GDP, ” “ operating cash flow, ” “ age distribution of 

population, ” “ debt as a percent of revenues, ” and “population growth. ” Key to evaluating 

climate change impacts on municipal issuers will be linking the municipal issuer ’s climate 

scores and credit rating risk drivers. Once these linkages are established, we can estimate the 

impact on the rating, the probability of default, and other corresponding risk factors.         

> 10 QRATE (Quantitative Ratings Estimator). Moody’s Analytics. https://www.moodysanalytics.com/product -list/qrate -
> quantitative -ratings -estimator Chapter 2

32 

Infrastructure 

Infrastructure is exposed to construction risk, country risk, counterparty risk, market risk and 

op erational risk. Infrastructure investment ratings are also influenced by a suite of climate 

hazards as well as the strength of the economy and social institutions. Risk drivers for 

infrastructure investments include revenue and cost stability, political ri sk, debt service 

coverage, and construction risk. Establishing the impacts of climate change on infrastructure 

investments necessitates linking project climate scores to credit -rating risk drivers.  These 

linkages then enable the estimation of rating impact s, the probability of default, and other 

corresponding risk factors. 

Commercial Real Estate 

Commercial property performance is subject to environmental influences on revenue 

generation potential, operating costs, and ultimately, collateral asset valuatio n. The potential 

impacts of climate change on real estate assets can occur through several channels. Acute 

physical risks, such as hurricanes and floods, represent catastrophic events that can cause 

considerable property damage s. Long -term chronic physical risks, like sea -level rise and 

changing precipitation patterns have the potential to impact both supply and demand for real 

estate. Under the most pessimistic climate scenarios such risks are projected to grow in 

frequency and severity during this century . Optimistic climate projections are predicated on 

the assumed adoption of aggressive global decarbonization practices. The transition away 

from carbon sources of energy will require changes in policy and regulation, technological 

investment, as well as ma rket adaptation. Real estate is also subject to these transition risks 

via uncertain future tax policies, environmental and efficiency standards, and changing 

consumer preferences for environmentally conscientious products. 

An a ccurate assessment of the n et income potential for a given property is vital for lenders. 

Typically, these assessments do not account for the impact that environmental factors may 

have on key operating revenue and cost drivers. In this context, a property may face revenue 

headwinds from downtime and business disruptions as a result of a catastrophic climate event. 

Similarly, demand could suffer if tenants prefer space in buildings with improved energy 

efficiency or other green infrastructure. Several significant cost drivers could al so be at play in 

a changing climate: higher operating costs, capital expenditure and maintenance costs, and 

higher insurance premiums could impact a borrower ’s debt service coverage. The impact on 

collateral is also important, as asset values can shift in climate change effected areas, 

potentially resulting in decreased liquidity in those markets. 

The above -mentioned climate change impacts on properties ’ net operating income (NOI) and 

value can be translated into key ratios such as DSCR and LTV, which serv e as the most critical 

inputs to real estate loans ’ credit risk assessment framework, including Moody ’s Commercial 

Mortgage Metrics ™ (CMM ™) or most internal credit risk models (Chen & Zhang, 2011) . The 

end results for this integrated analysis framework can be compared to assess various climate 

change scenarios. 

# 6 Case studies: evaluating the climate risk exposure of loans 

Physical climate risk data can be systematically integrated into lending decisions through loan 

origination, annual review processes, and risk management and reporting. The case studies 

below provide examples of how credit analysts can leverage Four Twenty Seven ’s physical 

climate risk application. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

33 

Mortgage portfolios 

The annual review process for mortgage portfolios is a good case of appli cation of this 

methodology, because they often contain millions of rows of properties that analysts cannot 

feasibly assess individually. As credit analysts typically have the address underlying each 

mortgage, they can easily upload the portfolio locations into Four Twenty Seven ’s physical 

climate risk scoring application to receive risk scores for all the properties. Users need to input 

each asset ’s location (street address or latitude/longitude), as well as the facility activity ( i.e., 

shopping center or manufacturing facility). Climate risk scores can help analysts by informing 

an initial, automated hotspot analysis that identifies locations above a certain risk threshold 

or have high exposure to multiple hazards. Analysts can then expl ore the risks at these high -

risk sites more thoroughly. 

The case study below considers a sample mortgage portfolio that has been screened for its 

climate risk exposure 11 . Given the impacts of flooding on residential real estate and the ways 

in which repeat ed inundation, insurance costs, and repair expenses, can affect mortgage 

repayments and property values, a mortgage analyst may be particularly interested in the 

properties ’ flood risk. After uploading the spreadsheet of mortgage locations and scoring the 

portfolio, the analyst can sort the assets based on their flood risk scores to identify properties 

with the highest risk exposure. 

In this portfolio there are two properties with red flags for flood risk and six properties with 

high risk ( Figure 2-4). Properties with red flags for floods are susceptible to high frequency of 

flooding and/or high flooding severity during events that have a 1% chance of occu rring 

annually. Likewise, properties with high flood risk are also exposed to some inundation during 

flood events. Even a single severe flood can significantly damage real estate and lead to 

significant costs for homeowners. In the portfolio below, there i s one asset with red flags for 

floods, hurricanes & typhoons, and sea level rise, suggesting that this asset carries substantial 

exposure to climate risk. The manifestation of this risk exposure into financial loss will be 

influenced by how structurally pr epared both the home and the surrounding area are for 

floods and high winds. Exploring the different dimensions of risk underlying each asset ’s

exposure, alongside any site -specific preparedness efforts and regional climate adaptation, 

will help the analys t obtain a more thorough view of whether the asset ’s physical risk exposure 

may affect the chances of mortgage default.   

> 11 The data and visuals used in these case studies are from Four Twenty Seven’s climate risk application. Chapter 2

34 

Figure 2-4 The exposure of assets in a sample mortgage portfolio sorted based on 

their exposure to flooding 

Source: Four Twenty Seven 

Promoting Equitable Climate Resilience 

Making lending decisions based on quantitative climate risk scores does have the 

potential to lead to a disproportionate impact on low -income families or other vulnerable 

households that are frequently among the most exposed to climate hazards due to many 

interacting economic and social factors. A lending strategy that prevents loans to low -

income populations would not contribute to systemic resilience but may rather 

perpetuate vulnerabilities. However, banks can engage with mortgage applicants around 

the p hysical climate risks they ’ve identified, helping families to understand and mitigate 

risk exposure that they may otherwise not be aware of if the risks were not disclosed. 

Banks can also identify resources for families striving to mitigate their exposure and 

encourage loan applicants to work with insurers or contractors to implement resilience -

measures. 

Banks also have an opportunity to use a forward -looking view of climate risk exposure to 

ensure that new homes are not built in areas largely exposed to s ea level rise or on the 

edges of drought prone forests vulnerable to wildfires, for example. Reducing new 

development in such exposed areas will help to mitigate the climate risk that leads to 

stranded assets and has detrimental impacts on financial system s and communities 

globally. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

35 

Commercial Real Estate 

Figure 2-5 Sites of commercial real estate highly exposed to floods in Europe 

Source: Four Twenty Seven 

Analysts can also integrate climate risk into their due diligence processes, such as for 

commercial loans. Unlike mortgage portfolios, this process may involve fewer assets and may 

allow for a more thorough view of climate risk exposure at each asset. By inputting the address 

of the assets underlying potential loans, analysts can obtain climate risk scores for each asset, 

as well as more detailed information on the underlying indicators. This informs the due 

diligence process by showing regional trends, ba sed on the geographic distribution of assets 

and climate hazards, and provides insight on the risk drivers at each potential asset. By 

combining this information with the bank ’s knowledge of the life of each loan, and the 

activities at each facility, the a nalyst can make more informed lending decisions to manage the 

bank ’s risk. 

In this case study, a credit analyst uploaded a commercial loan portfolio with assets across 

Europe ( Figure 2-5) and started by exploring the assets ’ exposure to floods. Four Twenty 

Seven ’s climate risk scoring application allows users to switch between table and map view to 

identify regional trends. In this case, viewing the asse ts mapped by their location and colored 

based on their flood risk allowed the analyst to see that there are several assets that are highly 

exposed to floods, while some are less exposed. The analyst may want to review the risk 

exposure of the highly expose d assets in more detail to understand what drives risk at each 

site and identify if these facilities are highly exposed to other hazards. The analyst may start 

with the freight logistics facility in Milan ( Figure 2-6), clicking on its location to review the other 

risks at this facility, revealing that it also a high exposure to heat stress and water stress. Chapter 2

36 

Figure 2-6 Climate risk scores for one of the most exposed assets in a commercial 

real estate portfolio *

*This freight logistics facility in Milan has a red flag for floods and high exposure to 

heat stress and water stress. 

Source: Four Twenty Seven 

The analyst may flag this site as one to examine more thoroughly during the due diligence 

process to understand what drives this facility ’s exposure. This asset ’s flood risk shows that it 

experiences relatively frequent flooding and is likely to experienc e more severe flooding 

moving forward. Analysts can use their understanding of the activities of the asset underlying 

a potential loan, alongside their information on the lifetime of the loan, to guide their 

interpretation of the climate risk assessment. For example, logistics facilities often rely on 

industrial equipment which can incur costly damage during flood events, and operations 

relying on specific equipment and facilities can be easily disrupted due to inundation. Likewise, 

this facility also reli es on regional transportation infrastructure to receive and distribute goods. 

Thus, flooding may be particularly significant for this facility since it is likely to experience 

disruptions if regional infrastructure is inundated even when its own equipment may not be 

damaged. This data highlights the importance of flood preparedness at this asset, as well as 

the preparedness of regional transportation infrastructure to withstand increasing extreme 

precipitation. The analyst may also note the asset ’s high exp osure to heat stress and water 

stress, since these are applicable due to the energy -intensive nature of freight logistics 

facilities and their reliance on outdoor labor. After exploring the underlying risk drivers at the 

asset, the credit analyst can disc uss this risk with the loan applicant to understand if and how 

the applicant is preparing for these impacts and reducing the risk. Analysts ’ well -rounded 

understanding of how an asset is exposed to changing conditions in the next several decades 

can inform their client engagement around risk and resilience, so they can build a thorough 

view on how this risk exposure may translate into credit impacts. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

37 

# 7 Limitations and need for further research 

Four Twenty Seven ’s climate risk scoring methodology is based on the specific location of 

assets, which provides the projection of how assets may be affected by changing climate 

hazards. However, banks do not currently have complete records of the exact locations 

underlying their loans. This data gap makes it challengin g for some banks to leverage this 

category of data 12 .

The primary output of this physical climate risk assessment is forward -looking exposure to 

several physical climate hazards out to mid -century, accounting for the sensitivity of different 

asset types. Ho wever, the impact of climate hazards on an entity ’s credit worthiness depends 

not only on exposure and sensitivity, but also on preparedness. For example, a home that is 

elevated or an office that has elevated its electronics and put tiled floor on the gro und floor, 

are less likely to incur costly flood damage s than a home that sits on the ground in the 

floodplain and the office without flood defense. Preparedness is a key aspect for credit 

analysts to investigate if they find an asset has high exposure to climate risk. 

An asset ’s preparedness will depend both on its own structural resilience to extreme events, 

as well as the resilience of the surrounding region which it depends upon for resources and 

employees or clients (Ambrosio & Kim, 2019) . This inform ation is highly specific to the 

characteristics of each asset, but is an essential element in forming a comprehensive 

understanding of the potential material impacts of climate change on an asset or the 

organization that it is part of. There is a need for continued research around systematic, 

context -specific approaches to assessing resilience at scale. In the meantime, credit analysts 

can improve their understanding of their clients ’ risk s by leveraging the findings from physical 

climate risk assessments t o engage with clients or potential clients about the exposure of their 

assets, asking specific questions about an asset ’s operations, supply chain dependencies, 

resource use, market positioning, and other elements that will influence how likely a loan is t o

be impacted by the exposure of its underlying asset. 

Four Twenty Seven currently provides an assessment of physical exposure, and is working with 

its parent company, Moody ’s Corporation, to provide a quantitative estimate of the financial 

value at risk f or each asset class. 

Because banks have not traditionally consistently integrated climate risk into their credit 

evaluation processes, it is challenging to systemically project potential impacts in monetary 

terms. However, as described above, performing systematic climate risk screening is the first 

step from which to build a more sophisticated understanding of credit risk exposure and 

develop new financial metrics that connect financial risk to climate risk. As banks begin to 

integrate climate risk data more systematically int o their processes, they have an opportunity 

to translate this information into indicators that speak to traditional financial reporting, such 

as Probability of Default and Loss Given Default. 

Likewise, location -specific climate data can be used to develop scenario analysis, that 

considers the uncertainty of modeling the future. By leveraging science -driven data that shows 

different potential outcomes based on different climate futures, banks can develop 

approaches to understand the range of their risk unde r different scenarios. This can help 

informed a more nuanced view of loans ’ risk exposure and also support growing reporting 

requirements. Four Twenty Seven recommends an approach to scenario analysis that accounts    

> 12 GeoAsset. Spatial Finance Initiati ve .https://spatialfinanceinitiative.com/geoasset -project/ Chapter 2

38 

for the variations in projected physical impacts due to scientific uncertainty (Steinberg et al ., 

2019) .

After obtaining forward -looking, location -specific projections that capture the potential 

impacts from a changing climate, banks also need capacity building to help analysts 

understand these impacts and respond accordingly. While it is essential to start with 

scientifically grounded, forward -looking data, the users of this data need to be trained to 

understand what potential impacts can mean for credi t risk. As mentioned above, each climate 

hazard can affect corporate facilities, real estate and infrastructure assets, by increasing 

operating or repair costs and decreasing revenue due to business disruptions. These impacts 

can reduce funding reserves or lead to below -target revenues, with implications for loan 

repayment. Credit analysts need to understand these risk pathways so they can make informed 

decisions based on climate risk data. They also need to understand the uncertainty inherent 

in climate pr ojections, the ways in which impacts vary in different regions and sectors, and the 

ways climate risks interact with other credit factors. An Approach to Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Bank Loan Portfolios 

39 

# Bibliography 

Ambrosio, N., & Kim, Y. (2019). Community Resilience and Adaptive Capacity: A Meaningful 

Investment Acr oss Assets. October 17. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Community Development Innovation Review . https://www.frbsf.org/community -

development/publications/community -development -investment -

review/2019/october/community -resilience -and -adaptive -capacity -a-meaningful -

investment -across -assets/ 

Baker, M. (2019). Anchorage Had Never Reached 90 degrees. That Changed This Week. The 

New York Times. July 4.  https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/04/us/alaska -heat -

anchorage -fire works.html 

Chen, J., & Zhang, J. (2011). Modeling Commercial Real Estate Loan Credit Risk: An Overview. 

Version 2.0. Moody’s Analytics. May.  https://www.moodysanalytics.com/ -

/media/whitepaper/2011/11 -03 -05 -modeling -cre -loan -credit -risk -an -overview.pdf 

EBRD, & GCA. (2018). Advancing TCFD Guidance on Physical Climate Risk and Opportunities .

Flato, G., Marotzke, J., Abiodun, B., Braconnot, P., Chou, S. C., Collins, W., Eyring, V. (2014). 

Evaluation of climate models. In Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. 

Contrib ution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 741 -866): Cambridge University 

Press. 

Gershunov, A., & Guirguis, K. (2012). California heat waves in the present and future. 

Geophysical Research Letters, 39 (18). 

Graff Zivin, J., & Neidell, M. (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for 

climate change. Journal of Labor Economics, 32 (1), 1 -26. 

Hausfather, Z., & Peters, G. P. (2020). Emissions –the ‘business as usual’story is mi sleading. 

In: Nature Publishing Group. 

Hubert, R., Evain, J., & Nicol, M. (2018). Getting started on physical climate risk analysis in 

finance – Available approaches and the way forward .

LaManna, M. (2018). From Risk to Resilience: Engaging with Corporates to Build Adaptive 

Capacity .

Nazeran, Pooya and Dwyer, Douglas. Credit Risk Modeling of Public Firms: EDF9. Moody’s 

Analytics. June 2015.  https:// www.moodysanalytics.com/ -

/media/whitepaper/2015/2012 -28 -06 -public -edf -methodology.pdf 

NGFS. (2019). A call for action – Climate change as a source of financial risk. Network for 

Greening the Financial System first comprehensive report, April 2019, link: 

https://www.banque -

france.fr/sites/default/files/media/2019/04/17/ngfs_first_comprehensive_report_ -

_17042019_0.pdf 

Steinberg, N. C., Mazzacurati, E., Turner, J., Colin, G., Dickinson, R., Snyder, M., & Trasher, B. 

(2018). Preparing public health officials for climate change: a decision support tool. 

California’s Fourth Cli ma te Change Assessment .

Steinberg, N. C., Turne r, J. C., Gannon, C. (2019). Demystifying Climate Scenario Analysis for 

Financial Stakeholders. Four Twenty Seven. December.  http://427mt.com/wp -

content /uploads/2019/12/Demystifying -Scenario -Analysis_427_2019.pdf 

Stiroh, K. (2016). Kevin Stiroh: Opening remarks at the GARP Global Risk Forum. Chapter 3

40 

# Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate: 

# Transition -Related Risks in Corporate Lending Portfolios 

By 

Oliver Wyman 1

# Abs tract 

The methodology described in this chapter is designed to assess the impact of climate 

transition scenarios on the creditworthin ess of corporate counterparties. In the absence of 

historical data, any credible climate impact assessment requires a form of bottom -up analysis. 

The methodology is anchored in the climate science and is a combination of top -down and 

bottom -up modules to o ptimize the trade -off between workload and analytical rigo ur. For the 

most material and/or representative exposures, we condition the financials and cashflows of 

the counterparties before re -assessing their creditworthiness (bottom -up module). We then 

extr apolate the results of the bottom -up approach based on relevant customer characteristics 

to cover the remainder of the portfolio (top -down module). The bottom -up module allows to 

gain a deep knowledge of the potential impact of climate scenarios while the top -down 

module enables institutions to perform a portfolio -wide climate stress -testing, even in the 

context of limitations in data or time and resources. The scope, depth, and complexity of the 

analysis is tailored to be proportionate to the materiality o f the exposures 

Keywords: climate risk, transition risk, TCFD, climate scenario analysis, sustainable finance, 

climate stress test 

# 1 Introduction 

Increasingly, climate change is being recognized as an issue not just for governments and civil 

society but one that the financial sector needs to understand and address. Climate change 

represents a set of risks for banks (such as potential credit losses on borrowers who are no 

longer competitive in the transition to a low carbon economy) as well as opportunities (s uch 

as lending to new categories of borrowers). Climate scenario analysis is an important tool for 

understanding and integrating climate risks into a bank ’s broader risk management framework. 

Climate scenario analysis can be thought of as a “what -if ” analy sis of one potential state of the 

world under a specific climate scenario that allows institutions to assess their climate -related 

exposures; for example, a scenario under which a low -carbon transition materialises. A 

scenario is therefore a plausible “hyp othetical construct ” of the future, not a precise forecast. 

Climate scenario analysis helps an institution to explore and better understand their potential 

exposures to climate -related risks.                   

> 1This chapter is written by John Colas, Partner &Vice Chairman, Financial Services Americas ,email:
> john.colas@oliverwyman.com ;Ilya Khaykin, Partner , email: Ilya.Khaykin@oliverwyman.com ;Alban Pyanet, Principal , email:
> Alban.Pyan et@oliverwyman.com .Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate

41 

# 2 Purpose 

The key aim of our methodology is to help financial ins titutions assess the transition -related 

exposures to climate risks in their corporate loan portfolios where they may have concerns 

about the impacts of a low -carbon transition (for instance due to change in policies, technology, 

or market sentiment), as we ll as an appetite to explore and capture the associated 

opportunities. Corporate loan portfolios are short -term compared to the time horizon of a 

low -carbon transition, providing financial institutions with the flexibility to adjust such 

portfolios over ti me. However, financial institutions should not wait to assess the potential 

impacts and opportunities of climate change, because: 

• The transition may unfold in a disorderly manner, for instance triggered by a sudden 

regulatory response, leaving little time for financial institutions and their clients to 

adjust, and potentially creating a “climate -driven Minsky moment ”;2

• Even if the transition happens in an orderly manner, changing the exposures and risk 

profile of a corporate loan portfolio takes time: asses sing risks and growth prospects, 

developing a coherent strategy, and building capabilities and relationships to affect 

the profile of the client base require advanced action ;

• Finally, understanding climate risks and opportunities will allow financial insti tutions 

to engage with their customers to help them manage the transition to a low -carbon 

future and establish themselves as trusted advisors. 

The purpose is to comprehensively assess the impact of orderly and disorderly transition 

scenarios on the creditw orthiness of wholesale clients across all sectors and geographies: it 

helps build awareness of climate risks and can be used not only by risk practitioners and 

sustainability teams at financial institutions, but also by the business sector, supervisors, an d

investors. 

Given the end goal is to integrate climate risks into the broader risk management framework 

and within decision -making processes, we believe it is important to leverage existing metrics 

such as probability of default or expected loss, rather than use a standalone, climate -specific 

metric such as a climate score. This will facilitate understanding of the results by stakeholders 

and allow the outputs to be more readily evaluated within the organization ’s existing business 

processes. 

The methodol ogy described in this chapter is designed to be compatible with a wide range of 

climate scenarios. While it is focused on credit exposures and risks, the same methodology 

can be applied for other asset classes, such as equity investments, and outside of th e financial 

services industry, for instance by corporates who would like to quantify their business 

exposure to climate transition risk. 

# 3 Methodology 

Our methodology to perform scenario analysis is composed of three modules ( Figure 3-1): 

• The climate transition scenarios (both orderly and disorderly);  

> 2Bank of England Prudential Regulation Authority (2018), Transition in Thinking: The impact of climate change on the UK
> banking sector .

Chapter 3

42 

• A “bottom -up ” module, which assesses the impact of transition risk scenarios on a set 

of representative exposures; and 

• A “top -down ” module, which extrapolates the name -level information to the 

remainder of the portfolio. 

Figure 3-1 Scenario analysis methodology – overview 

The rationale for developing both a top -down and a bottom -up module is to balance accuracy, 

comprehensiveness, and workload. The bottom -up module is critical to driving a deep 

understanding of the risks in the absence of historical data, while the top -down module makes 

its application across the portfolio more practical, for instance when data or time and 

resources are not sufficient to run a bottom -up analysis for all counterparties. In practice, a

detailed, counterparty -level analysis can be performed on a sample of companies in each 

sector to evaluate the drivers and estimate the impact of the scenario on corporate 

performance. The size of the required sample depends on the homogeneity of the portfolio. 

The top -down module then extrapolates the impact to other companies in the portfolio. This 

technique reduces both the required time and resources, while maintaining integrity and 

accuracy of the analysis. 

The three modules are further detailed in the following. 

Climate scenarios 

Scenario analysis methodolog ies need to be compatible with a range of climate scenarios so 

that financial institutions can test several plausible “hypothetical constructs ” of the future, 

and make strategic decisions based on this analysis. When performing scenario analysis, we 

use tw o types of climate transition scenarios – temperature -based scenarios and event -based 

scenarios (see  Figure 3-2) – which we then apply to specific compa nies to evaluate their impact. Borrower characteristics    

> (e.g. rating)
> Intermediary
> output Output Input
> Climate
> scenarios Top down module
> Bottom up module
> Climate scenario models
> Impact on
> probability of
> default
> Evolution of risk factors (by sector/geography)
> Revenue
> Low -carbon capex
> Emissions cost
> Climate credit
> quality index
> (by sector/geography)
> The top -down module systematically applies
> the scenario across the portfolio and drives
> consistency and repeatability
> Bottom -up analysis of select borrowers is used
> to calibrate the impact of cost and revenue
> drivers on credit ratings
> Borrower –level analysis
> A
> A-
> BBB
> AAA
> Time
> The impact of the scenario on all
> borrowers is assessed through a
> Merton -type model
> Legend

Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate 

43 

Figure 3-2 Temperature and Event -based climate transition scenarios 

Temperature -based scenarios are holistic scenarios used by researchers, policymakers, and, 

increasingly, co rporations to analy ze how the world might achieve a particular change in 

average global temperature. They are essential for understanding and quantifying how the 

economy could evolve. Advanced models to develop these scenarios already exist and can be 

leve raged by financial institutions ( Figure 3-3). 

Figure 3-3 Climate scenario models - Representative model structure 

Source: Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) 

The most s ophisticated scenario models, such as the ones used by the Intergovernmental 

Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), are intended as energy -economy -climate models with policy 

and research applications, leading to three issues: Temperature -based / Integrated scenario 

2040 

50 

2100 

0 2020 2000 2080 2060 

100 

150 

• Scenarios focused on potential impact of one triggering 

event (e.g. carbon price regulation) 

• Focus on understanding current portfolio exposure 

to the specific event – timing considered as “near -term” 

for simplification of analysis 

CO 2 emission trajectory 

and corresponding climate 

change scenarios 

~4.5 °C

No action 

~3 °C

Business as usual 

Paris pledges 

~2 °C Two -degree 

~1.5 °C

Rapid energy 

transition 

> GTCO 2e/year

Event -based scenarios / Disorderly transition scenarios 

Triggering event Type of risk Key metric 

Example 

exposed 

sector 

Carbon price 

regulation 

Transition 

(policy) 

Carbon price Oil & Gas 

Breakthrough in 

energy storage 

Transition 

(technology) 

Battery 

capacity 

Car 

manufacturers 

• Holistic scenarios/cross -sector 

• Often developed for policy purposes to describe an 

orderly transition, not a stress scenario 

• Requires long -term modeling and assumptions 

• Explicitly refers to the TCFD and the 2 °C scenario 

Orderly 

transition 

scenarios Representative model structure 

Emissions and 

climate forcing 

• Greenhouse gases 

• Air pollutants 

• Land -use change 

• Atmospheric changes 

Climate impacts 

• Agriculture and food 

production 

• Water availability 

• Floods, droughts, storms 

• Sea level rise 

• Economic damages 

Socio -demographic 

and economic 

• Population growth 

• Economic development 

• Technology 

• Policies 

• Energy use 

• Land use 

Climate projections 

• Temperature 

• Precipitation 

• Glacier and ice melting 

• Extreme weather 

Transition risk modules Physical risk modules 

Common transition 

scenario outputs 

• Energy demand 

• Energy prices 

• Land use 

• Emissions 

• Investments 

• Carbon price 

• Macroeconomic impacts 

Scenario 

models  

> Source: Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) Chapter 3

44 

• First, they often describe a smooth a nd orderly transition to a low -carbon economy, 

which is optimi zed to minimi ze the costs on the economy. In the other words, they 

often depict a best -case scenario, rather than stress scenario (such as a disorderly 

transition to a low -carbon economy). 

• Secon d, critical outputs for financial analysis are often unpublished or unavailable, 

forcing financial institutions to develop their own variables, further interpret some of 

the results, and pilot the analysis on a sample of their exposures. 

• Third, from a mode l risk management perspective, financial institutions need to get 

comfortable with the modelling assumptions made by scientists in a field they are 

often unfamiliar with. 

Event -based scenarios are scenarios focused on the potential short -term impact of one trigger 

event, such as the sudden implementation of a major carbon price regulation. This type of 

scenario can be used to model aspects of an abrupt or a disorderly transition to a low -carbon 

economy. At this stage, the industry at large is moving towards longer -term, orderly transition 

scenarios ( Figure 3-4). However, from risk and stress testing perspectives, we also see value in 

modelling shorter -term, disorderly transition scenarios as they may tie to near -term decisions 

and highlight different risks. 

Abrupt or disorderly transition scenarios are not as well understood, but may create additional 

risks for institutions as, by definition, an abrupt or a disorderly transition would be less optimal 

for the economy. These types of scenarios are therefore useful candidates for climate stress 

testing and have been highlighted by regulators. Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate 

45 

Figure 3-4 Climate scenarios used in the industry 3

Source: “Climate Change, Managing A New Financial Risk,” IACPM and Oliver 

Wyman, 2019 

The remainder of this section describes how we use the variables from the climate scenarios 

to assess the potential credit losses. Note the methodology is compatible with all climate 

scenarios that provide the relevant output variables. 

Bottom -up module 

The purpose of the bottom -up module is to assess the impact of the climate scenarios on the 

creditworthiness of a sample of companies. T o this end, we build a linkage between climate 

scenarios, key drivers, and company -level financial statements at the counterparty level for all 

segments, as depicted in  Figure 3-5. 

> 3

For more information on climate scenarios, please refer to: 

- www.climatescenarios.org/primer/ 

- db1.ene.iiasa.ac.at/CDLINKSDB/ 

- www.iea.org/rep orts/world -energy -outlook -2019 Which climate scenarios do you use (or plan to use) for climate 

scenario analysis/stress testing? [several responses possible] 

# of respondents 

What is the time horizon of the climate scenarios 

you are using (or plan to use) for climate 

scenario analysis/stress testing? 

# of respondents     

> 8
> 9
> 4
> 8
> 6
> 3
> 5
> 3
> 5
> Internal
> scenario
> 2DS REMIND
> CD -
> LINKS
> 1.5 °C
> IEA 450 IEA
> B2DS
> REMIND
> CD -
> LINKS
> 2°C
> RCP IEA SDS Other
> 5
> 8
> 16
> Short to
> medium term
> Medium to
> long term
> Long term
> Some institutions plan to disclose
> under different scenarios
> Orderly transition scenarios
> Typically orderly transition scenarios

Chapter 3

46 

Figure 3-5 Bottom -up module overview 

We begin by assessing the evolution of key business drivers under a transition scenario 

(volume, unit cost, price, capital expenditure) for each segment.  Table 3-1 shows an example 

of how the various drivers can be adjusted for oil and gas producers under a carbon tax 

scenario (where the tax is applied to producers).  Figure 3-6 illustrates how the resulting profit 

margin of oil and gas upstream companies can be adjusted. Credit rating model  

> Intermediary
> output Output Input

Company financials 

Scenario -adjusted PD 

(sample) 

Credit rating model 

Key drivers 

Volume 

Price 

Unit cost 

Capital expenditure 

2

Company -level financial 

statements 

(scenario -adjusted) 

Income Statement 

Cash Flow Statement 

Balance Sheet 

> Climate scenarios

Asset value 

Second, we develop scenario -

adjusted financial statements based 

on the key drivers 

Lastly, we create a linkage between 

rating model metrics and the scenario -

adjusted financial statements and re -run 

the rating model 

First, we identify and assess key 

drivers to translate the impact of a 

scenario on a company’s financial 

statements Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate 

47 

Table 3-1 Expected scenario impact on key drivers – Oil and gas Exploration and 

Production 

Driver  Expected Scenario Impact  Modelling approach 

Volume  Some of the additional costs borne by the 

producers due to the tax will be passed 

onto the consumers ; increased prices will 

lead to a decreas e in demand/production 

Decrease volume of high cost 

producers to reflect the 

decreasing demand 

Unit Cost  The marginal cost of extraction will be 

impacted by the cost of emissions: 

Released when oil and natural gas 

products are used 

Generated during the production process 

Shift cost curves upwards to 

reflect the additional costs of 

emissions due to the carbon tax 

Price  The price paid by consumers will increase 

due to the carbon tax, however the margin 

for the producer will become smaller 

Assess scenario price and 

demand based on carbon 

intensity and elasticities of the 

sector 

Capital 

Expenditure 

Capital expenditure is expected to 

decrease reflecting the lower demand 

Represents investments to maintain 

current production or grow future 

production 

Link level of capital expenditure 

to prices 

Asset value  Some high -cost oil and gas reserves will 

become uneconomical under the scenario 

due to lower demand and negative 

margins (sometimes referred to as 

“stranded assets ”) 

Apply impairment on balance 

sheet of borrowers with high 

cost reserves to account for the 

decreasing demand 

Figure 3-6 Illustration of unit cost adjustment – Oil and gas Exploration and 

Production 

Once the key drivers have been estimated, we link them to the financials of each company, 

including income statement, cash flow statement, and balance sheet ( Figure 3-7). The output 

of this step is scenario -adjusted financials, which can then be re -run through the business -as -0 

> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> Scenario unit cost Baseline unit cost Carbon price for CO2
> emissions from oil and
> natural gas products
> Carbon price for CO2
> emissions generated
> during production process
> Change in cost of
> oil field services
> The scenario price is higher than the
> baseline price (due to the shift in supply),
> as producers pass through some of the
> costs of the carbon price
> Baseline price
> Scenario price
> Baseline
> margin
> Scenario
> margin

Unit cost - carbon tax levied on producers 

USD/boe; carbon price scenario; Illustrative    

> Cost of emissions that will be
> released when oil and natural gas
> products are used (only if the
> carbon tax is levied on producers)
> Cost of emissions
> generated during the
> production process Decrease in the cost of
> oil field services due to
> lack in demand Chapter 3

48 

usual credit rating model, to get to scenario -adjusted ratings and probability of default for 

each counterparty. 

Figure 3-7 Link age of business drivers to company financial statement 

Top -down module 

A top -down extrapolation approach is a useful complement to the bottom -up analysis since it 

enables institutions to perform a portfolio -wide climate stress test, even when data or ti me 

and resources are not sufficient to run a bottom -up analysis for all counterparties. In practice, 

we extrapolate the results of the bottom -up analysis based on relevant customer 

characteristics to cover the remainder of the portfolio. 

Depending on the p ortfolio and the institution in question, various approaches can be 

considered for extrapolating the results from the counterparty -level analysis and for 

developing a generalisable relationship between credit impact and scenario variables for each 

segment in -scope. Typically, a regression -based “rule of thumb ” that uses company data and 

scenario variables as independent variables is calibrated based on the bottom -up analysis to 

predict changes in credit quality. The company data allow to estimate differenti ated impacts 

across firms based on initial characteristics (e.g., starting rating, geography), while the scenario 

variables allow to estimate the impact for a range of scenarios and therefore to run recurrent 

and flexible portfolio stress -testing without c omprehensive update of counterparty -level 

impact analysis. 

# 4 Case study and implications 

The methodology allows an institution to estimate the potential financial impact of various 

climate scenarios. An example output is shown in  Figure 3-8. The methodology provides the 

scenario -adjusted rating and probability of default for the analy zed companies. Even in a high -Cash Flow Statement 

Cash Flows from Operations 

Cash Flows from Investing 

Cash Flows from Financing 

> Volume
> Unit cost
> Price
> Capital expenditure

Income Statement 

Revenue 

Expenses 

Balance Sheet 

Assets 

Liabilities 

Shareholder’s Equity Asset value  

> Borrower’s adaptation plans

Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate 

49 

carbon sector like oil and gas, some companies may be heavily or li ttle impacted by climate 

transition scenarios. For instance, in this sector, key indicators driving financial performance 

under a transition scenario include: 

• Starting financial strength (e.g. , whether the company has initially high or low 

leverage), 

• Posit ion on the cost curve (high cost reserves will be the first ones to be impaired shall 

the demand for oil and gas decrease), and 

• Carbon intensity of the extraction process. 

This differentiated impact across customers highlights why a simple top -down, sector -level 

approach is insufficient to model climate risk. 

Figure 3-8 Average rating impact by company – Oil and gas Exploration and 

Production – Illustrative 

Developing a deep understanding of the key climat e risk drivers has multiple benefits beyond 

the “stress number ” at the end of the process. When organi zations are successful in applying 

the approach, not only do they manage to integrate these drivers into underwriting and credit 

review processes, but the exercise also fosters better engagement with their customers, 

helping them manage the transition to a low -carbon future and mitigate their own climate 

exposures. Thus, understanding climate risks is a way for banks to further position themselves 

as truste d advisors for their clients, rather than a merely “punitive ” exercise. 

# 5 The path forward 

Development of climate scenario analysis capabilities will naturally require multiple phases as 

practices evolve and new data emerges from industry practitioners, corp orates, policy makers, 

and climate scenario modelers. We see a number of potential paths for further development 

of the approach. This includes: TRANSITION RISK 

> Average changes in credit ratings by scenario

SCENARIOANALYSIS      

> Choose Sector
> Choose Geography
> CALCULATE
> Oil and gas
> World
> Choose Customer
> All
> Late policy action Early policy action No additional action Internal scenario 1
> Late policy action
> Choose Climate Scenario
> Starting rating Ending rating Example: Sudden implementation of a carbon tax Chapter 3

50 

• Creating financially oriented transition scenarios tailored to the vulnerabilities of 

individual institutions, 

• Integrating transition risk assessment within organi zations, and 

• Building out climate scenario models to support financial risk analysis. 

Most publicly available scenarios are primarily intended for a different purpose from financial 

risk assessment. The most sophisticated scenario models, such as the ones assessed in IPCC 

reports, are intended as energy -economy -climate models with policy and research 

applications, not for financial analysis. As a result, critical outputs for financial analysis are 

often u npublished or unavailable. Over the past few years, significant advancements have 

been made toward building a bridge between the scenario modelling practices of the scientific 

community and the credit risk analysis practices of the financial sector. For in stance, the 

SENSES project, in which Oliver Wyman is participating, gathers the climate scenario modelers 

and various stakeholders (such as finance practitioners, policymakers, and corporates) to 

develop the new generation of climate change scenarios. 4 Thi s process highlighted a number 

of areas for future development, which include: 

• New types of scenarios (such as disorderly transition scenarios), 

• Improved model granularity, 

• Ex post calculations to generate new financial risk variables, and 

• Redesign of mod el reporting and outputs to track additional sector variables. 

Integration of transition risk assessment in the organi zation 

The methodology outlined in this chapter provides for scenario -based assessment of transition 

risk. However, institutions need to go beyond risk assessment and disclosure to properly 

manage transition risks. As climate risks materiali ze, institutions would benefit from their 

broader incorporation into a range of business management and risk management processes 

at financial instituti ons. 5 While specifics may differ across institutions depending on particular 

profiles, potential examples of areas for integration include: 

• Integration of transition risk measurement across other risk measurement processes 

including physical risk, 

• Embeddin g into risk identification processes, 

• Incorporation of climate risk considerations in underwriting and credit rating 

processes, 

• Consideration of climate -related limits and exposure monitoring,    

> 4For more information, please refer to: http://senses -project.org
> 5For more details on the integration of climate -related considerations into traditional risk management frameworks, please
> refer to “
> Climate Change, Managing A New Financial Risk ,” IACPM and Oliver Wyman Assessing Credit Risk in a Changing Climate

51 

• Climate risk -related portfolio management and structuring, 

• Cons ideration within business planning, strategic planning, and pricing, 

• Adjustment of governance and organi zation, and 

• Capturing climate risk in the risk appetite. 

# 6 Conclusion 

The potential disruption and financial implications of climate change are imminent. As the 

impact of climate change prompts high financial stakes and substantial structural adjustments 

to the global economy, financial institutions will face both climate risks and opportunities. 

Financial institutions need to treat climate risks as a finan cial risk, not just a reputational one, 

and integrate climate considerations into their financial risk management frameworks. The 

measurement management of climate risks is a new exercise and will continue to evolve. In 

helping financial institutions asses s climate risks, we count on the compounding effect of these 

efforts. As the financial services industry adopts sound, analytical approaches for 

understanding climate risks, we believe it will become a significant governance and risk 

management topic. Inve stors will respond in kind, as the information created by climate 

disclosures drives their own capital allocations. A richer data environment can fuel more 

efficient capital markets. Through all these changes, increasing awareness of climate risks 

within t he financial services industry will ultimately generate broad -based benefits for other 

industries and the society as a whole. Chapter 4

52 

# Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in 

# Financia l Portfolios: A Science -Based Approach for 

# Investors and Supervisors 

By 

Irene Monasterolo and Stefano Battiston 1

# Abstract 

Climate risk is a new source of financial risk characteri zed by deep uncertainty, non -linearity, 

and endogeneity. Neglecting these characteristics leads to a severe underestimation of 

potential financial losses and gains. We present the CLIMAFIN methodology designed to help 

investors and financial institutions to address this challenge and to embed climate risk into 

pricing models and stress -tests. The method builds on the Climate Stress -test by Battiston et 

al. (2017) , which has become over the years a reference tool for academics and practitioners. 

CLIMAFIN allo ws to translate forward -looking climate transition scenarios into financial shocks 

and to provide investors and financial supervisors with scenario -adjusted risk metrics and 

models (e.g. Climate Value at Risk, Climate Spread, Climate Stress -test). The chap ter describes 

the technical details of the methodology and some recent policy applications carried out in 

collaboration with leading financial institutions. 

Keywords : climate scenarios, climate transition risk, financial risk, risk management strategy, 

cli mate V aR , climate spread, climate stress -test, financial stability 

# 1 Introduction 

There is a growing consensus among scientists, central bank officials and financial supervisors 

that climate change is a new source of risks for the economy and financial stabi lity, at both 

individual institution and system level s (Battiston et al., 2017 ). Climate -related financial losses 

can result from the misalignment of investments in the economy and finance with the climate 

and energy transition targets. It is broadly recog nized that massively scaling up investments in 

low -carbon firms and sectors and phasing -out those in fossil -fuel power plants and carbon -

intensive sectors are both needed to achieve climate targets laid out in the Paris Agreement 

(New Climate Economy, 2018 ). 

In recent years, many central banks and academic institutions began to analy ze climate -related 

financial risks that could stem from a disorderly transition to a low -carbon economy, consisting                

> 1This chapter is written by Irene Monasterolo (corresponding author, IM) and Stefano Battiston (SB). IM is an assistant
> professor at Vienna University of Economics and Business, and visiting research fellow a t Boston University’ sGlobal
> Development Policy Center ,email: irene.monasterolo@wu.ac.at . SB is SNF Professor of Banking at the University of Zurich,
> and professor of Political Economy at Ca’Foscari Univer sity of Venice ,email: stefano.battiston@uzh.ch .The authors (IM
> and SB) would like to thank Antoine Mandel (Paris School of Economics), Bas van Ruijven and Keywan Riahi (IIASA), Petr
> Jakubik (EIOPA) for the useful comments and collaboration on the application of the methodology. We acknowledge the
> support of the INSPIRE grant and of the FET H2020 project CLIMEX (Grant number 851876). IM acknowledges the support
> of the Klimafonds+ project Gree nFin , the H2020 CASCADES project (Grant number 8 21010) and of the OeNB ’s Maria
> Schaumeyer habilitationsstipendium, while SB recognizes the support of the Schwyzer Winiker Stiftung. Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

53 

in the late and/or sudden introduction of climate policies ( e.g., carbon pricing, Stiglitz et al., 

2017 ) that cannot be fully anticipated by investors. In such a context, firms and investors are 

unable to timely adjust their business and portfolios ’ risk management strategies ( Battiston et 

al., 2017 ). Mispricing of climate -related financial risks may reflect in the  value  of the financial 

contracts and securities issued by low -carbon and carbon -intensive activities, leading to asset 

price volatility. This, in turn, could have potential implications on  financial stabi lity at the 

system level if large and correlated asset classes are involved ( Monasterolo et al., 2017 ). Given 

the interconnectedness of financial markets and the strong linkage between finance and the 

real economy, such losses could be amplified by network effects and cascade from 

the  financial sector  to  the economy ( Battiston et al., 2017 ), with destabilizing effects on 

countries ’ economic performance and social cohesion ( Monasterolo, 2020 ). 

A main barrier for investors, financial supervisors and regulator s to embed climate -related 

financial risks in their decision making is the lack of science -based approaches to quantitatively 

assess the implications of future climate scenarios on the value of financial contracts and 

investors ’ portfolios. To fill this ga p, we developed an operational framework, CLIMAFIN, to 

assess and manage forward -looking climate risks in investment and financial policy decisions 

under deep uncertainty (Battiston et al., 2019a). CLIMAFIN addressed to questions that are 

relevant to inves tors and financial supervisors in the low -carbon transition: 

1. How to carry out a quantitative assessment of climate transition risks at the individual and 

systemic financial level that makes best use of the available scientific knowledge on climate 

chang e and financial risks? 

2. How to price climate risk characteristics (forward -looking, deep uncertainty, non -linearity, 

endogeneity) in the probability of default of financial contracts and investors ’ portfolios, 

considering counterparty risks? 

The major c hallenge in addressing these questions stands in the complex nature of climate 

change, which represents a new type of risk for financial actors and renders standard finance 

approaches to risk pricing and valuation inadequate. In particular, we need to cons ider that 

climate -related financial risks are endogenous ( Battiston et al., 2017 ). This means that the 

today ’s perception of future climate risks held by policy makers and investors can impact on 

their action (or inaction) towards those risks and affect th e realization of climate risks 

themselves. Indeed, if the introduction of stable climate policies is delayed by governments, 

firms and financial actors do not align their investments to sustainability. This, in turn, makes 

it impossible to limit global tem perature increase below 2 degrees C elsius from pre -industrial 

levels, triggering the realization of climate risks in the economy and finance in the near future. 

Such endogeneity leads to multiple possible pathways (or equilibria, in the sense of strategic 

interaction of economic agents) that are very different based on the future prevalence of 

climate policies, or energy technology shocks, and on investors ’ anticipation and reaction to 

them. Moreover, it is very difficult to estimate the probability of such pathways given that we 

are in a context of deep uncertainty ( Weitzman, 2009 ). This information is not contained in 

historical data, thus represent ing a poor proxy of the materiality of the climate -related 

financial risks we could face in the near future . However, traditional approaches to financial 

risk assessment and portfolio optimization are based on backward -looking benchmarks and 

short -term horizons, as well as assumptions of normal distributions, perfect markets and 

absence of arbitrage. 

This chapte r is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses why standard economic and financial 

risk models are inadequate to assess such risks. Section 3 presents the details of the CLIMAFIN 

methodology ( Battiston et al., 2019 a), introducing the workflow, the fundame ntal components, Chapter 4

54 

input metrics and data used. Section 4 illustrates the output of the CLIMAFIN methodology 

(Climate Spread, the Climate Value at Risk (VaR) and the Climate Stress -test) as applied to 

equity holdings, corporate and sovereign bond portfolios held by financial institutions, in 

collaboration with central banks (e.g., Austrian National Bank (OeNB), Banco de Mexico (BdM)) 

and financial regulators (e.g., European Insurance and Occupational Pension Funds Authority 

(EIOPA)). In section 5, we conclude by discussing the applicability of science -based climate -

financial risk metrics and methods to inform investors ’ risk management strategies, and to 

support financial supervisors in identifying systemic climate -related financial risks and the 

designing pru dential measures to mitigate them. 

# 2 Climate change as a new type of risks for financial analysis 

Climate change represents a new type of risk for financial actors and decision makers, because 

it is characterized by: 

• Deep uncertainty: Due to the nature of t he earth system, climate change is 

characterized by deep uncertainties in forecasting its realization and impact on 

humans and ecosystems . This is in part due to the presence of tail events ( Weitzman, 

2009 ) and tipping points after which the characteristic s of the system change abruptly 

(Solomon et al., 2009 ). The more the system gets closer to such tipping points, the 

more the possibility of irreversible changes in the human -environmental system to 

occur, and with that the possibility of crossing of the pl anetary boundaries (Steffen et 

al. 2018) and of triggering domino effects (Lenton et al. , 2019). Other sources of 

uncertainty refer to the assumptions on agents ’ utility function, future productivity 

growth rate, and intertemporal discount rate used in cos t-benefit analyses of climate 

change. 

• Non -linearity : Recent research showed that the distribution of extreme climate -

related events (heat/cold waves) is highly non -linear ( Ackerman, 2017 ). Fourteen of 

the 15 hottest years on record were since 2000, while 2 015 -2019 was the hottest five -

year period on record ( WMO, 2019 ). 

• Forward -looking nature of risk : The impacts of climate change are on the time scale 

of two decades or longer, while the time horizon of financial markets is much shorter 

(few months). 

• Endogen eity : Climate -change risks are endogenous and depend on the risk 

perceptions of the agents involved. Indeed, the achievement of the climate targets 

depends on governments ’ and firms ’ investment decisions. But both types of decisions 

depend on their percept ions of the risks involved, which differ across the possible 

transition scenarios and trajectories ( Battiston, 2019 ). Thus, the endogeneity between 

policies choices and investors ’ expectations on the financial risks resulting from these 

policies generates the possibility of multiple equilibria. Green perception is likely to 

lead to green climate policy and green portfo lio. 

Climate change is expected to impact the economy and finance via physical and transition risks 

(Carney 2015). However, while climate physical risks will be more visible in the medium -to -

long term, climate transition risks could happen earlier and be more financially relevant. 

Further, it is now well recognized that in assessing climate -related financial risks, one should 

not only consider the characteristics of climate risks, but also those of financial risks. Research 

developed following the Great Fi nancial Crisis highlighted the key role of financial complexity Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios 

55 

and financial actors ’ interconnectedness in amplifying shocks via the reverberation of losses 

within the financial network (Battiston et al. 2012, 2016) and in contributing to the building 

up of systemic risk (Battiston et al. 2012). 

These elements challenge the traditional approaches to financial risk assessment used by 

investors and financial supervisors because they require a rethinking of the notion of 

materiality of risks and, connected to that, the notion of time horizons, benchmarks and 

coordination problems in investment decisions. Indeed, standard approaches to economic 

and financial risk assessment stand on the identification of the most likely scenarios, on the 

computation of expected values and on the calculation of risk metrics (e.g., volatility) based 

on the historical values of market prices. In addition, they rely on strong assumptions of 

market conditions and agents’ behaviors, including perfect informa tion, normal distributions, 

and a lack of arbitrage (Black & Scholes, 1973). These assumptions and characteristics are 

clearly at odds with the characteristics of climate risks (and financial risks) and could lead to 

underestimating the impact of climate c hange in risk assessment models, with relevant 

implications on policy recommendations ( DeFries et al., 2019 ). 

# 3 The CLIMAFIN framework 

CLIMAFIN methodology is a transparent and science -based approach to quantitatively 

assess ing and pric ing forward -looking climate risks and their characteristics (i.e., deep 

uncertainty, non -linearity and endogeneity) in the value of individual financial contracts and 

investors ’ portfolio. More specifically, we can embed forward -looking climate transition 

sce narios provided by climate science and climate economic models (e.g., Integrated 

Assessment Models, IAMs) in: 

• Probabilities of defaults of contracts and securities (i.e., introducing climate in 

financial pricing models for equity holdings, corporate and s overeign bonds) 

• Quantitative metrics of financial risks used by investors, central banks and financial 

regulators (e.g., climate VaR, climate spread) 

• A full -fledged Climate Stress -test rooted in financial network models. 

Table 4-1 summarizes the purpose of CLIMAFIN and its characteristics along key dimensions 

such as coverage of scenarios, risk types and financial instrument types. Chapter 4

56 

Table 4-1: Purpose and characteristics of CLIMAFIN 

Purpose 

To enable investors, central banks and financial regulators to assess 

forward -looking climate risks (transition, physical) and opportunities in 

financial portfolios a nd identify drivers at the individual and system 

level. 

Target users 

CLIMAFIN can be customized for both private and public financial 

institutions, portfolios and types of financial contracts (e.g. equity 

holdings, corporate and sovereign bonds, loans). Existing applications 

have involved development finance institutions (e .g. China 

Development Bank), national central banks (e.g. OeNB, BdM), financial 

regulators (EIOPA) and commercial banks (European and US banks). 

Climate scenarios 

covered 

CLIMAFIN covers 2°C -aligned climate transition scenarios, including 

those characte rized by a disorderly low -carbon transition (e.g., late and 

sudden introduction of climate policies and lack of full anticipation by 

investors). CLIMAFIN builds on the IEA Technological Roadmap as well 

as scenarios of emissions targets, energy technology t rajectories and 

national contributions produced by IAMs used by the IPCC ( 2014, 2018 ), 

and their scenario databases, such as LIMITS Database 2 and Socio -

Economic Shared Pathways and the most recent CD -Links 3.

Risk types covered 

The methodology allows users to compute the probability of default 

(PD) for individual financial contracts, the Climate Value at Risk (Climate 

VaR) and Expected Shortfall (ES), and the climate stress -test under 

forward -looking climate transition scenarios (including a disorderly 

transition) aligned to the 2°C target. The sectors covered, such as 

energy, utility, manufacturing and transportation, are those in the IEA 

technological roadmap and in the EU Reference Scenarios. 

Risk transmission 

channels 

CLIMAF IN has focused so far on transition risks arising from asset value 

adjustments according to the types of climate risks, the financial risk 

characteristics of the investors and their expectations of the impact of 

climate policies. Adjustments include econom ic and financial 

gains/losses (Gross Value Added (GVA), Probability of Default (PD)) due 

to i), exposures to high/low carbon activities (classified in Climate Policy 

Relevant Sectors (CPRS) and ii), delayed and disorderly alignment with 

climate targets tha t investors do not fully anticipate. If climate policies 

are credible, stable and anticipatable by investors, the portfolios will 

not experience large price volatilities that require asset revaluation. Our 

team is working to include physical risk transmiss ions. Recent 

application has focused on climate physical risk stemming from floods 

and sea -level rise. 

Financial contracts 

covered 

The methodology applies to loans, corporate and sovereign bonds and 

equity holdings, and cat bonds. Our team is working to i ntegrate 

derivatives. 

Granularity of the 

analysis 

Risks at the firm level can be aggregated to the portfolio level and 

incorporated into standard financial risk metrics (see Climate VaR by 

Battiston et al., 2017 ). The level of granularity required depends on the 

depth of analysis and would normally include project and/or 

counterparty data.                 

> 2The LIMITS Scenario Database is operated by the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA )
> https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/LIMITSDB/dsd?Action=htmlpage&page=about
> 3https://data.ene.iiasa.ac.at/iamc -1.5c -explorer/#/login?redirect=%2Fworkspaces Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

57 

Country -specific 

risks 

We elaborate a dataset of proprietary trajectories based on country and 

sector specific progress towards their Nationally Determined 

Contributions (NDCs) and climate targets in order to incorporate 

country -level transition risks into standard metrics of sovereign risks 

(see the Climate Spread in Battiston & Monasterolo, 2019 ). The team is 

working to in corporate country -specific exposures to climate physical 

risks. 

The CLIMAFIN framework provides a quantitative assessment arranged in a workflow of four 

modules.  Figure 4-1 shows the interplay of the four modules in the CLIMAFIN workflow. 

Module 1 gathers and consolidates a database of climate science scenarios and climate 

transition scenarios, e.g., those provided by the IPCC (2018) and the NGFS (2019) .

Module 2 uses the information from Module 1 to generate a large set of forward -looking 

climate transition scenarios that imply a shock on the low -carbon and carbon -intensive 

economic activities (respectively positive and negative) based on their energy t echnologies 

(i.e., specific renewable energy or fossil fuels based). Depending on the assumptions on the 

climate economic model used (e.g. IAMs) and the introduction of the policy (e.g. the value of 

the carbon tax), the policy shock can be computed either as difference across trajectories 

(Monasterolo et al., 2018) or as difference along time steps in the same trajectory (Battiston 

et al., 2017). when moving from the initial state of the economy, i.e., the Business as Usual (B), 

to a specific policy scenari o (P). Using climate economics models (e.g., the IAMs), we calculate 

economic shocks (market share, Gross Value Added (GVA)) by region and sector of economic 

activity (e.g., low -carbon or carbon -intensive), conditioned to each scenario. The core of the 

fee dback mechanism is as follows: the forward -looking climate transition scenarios imply a 

shock to the low -carbon and carbon -intensive economic activities (respectively positive and 

negative) based on their energy technologies (i.e., renewable energy or foss il fuels based). To 

associate a climate financial risk profile to the sectors of economic activities, Battiston et al. 

(2017) introduced the Climate Policy Relevant Sectors (CPRS), i.e. , fossil fuels, low/high -carbon 

utility, low/high -carbon transportation , energy intensive manufacturing, housing. 

Module 3 provides the information set of a risk -averse investor and carries out a valuation 

adjustment and a risk adjustment of individual financial contracts, i.e., in their Probability of 

Default (PD) based on the scenarios of economic shocks (by activity and its energy technology) 

obtained from Module 2. In particular, Module 3 uses the outcome of the economic shock on 

each economic activity and assets, and prices it in the PD and value of the financial contrac ts 

(equity holdings, corporate and sovereign bonds) issued by the activity, or in the loans 

associated to that. 

Module 4 uses information on repricing of the contracts and computes distributions that allow 

to consider non -linearity and deep uncertainty of climate change in climate financial risk 

metrics (e.g. Climate VaR) and the Climate Stress -test. Rooted on financial valuation in network 

models, the Climate Stress -test allows to assess the largest losses for individual portfolios 

conditioned to climate scenarios, considering risk amplification and reverberation driven by 

financial interconnectedness, considering losses generated by direct and indirect exposures 

(second round losses, Battiston et al., 2017, Roncoroni et al., 2019). Chapter 4

58 

Figure 4-1 CLIMAFIN framework for climate financial risk assessment under deep 

uncertainty 

Module 1 provides the information set combining science -based knowledge and 

market data to be used by financial supervisors and investors. Module 2 provides 

information on the economic shocks (positive and negative) associated with climate 

transition scena rios, at the level of economic activity. Modules 3 and 4 provide 

metrics and methods of financial risks to support investment and policy decision 

making in the transition to a carbon -neutral economy. Source: Battiston et al. 

(2019a) 

Module 1. Database o f climate science scenarios and climate economics 

scenarios 

Module 1 gathers and consolidates the following sets of information: 

• Sets of future climate change scenarios, as from the IPCC reports ( IPCC , 2014 , IPCC 

2018), forecasts of GHG emission concentrations, temperature changes and 

socioeconomic impacts of climate change conditioned to the scenarios. 

• Sets of economic trajectories under climate policy scenarios as provided by well -

established economic models of climate change, e.g., IAMs 4 , parti al or general 

economic equilibrium models that consider GHG emission targets and any physical 

damages resulting from climate change. For instance, the LIMITS database and the 

new CD -Links database provides scenarios of the evolution of different economic 

sectors ’ output under various policy scenarios as computed by IAMs developed by 

leading academic institutions such as IIASA, PIK, and CMCC. 

For instance, in the climate risk assessment of the sovereign bond portfolios of insurance 

companies in the European Union (EU), Battiston et al. (2019a) used the climate policy 

scenarios aligned to the 2°C target developed by the international science community and 

reviewed by the IPCC. They considered the stabiliza tion concentration of CO2 at the end of  

> 4

Note that IAMs consider only in very stylized way, if at all, the impact of climate change on the socio economic system. It 

can be argued that the convex damage function used in this literature cannot account for the essential characteristics of 

climate risks such as tail risk and climate tipping points. The approach presented here can be adapted to use traj ectories 

from economic models that would also account for these effects .Value at Risk à            

> M2: SHOCKS ON SECTORS ’FORWARD-LOOKING TRAJECTORIES (market shares, GVA) M1: CLIMATE SCENARIOS (EMISSIONS TARGETS) M3: SHOCK ON FIRM ’S CASH FLOWS AND FISCAL REVENUES
> (IPCC 2014)
> 3 TWh from coal
> 7 TWh from renewables
> Utility: 10TWh generation
> M4: CLIMATE VAR AND CLIMATE STRESS TEST CONDITIONED TO CLIMATE SCENARIOS M3: SHOCKS ON PD AND PRICE OF FINANCIAL CONTRACTS
> Co untry
> WI TCH:
> bo nd
> sh ock
> (% )
> WI TCH:
> yi eld
> sh ock
> (% )
> Au stria1, 3-0 ,16
> Au stralia-1 7,362, 45
> Ca nada-5 ,210, 67
> No rway-1 4,822, 05
> Po land-1 2,851, 75
> Sources: Battiston & Monasterolo 2019, Monasterolo ea 2018
> FEEDBACK ON ECONOMIC STRUCTURE Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

59 

century consistent with the 2°C pledge under the Paris Agreement (i.e., 450 and 500 parts per 

million (ppm)). These are associated with two different policy implementation scenarios, i.e., 

Reference Policy (RefPol) a nd Strong Policy (StrPol) in the exercise conducted by LIMITS IAMs 

(Kriegler et al., 2013 ). RefPol assumes a weak near -term target by 2020 with fragmented 

countries ’ actions to achieve emissions reduction by 2050, while StrPol assumes a stringent 

near -term target by 2020. The 500 and 450 ppm scenarios are associated with a probability of 

exceeding the 2°C target by 35 -59% and 20 -41% respectively. A change in climate policy (e.g. 

in the value of the carbon tax every five years) implies a change in the sector s' macroeconomic 

trajectory, thus a change in the market shares of primary and secondary energy sources. 

Currently, CLIMAFIN ’s new analyses use the CD -Links post -Paris Agreement Scenarios. 

Table 4-2 provides an overview of the scenarios and their comparisons (See Battiston & 

Monasterolo, 2019 ). 

Table 4-2 LIMITS scenarios’ characteristics 

Source: Table based on Kriegler et al. (2013) , adapted in Battiston and 

Monasterolo (2019) 

Module 2. Climate transition shock scenarios 

This module derives scenarios of economic shocks (positive or negative) at the level of 

economic activities, based on t heir energy technology and relevance for climate policy 

implementation from the information provided by Module 1. 

First, based on climate science evidence from Module 1, we construct an event tree for the 

main possible scenarios relevant for climate transition risk, in a mid -term horizon of 2025 -

2030 or in a long -term horizon (2050), following the 5 years calculations of the IAMs. In 

particular, we provide an argument for how the current socioeconomic dynamics of opposing 

vested interests increases the likelihood of a disorderly low -carbon transition. This event tree 

can be defined for the zero -carbon energy transition needed to achieve the climate targets 

(IPCC, 2018 ) as in  Figure 4-2:No policy Base Baseline None N/A None                                                                         

> RefPolReferenceWeak2100None
> StrPolReferenceStringent2100None
> 450BenchmarkNoneN/A450ppm
> 500BenchmarkNoneN/A500ppm
> DelayedPolicyRefPol-450ClimatePolicyWeak2020450ppm
> DelayedPolicyStrPol-450ClimatePolicyStringent2020500ppm
> DelayedPolicyRefPol-500ClimatePolicyWeak2020500ppm
> DelayedPolicyStrPol-500ClimatePolicyStringent2020500ppm
> DelayedActionRefPol2030-500ClimatePolicyWeak2030501ppm
> Fragmentedaction
> Immediateaction
> ScenarioclassScenarionameScenariotype
> Levelofambition
> (nearterm)
> Levelofambition
> (longterm)
> Levelofinternational
> cooperation

Chapter 4

60 

Figure 4-2 Lo w-carbon transition’s main transition scenarios: chain of events in the 

transmission of economic and financial shocks 

Second, based on the economic trajectories from Module 1, we derive a set of economic 

shocks (on output, market share and GVA) by region and sector of the eco nomic activities (low -

carbon and carbon -intensive). These shocks can be computed either across climate transition 

trajectories (Monasterolo et al. 2018), or within the same trajectory across years (Battiston et 

al. 2017). Since the current classifications of economic activities (e.g. NACE 4 digit) do not 

provide information on the sector ’s exposure to climate risks, we classify economic activities 

relevant to climate transition risks into CPRS. These include fossil fuel, utility, energy -intensive, 

transport , housing, infrastructure, identified based on: the direct and indirect contributions of 

economic activities (classified at the NACE 4 -digit level) to GHG emissions (Scope 1, 2, 3); their 

sensitivities to climate policy implementation (e.g. the EU carbon leakage directive 

2003/87/EC); the technology mix of the activities and their role in the energy value chain; their 

investment plans , particularly the climate relevant part (e.g. CAPEX in Battiston et al., 2017 ). 

Doing so allows us to identify activities an d sectors that will have the most impact on achieving 

climate targets and will also be impacted by climate transition risks. The CPRS classification 

was used by the European Central Bank (2019 5) and by EIOPA (2018 6) to assess financial actors ’

exposure to climate transition risks in the EU. 

Third, we consider the transition of the economy from a business -as -usual (BAU) trajectory to 

a given policy trajectory (P) compatible with a 1.5°C or a 2°C target: 

• Shocks are obtained as differences in sectors ’ output between the BAU and the 

climate policy shock trajectories (P) for the same model (e.g., IAMs 7 ) that can be 

calculated either across trajectories or across years (2020 to 2100) within the same 

trajectory; 

> 5

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/financial -stability/fsr/special/html/ecb.fsrart201905_1~47cf778cc1.en.html#toc5  

> 6

https://register.eiopa.europa.eu/Publica tions/Reports/EIOPA%20FSR%20December%202018.pdf  

> 7

Note that other climate economic models could be used to provide shocks on output. We opted  for  IAMs because they 

are the models reviewed by the IPCC report and used to inform climate policy discussion. Orderly Disorderly 

Low-carbon transition scenarios: economic and financial shocks transmission tree                                         

> After 2030/never
> Governments introduce timely and coordinated climate policies aimed to achieve the 2˚Ctarget (e.g. a carbon tax aligned to Stiglitz et al. 2017) The pathway is predictable. Market players can anticipate the shift from fossil fuel to renewable energy sources and price it in their business models No aggregate shocks on asset prices. While there is idiosyncratic risk related to individual firms ’
> performances, there is no systemic risks. Governments cannot (or may want not) introduce timely and coordinated climate policies. The transition may take place but it will be disorderly. Aggregate shocks on asset prices (volatility) could occur triggering potential individual and systemic risks. These, in turn, could affect financial stability. Uncertainty characterises the transition. Market players can anticipate the shift from fossil fuel to renewable energy and price it in their business models. Temperature increases for centuries, leading to irreversible changes to the earth system (tipping points, domino effects) Climate policies are never introduced. The energy transition never takes place. Large shocks on GDP driven by resource scarcity and shock on productivity and profitability trigger systemic financial risk. Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

61 

• We need to depart from the idea of “most likely/feas ible scenario ” and consider sets 

of several scenarios (see  Table 4-2) to be able to determine (in Module 4) how wrong 

could an investor be in computing t he Climate VaR of her portfolio. 

• The disorderly transition is thus intended as a temporary out -of -equilibrium shift of 

the economy between two separate equilibrium trajectories based on the energy 

technology that drives the transition. This formulation mak es the exercise familiar to 

economists because they are consistent with traditional economic models ’ rationale. 

Module 3. Shock scenario -adjusted financial pricing and risk valuation 

This module integrates forward -looking climate transition risk scenarios in financial risk -pricing 

models and quantitative financial risk metrics used by investors and financial supervisors, such 

as Climate Spread ( Battiston & Monasterolo, 2019 ) and Climate VaR ( Battiston et al., 2017 ).

The Climate Spread is defined as the cha nge in the spread of a corporate or sovereign bond 

contract conditional on a given Climate Policy Shock Scenario, thus introducing future climate 

risks in the assessment of firms or countries ’ financial solvency. The Climate VaR can be defined 

as the “wors t-case loss ” conditioned to future climate shock scenarios given a certain 

confidence level. 

From the sectorial economic shock trajectories based on climate transition scenarios (Module 

2), we compute the financial shocks on the cashflows of individual eco nomic activities 

comprising the sector. We then translate the shock on the cashflows in the adjustments of PDs 

of individual firms and sovereign governments, and in the adjustment of risks and values of 

the individual risky financial contracts (equity hold ings, corporate and sovereign and bonds). 

In this step, we develop climate -based financial pricing models and financial risk metrics (e.g. 

Climate Spread, Climate VaR) embedded in the forward -looking climate shock trajectories, 

accounting for the deep unce rtainties of climate risks. 

Our approach stands on the definition of the Information Set of a risk -averse investor who 

aims to minimize the largest climate -related losses to her portfolio. We define an information 

set that can accommodate incomplete inform ation and deep uncertainty (Greenwald & Stiglitz, 

1986) and can cover a time horizon that is relevant both for investment strategies and for the 

low -carbon transition (e.g. from 2020 to 2050). The investor ’s information set comprises 

(Battiston et al., 201 9a): 

• Climate policy scenarios corresponding to Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emission 

reduction target across regions), provided e.g. by IPCC reports; 

• Future economic trajectories for carbon -intensive and low -carbon activities 

conditioned to climate scenarios, pr ovided by climate economic models (e.g., IAMs); 

• Forward -looking Climate Policy Shock Scenarios intended as a disorderly transition 

from B (Business as Usual) to P (a given climate policy scenario). These can be 

computed either across trajectories or acros s years within the same trajectory; 

• Climate Policy Shocks on the economic output of low -carbon/carbon -intensive 

activities, on their Gross Value Added (GVA) and their contribution to the fiscal 

revenues of the sovereign government. The policy shocks are un der transition 

scenarios and in a specific climate economic model. Chapter 4

62 

3.3.1 Pricing forward -looking climate risks into equity holdings 

We introduce a valuation model where 𝑡 0 denotes the time at which valuation is carried out 

and E denotes a generic equity contract. In the absence of climate policies, we assume that all 

relevant information is captured by the expected future flow of dividends. 

Following Gordon's formulation (Gordon 1959), we further consider that dividends grow at a 

constant rate 𝑔 (𝐵 ) so th at for all 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡 0; 𝑑𝑖𝑣 (𝑡 + 1) = (1 + 𝑔 (𝐵 ))𝑑𝑖𝑣 (𝑡 )

Denoting by 𝑟 the cost of risky capital, the value of equity is then determined as the net 

present value of future dividends equal to 𝑉 𝐸  

> 𝐵 ,𝑡 0

:

Where 

𝑑𝑖𝑣 (B) = 𝑑𝑖𝑣 (𝑡 0).

If we assume a climate policy shock to occur at time 𝑡 ∗, dividend is assumed to shift to 𝑑𝑖𝑣 (P)

and the growth rate of dividends to 𝑔 (𝑃 ) where P identifies a specific climate policy scenario. 

The value of equity is then determined as 𝑉 𝐸 

> 𝑃 ,𝑡 ∗

If the climate policy shock occurs at valuation time, i.e., 𝑡 ∗ = 𝑡 0, we have 

In a climate policy scenario P, it is expected that 𝑑𝑖𝑣 (P) and 𝑔 (𝑃 ) decrease for carbon -

intensive economic activities and increase for low -carbon economic activities. 

From the equity valuation under climate scenarios, we can then assess: 

The change of valuation in the case of a disorderly transition occurring at time 𝑡 ∗ given by 

𝑉 𝐸  

> 𝐵 ,𝑡 0

- 𝑉 𝐸 

> 𝑃 ,𝑡 ∗

Given a probability distribution P on the time of occurrence and/or the impact o f the policy 

scenarios, we can compute Climate VaR associated with an equity contract. Climate VaR is a 

quantile of loss distributions conditioned to climate policy shocks scenarios, which could be 

either characterized by  physical or transition risks ( Batt iston et al., 2017 ), in a given time. The 

Climate VaR, then, defines the largest losses (usually  in USD) in the  value of a risky asset (e.g., 

equity holdings and bonds) or portfolio that the investor should withstand, conditioned to a 

given scenario, confi dence level and time. Thus, the Climate VaR is a measure of  risk of 

investment  under forward -looking climate scenarios. The Climate VaR Management Strategy 

can be written as: Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios 

63 

The VaR, despite being well known and used by investors, has two main limitatio ns in this 

context. First, VaR is computed assuming knowing how the loss will be distributed, and 

this leads to model risk . Second, VaR depends linearly on the PD of underlying assets, thus 

implying that small errors have small consequences. However, the PD of leveraged investor 

depends non -linearly on PD of underlying assets, thus implying small errors can have big 

consequences. But, imp ortantly, VaR does not consider leverage. This means that to assess the 

financial risk implications of climate change, we need to go beyond VaR and consider 

interconnected financial actors, leverage financial agents with overlapping portfolios, i.e., the 

conditions for systemic risk in financial networks ( Battiston et al., 2016 ). This is a main feature 

of CLIMAFIN, as well as the possibility to be applied to other risk metrics, such as the Expected 

Shorfall (ES). This is the average of all the losses above the VaR (i.e., the largest losses), and 

gives us a measure of what we can expect in terms of losses on our portfolio. 

For a complete explanation of the pricing of forward -looking climate transition risks in the 

value of equity holdings, see Battiston and M onasterolo (2019) .

3.3.2 Pricing forward -looking climate risks into corporate and sovereign bonds 

We consider a risky (defaultable) bond issued by a corporate issuer j, issued at 𝑡 0 with maturity 

T. The value of the defaultable bond at time T, with R bein g the Recovery Rate of the corporate 

bond (i.e., the percentage of notional recovered upon default), and LGD being the Loss -Given -

Default (i.e., the percentage loss), can be written as: 

𝑣 𝑗 (𝑇 ) = {𝑅 𝑗 = (1 − 𝐿𝐺𝐷 𝑗 ) 𝑖𝑓 𝑗 𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑠 (𝑤𝑖𝑡 ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏 𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑄 𝑗 )

1 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒 (𝑤𝑖𝑡 ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑄 𝑗 )

The unitary price 𝑃 𝑗 (𝑡 ) of the bond at time 𝑡 < 𝑇 and 𝑡 > 𝑡 0 follows the usual definition of 

discounted expected value at the maturity: 

𝑃 𝑗 (𝑡 ) = exp (−𝑟 𝑓 (𝑇 − 𝑡 )) 𝐸 [𝑣 𝑗 (𝑇 )]= exp (−𝑟 𝑓 (𝑇 − 𝑡 )) (1 − 𝑄 𝐿𝐺𝐷 )

The bond price 𝑣 𝑗  

> ∗

is equal to the bond discounted expected value, with 𝑦 𝑓 risk -free rate, i.e., 

the yield of the bond facing no default risk ( e.g. the German bond in the case of sovereign 

bon ds, see Battiston & Monasterolo, 2019 ). The cumulative probability of default Q is related 

to the probability of default at t as follows: Q = 1 – (1 − q)(𝑇 −𝑡 ). The formula can be used 

to determine, from the market price, the value of the annual default pr obability q (i.e., q

implied ) for a given risk -free rate and LGD. In the case of a multi -coupon bond, the formula 

gets more complicated since one must sum up the expected value of the coupons, but the 

logic remains the same. For each coupon k, the coupon a mount is assumed to be paid only if 

j has not defaulted before. 

The bond price is defined implicitly by the yield 𝑦 𝑗 of bond j (under risk neutral measure) as 

follows: 

𝑣 𝑗  

> ∗

= 𝑒 −𝑦 𝑗 𝑇 

We can define the Probability of Default (PD) 𝑞 𝑗 (𝑃 ) of the corporate bonds ’ issuer j under 

Climate Policy Scenario P as: 

𝑞 𝑗 (𝑃 ) = 𝒫 (𝜂 𝑗 < 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑃 )) = ∫ 𝜙 (𝑃 )(𝜂 𝑗 )𝑑𝜂 𝑗  

> 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑃 )
> 𝜂 𝑖𝑛𝑓 Chapter 4

64 

where 𝜙 (𝑃 )(𝜂 𝑗 ) is the probability distribution of idiosyncratic shock 𝜂 𝑗 , and 𝜂 𝑖𝑛𝑓 is the lower 

bound of the ra nge of the value of 𝜂 𝑗 .

We report a result on the PD adjustment. In simple terms, conditioned to the climate policy 

shock, there is a shift ∆𝑞 in the probability distribution of the small productivity shocks and 

thus in the default probability of issuer j:

∆𝑞 𝑗 (𝑃 )= 𝑞 𝑗 (𝑃 ) - 𝑞 𝑗 (𝐵 ) = ∫ 𝜙 (𝜂 𝑗 )𝑑𝜂 𝑗  

> 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑃 )
> 𝜂 𝑖𝑛𝑓

, with 𝜃 𝑗 (𝑃 ) = 𝜃 𝑗 (𝐵 ) - 𝜉 𝑗 (𝑃 )

Thus, assuming that the climate policy shock on the fiscal revenues of the firm (and thus of 

the sovereign) is proportional to the shock on the GVA of low -carbon and carbon -intensive 

sectors, i.e., 𝜉 𝑗 = 𝜒 𝑗 𝑢 𝑗 ,𝑠 

> 𝐺𝑉𝐴

(P), with elasticity 𝜒 𝑗 , then th e adjustment ∆𝑞 𝑗 (𝑃 ), the PD of j in a 

Climate Policy Shock Scenario: 

• Increases with the GVA shock magnitude | 𝑢 𝑗 ,𝑠 

> 𝐺𝑉𝐴

(P)| if 𝑢 𝑗 ,𝑠 

> 𝐺𝑉𝐴

(P)<0, decreases vice versa; 

• Is proportional to the GVA shocks on CPRS (in the limit of small Climate Policy Shocks). 

The bond spread can be defined then as: 

𝑠 𝑗 =𝑦 𝑗 −𝑦 𝑓 , with 𝑒 −𝑦 𝑗 𝑇 = 1 − 𝑞 𝑗 𝐿𝐺𝐷 𝑗 

The Climate Spread Δ𝑠 𝑗 is defined as the change in the spread of a bond contract conditional 

upon a Climate Policy Shock Scenario: 

For a complete explana tion of the pricing of forward -looking climate transition risks in the 

value of corporate and sovereign bonds, see Battiston and Monasterolo (2019) .

Required input data 

From the perspective of the user, the application of the CLIMAFIN methodology requires the 

following information on the portfolio of investments to be collected and analyzed: 

• Financial securities (listed equities, corporate and sovereign bonds): identifie r of the 

financial security, e.g. ISIN code, TICKER and LEI of the issuer; 

• Financial securities (unlisted equities and loans): LEI of the firm, full legal name, 

location of incorporation. Same information for the parent company; 

• The NACE sector of the econ omic activities of the firm that issue the contract (at 4 -

digit level, if possible); 

• The composition of financial actors ’ investments in financial securities (i.e., their 

exposure); 

• Information on the characteristics of the financial securities and time se ries data (e.g., 

duration, maturity, coupon, term, prices, etc.). 

All financial information (except loans) can be collected using financial data providers (e.g., 

Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Eikon, etc.). Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios 

65 

In addition to the financial input data, the followin g climate and energy data are needed: 

• Measures of economic shocks associated with climate scenarios and provided by IAMs 

(Kriegler et al., 2013; McCollum et al., 2018 ); 

• Contributions from fossil fuels and renewable energy sectors to the individual 

countrie s’ GVA (e.g. Eurostat, IEA); 

• Data on country ’s macroeconomic and financial aggregates (e.g., debt/GDP, deficit, 

etc.) provided by national or international statistical offices (e.g., Eurostat, OECD). 

# 4 Applications to portfolios of financial institutions 

In this section, we present several applications of the CLIMAFIN approach to the risk analysis 

of investment portfolios. 

Climate risk assessment of insurance companies’ sovereign bond portfolio 

The CLIMAFIN framework was recently applied to a forward -looking climate transition risk 

assessment of sovereign bond portfolios of insurance companies in Europe, as a result of the 

first collaboration between climate economists, climate financial risk modelers and financial 

regulators (Battiston et al., 2019 b). The ana lysis considers forward -looking scenarios 

characterized by a disorderly introduction of climate policies (i.e. , carbon pricing) and lack of 

full anticipation and pricing by investors. 

The authors first computed the shocks on market shares and profitabilit y of carbon -intensive 

and low -carbon activities that contribute to the GVA and fiscal revenues of the EU countries, 

which in turn issue the sovereign bonds that are held in the portfolios of European insurers. 

The shocks are calculated with climate economi c models that provide climate transition 

trajectories for fossil fuel and renewable energy and electricity sectors, conditioned to 2°C -

aligned climate policy scenarios. After defining the climate risk management strategy under 

uncertainty for a risk averse investor (insurer) that aims to minimize the largest losses in her 

sovereign bonds ’ portfolio, the authors price the climate transition scenarios in the PD of the 

individual sovereign bonds and in the bonds ’ climate spread. The results (see e.g.,  Figure 4-3)

show that the impact of a disorderly transition to the low -carbon economy on the sovereign 

bonds ’ portfolios of European insurers, under 2°C -aligned climate policy scenarios, are 

moderate but non -negligible. In particular, shocks on bonds ’ value are heterogeneous across 

countries and reflect the progress towards decarbonization of countries ’ economies. Most 

negative impacts affect the portfolios of ins urance solos exposed to Polish sovereign bonds. 

Two dimensions drive the magnitude of the impact of climate shocks on bonds ’ portfolios. 

First, for each sovereign bond, negative shocks (e.g., on primary energy fossil sector) can be 

possibly compensated by positive shocks (e.g., on secondary energy electricity based on 

renewable sources). Second, in a portfolio of sovereign bonds issued by several countries, 

negative aggregate shocks from a less climate -aligned sovereign can be possibly compensated 

by positi ve shocks from another more climate -aligned sovereign. These two dimensions 

contribute to limit the magnitude of the median value of the portfolio impact in the chart. Chapter 4

66 

Figure 4-3 Distribution of impact on so vereign holdings of European insurers 

Note: The length of the bars represents the heterogeneity of impacts on insurers 

domiciled in the given country (wider distribution). Y -axis represents negative 

impact (percentage of the original value of government portfolios) of climate policy 

shocks on the value of sovereign bonds (e.g. 100% expresses 0% impact, 97% 

corresponds to drop of 3%). The estimated impact is based on the country of the 

holder (issuing country), across climate policy shock scenarios and under the 

scenario of adverse market condit ions. Source: Battiston et al. (2019b) 

This work aims to raise the awareness of climate risks to insurers as well as of regulators and 

financial supervisors, and provide an approach to include climate risks into their risk 

assessment frameworks. This requi res moving from the backward -looking nature of traditional 

financial risk assessment to a forward -looking assessment that considers both climate 

uncertainty and financial complexity. 

Climate risk assessment of sovereign bond portfolio of the Austrian Natio nal 

Bank (OeNB) 

Battiston and Monasterolo (2019) assessed the climate risk exposure of OeNB ’s portfolio of 

sovereign bonds issued by OECD countries (10 years, zero coupon). They considered forward -

looking climate transition trajectories produced by two cli mate economic models (used to 

calculate energy and electricity trajectories consistent with the 2°C targets and used by the 

IPCC report, i.e., GCAM and WITCH 8 ), conditioned to several mild and tight climate policy 

scenarios characterized by carbon pricing (Kriegler et al., 2013 ). They then modelled the 

impact of the change in low -carbon and carbon -intensive sectors ’ profitability on the GVA and 

fiscal revenues of each individual OECD country. Finally, they priced the shock on the fiscal 

revenues in the PD o f the sovereign bond of the issuing country, on the bond price and yield, 

i.e., the Climate Spread. Results show that the level of (mis)alignment of a country ’s economy 

with low -carbon transition, under feasible climate transition scenarios, can be priced in the 

sovereign bond and affect the country ’s financial risk position. In particular, as  Table 4-3 shows, 

the largest negative shocks on the value of i ndividual sovereign bonds are on countries where 

fossil fuel -based primary and secondary energy sources represent a large contribution to GVA 

and national GDP, e.g., Australia and Poland. In contrast, sovereign bonds of countries with                               

> 8The Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) is the IAM developed by the Joint Global Change Research Institute in
> Maryland to explore the dynamics of the coupled human -Earth system and the response of this system to global change
> (http://www.globalchange.umd.edu/gcam/ ). WITCH is the IAM global dynamic model integrating the interactions between
> the economy, the technological options, and climate change. It is developed at the RFF -CMCC -EIEE European Institu te on
> Economics and the Environment in Milan (IT): www.witchmodel.org 95%
> 96%
> 97%
> 98%
> 99%
> 100%
> 101%
> PL HU DE SK AT GR BE SI LV IT UK ES PT NL LT EE DK FI LU FR IE NO BG MT LI CY HR CZ SE Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

67 

growing shares of ren ewable energy sources contributing to GVA, such as Austria, experience 

positive shocks. The largest negative shocks are associated with the 10 -year sovereign bonds 

issued by Australia, equal to 17.36% decrease in value (under a tight climate policy scenari o

(StrPol450) characterized by carbon tax introduction) that translates in an increase in the 

Climate Spread. The negative shock on the sovereign bond is due to the negative shock on the 

fiscal revenues of the fossil fuel extraction and carbon -intensive se ctors, which represent a 

relevant share of Australian GDP . In contrast, positive shocks on the sovereign bonds ’ value 

(and thus a decrease in the Climate Spread) are associated with the bonds of countries that 

are aligning their economies to the climate ta rgets, e.g., Austria (due to the role of hydropower 

in electricity generation). 

Table 4-3 Climate Spread of sovereign bonds 

Note: Climate policy shocks on selected OECD sovereign bond and Climate Spread 

conditioned to a tight climate policy scenario (StrPol450). Positive shocks on the 

yield correspond to negative shocks on the value of the sovereign bond. Climate 

Spread: 2,45=245 basis poin ts. GCAM and WITCH IAMs were used to obtain the 

shocks on the energy technology trajectories conditioned to the StrPol450 2°C -

aligned climate policy scenario. The shock on the bond is the shock on the value of 

the bond, while the shock on the bonds’ yield is its Climate Spread. Source: Battiston 

and Monasterolo (2019) 

Climate risk assessment on energy infrastructure projects of Chinese 

development finance institutions 

Monasterolo et al. (2018) used the CLIMAFIN methodology to assess the climate transition r isk 

exposures of two main Chinese policy banks ’ (China Development Bank and Export -Import 

Bank of China) portfolios to overseas energy infrastructure projects. They analyzed 199 

overseas energy investment loans (from oil -based primary energy to solar -based electricity 

production) in 63 low -income and mid -income countries in 2000 -2018 with a combined value 

of US$228.105 billion. They found that the banks ’ exposures to losses induced by climate 

transition risk ranged between 4% and 22% of their portfolios .9

Figure 4-4 shows the results of the analysis under a stringent 2°C -aligned climate policy 

scenario (i.e., Str Pol450, Kriegler et al., 2013 ) characterized by the introduction of a carbon tax 

and countries' fragmented action. The authors found that negative shocks on project loans ’

value affect coal power generation in the Chinese and bordering countries' region (i.e. ,

CHINA+), and oil and gas power generati on in former USSR and transition countries (i.e., the 

Reforming Economies). In contrast, positive shocks are associated with renewable energy 

projects, in hydropower in the African region and nuclear in Pakistan. The scenarios and shocks 

presented in  Figure 4-4 are computed using the  GCAM IAM and the LIMITS database, while 

the shocks are in USD million.                                                  

> 9Note that with an average 12 -times leverage, even an average shock (10% circa) could lead the banks to financial distress. GeoregionModels’regionWITCH:bondvalueshock(%)WITCH:yield(spread)shockGCAM:bondvalueshock(%)GCAM:yield(spread)shock
> AUSTRIAEUROPE1,3-0,160,13-0,02
> AUSTRALIAREST_WORLD-17,362,45n.a.n.a.
> BELGIUMEUROPE0,84-0,10,030
> CANADAPAC_OECD-5,210,67-18,292,61
> POLANDEUROPE-12,851,75-2,490,32Chapter 4

68 

Figure 4-4 Climate financial risk assessment of Chinese overseas energy projects 

Note: Projected gains and losses of China Development Bank and Export -Import 

Bank of China’s overseas energy loans portfolio (project based) conditioned to 

stringent 2°C -aligned climate policy scenarios (in million USD). Source: Monasterolo 

et al. (2018) 

Climate Stress -test of the financial system 

In 2017, Battiston et al. (2017) published a Climate Stress -test exercise that provides an 

application of fi nancial valuation in network models to the analysis of equity portfolios of 

banks exposed to climate transition risks. First, the authors assessed investors ’ exposure to 

climate transition risk using the CPRS classification. Then, with the climate stress -test, they 

assessed the first and second -round losses of investors ’ portfolios conditioned to climate 

transition scenarios, i.e., the indirect losses due to devaluation of counterparties' debt 

obligations on the interbank market, using the DebtRank 10 . They f urther calculated the Climate 

VaR, conditioned to different climate transition scenarios provided by IAMs and under low -

carbon or high -carbon investment strategies, of the 20 most exposed banks in the EU and US 

(Figure 4-5). 

The authors found that the exposure of institutional investors to climate transition risk is 

large ly heterogenous and amplified by network effects. In particular, the exposures of pension 

and investment funds to CPRS reached 43 -45% of equity portfolios, and the potential losses 

could be amplified by the mutual exposures of financial actors (e.g. , pension funds and 

investment funds). Roncoroni et al. (2019) further deve loped the climate stress -test applied 

to Banco de Mexico ’s portfolio using the Asset Network Valuation Framework (NEVA) 

approach (Barucca et al. , 2019). 

Battiston et al. (2017) ’s Climate Stress -test considered micro -level climate transition risks, i.e., 

the exposures of individual banks to individual financial contracts (equity holdings) and 

computed the Climate VaR (VaR 95, i.e., 5%) on largest EU and US banks ’ portfolios, assessing 

the impact of a disorderly transition on banks ’ capital. They found that banks with a 

“environmentally unsustainable ” investment strategy (i.e., those mostly exposed to fossil fuel 

and carbon intensive firms) incur large losses ( Figure 4-5 left chart) in comparison to banks 

with a greener investment strategy ( Figure 4-5 right chart). Moreover, the losses via first round 

(i.e. , due to direct effects, dark colors) are amplified by risk reverberation and contagion of    

> 10 The DebtRank is a reference measure of systemic financial impact developed by Battiston et al. (2012) .It is inspired by
> feedback -centrality and allows to determine the systemically important nodes in a network to assess drivers of systemic
> financial risk. Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios

69 

intra -financial contracts (i.e., the indirect effects, lighter colors). For instance, with regards to 

the two most exposed banks, Deutsche Bank ’s losses on capital a re driven by direct effects, 

while Credit Agricole ’s losses are driven by indirect effects. This means that the largest banks 

are heterogeneously exposed to climate transition risk and the related losses could be 

amplified by financial interconnectedness, with implications on asset price volatility and 

financial stability ( Monasterolo et al., 2017 ). 

Figure 4-5 Climate Value at Risk (VaR) of EU largest banks conditioned to low -

carbon or high -carbon investment strategy 

Note: The Climate VaR (5%) analysis is conducted on the equity holdings of 20 most 

severely affected banks, under scenario of renewable (green, left chart) and fossil 

fuel and carbon intensive ( brown , right chart) investment strategies, in USD million. 

Dark (light) color represents first (second) round losses. The analysis is based on the 

financial network model by Battiston et al. (2012) that introduced the DebtRank. 

Source: Battiston et al. (2017) 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this chapter, we presented CLIMAFIN, a transparent and science -based approach vetted by 

academics and practitioners. CLIMAFIN allows to translate forward -looking climate transition 

scenarios into financial shocks and to provide investors and f inancial supervisors with 

scenario -adjusted risk metrics and models (i.e. , Climate Spread, Climate VaR and Climate 

Stress -testing). 

The innovative approach of CLIMAFIN supports private and public financial institutions in their 

portfolio risk management st rategies. It also provides financial supervisors with a methodology, 

independent from the ones developed by the industry, in order to inform the design of 

regulations to foster financial stability in the low -carbon transition. 

Embedding climate risk into f inancial risk metrics requires to connect areas of knowledge 

which have remained separated so far and developed in parallel by climate scientists, climate Chapter 4

70 

economists, financial risk and network experts. Moreover, this interdisciplinary endeavor 

would not b e possible without the long -term dedication of academic researchers. 

The CLIMAFIN applications addresses three important elements of climate -financial risk 

assessment. First, the temporal scale of the problem and its uncertainty compel us to move 

from a stress -test approach based on a single type of scenarios to a set of scenarios, to be able 

to compute the Climate VaR conditioned to the uncertainty that characterizes the scenarios. 

Second, the assumptions of the scenarios matter for their use in financia l assessment . New 

generation of climate scenarios assumes that countries are on track to deliver on their 2030 

climate pledges, and do not consider the role of finance nor its complexity in achieving the 

scenarios, implying that funds for undertaking even massive investments in energy technology 

(and change the energy technology composition) are always available with no frictions. 

However, in reality, financing (in particular to low -carbon energy investments) is constrained 

and affects the likelihood of the transition scenarios. Third, the information gaps at firm level 

(e.g. , the energy technology and emissions profile) mean imperfect information for investors 

about their exposure to climate risks via firms ’ contracts (e.g. , stocks, bonds, or loans). 

Greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions accounting suffers from limited availability, 

comparability and relevance for climate policy (Monasterolo et al. , 2017). In contrast, in the 

definition of the activities that are exposed to transi tion risk, i.e., the CPRS, CLIMAFIN 

considers not only GHG direct and indirect emissions of activities but also their relevance for 

climate policy implementation, their role in the energy value chain, and firms’ future 

investment plan (e.g. CAPEX). 

CLIMAFIN has been applied to several portfolios (e.g., equity holdings of EU and US largest 

banks, sovereign bonds ’ portfolios of European insurance firms and central banks, syndicated 

loans of US banks, etc.) and is supporting several central banks and fi nancial regulators ’ climate 

financial risk assessment exercises. CLIMAFIN has been recently extended to the analysis of 

the exposure of US banks ’ loans to climate physical risks (storms and floods) impacting on 

firms and sectors ’ capital intensity, at a gr anular geographical level, and computing the Value -

at -Risk (95 and 99 percentile by Battiston et al., 2020 ). 

The result indicates that under several climate scenarios, the potential impact of a disorderly 

transition to a low -carbon economy on financial act ors (e.g., pension funds, investment funds 

and insurers, development banks) is considerable. In addition, investors ’ exposures to climate 

risks are large and can be amplified by financial complexity, potentially creating new sources 

of risk for economic an d financial stability. 

Regarding climate transition risks, current CLIMAFIN ’s developments focus on the refinement 

of the disorderly transition scenarios in collaboration with the IAM community, including SSPs 

and Post -Paris Agreement scenarios, and the analysis of the feedbacks of the climate financial 

shocks Battiston et al., 2020 . Regarding the climate physical risk scenarios, the CLIMAFIN team 

is working at the refinement of the shocks ’ transmission to the individual firms at a granular 

geo -localized level, in collaboration with development finance institutions (e.g. , the World 

Bank), using microlevel data. Assessing Forward -Looking Climate Risks in Financial Portfolios 

71 

# Bibliography 

Ackerman, F. (2017). Worst -Case Economics: Extreme Events in Climate and Finance : Anthem 

Press. 

Barucca, P., Bardoscia, M., Caccioli , F., D'Errico, M., Visentin, G., Battiston, S., & Caldarelli, G. 

(2019). Network valuation in financial systems. Mathematical Finance. 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., & Monasterolo, I. (2020). CLIMAFIN Assessing climate physical risk 

for banks. UNEPFI Pilot p roject on implementing TCFD recommendations for banks. 

Battiston, S. (2019). The importance of being forward -looking: managing financial stability in 

the face of climate risk. Banque de France's Financial Stability Review (23), 39 -48. 

Battiston, S., Mandel , A., & Monasterolo, I. (2019a). CLIMAFIN handbook: pricing forward -

looking climate risks under uncertainty. Working Paper available at SSRN 

http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3476586 

Battiston, S., Jakubik, P., Monasterolo, I., Riahi, K., and van Ruijven B. (2019b).  Climate risk  

> assessment of sovereign bonds’ portfolio of European insurers. In: European Insurance and
> Occupational Pension Authority (EIOPA) Financial Stability Report ,

ht tps://www.eiopa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/publications/eiopa_financial_stabil 

ty_report_ -_december_2019.pdf 

Battiston, S., & Monasterolo, I. (2019). A climate risk assessment of sovereign bonds’ 

portfolio. Working Paper available at SSRN 

https://papers. ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3376218 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A climate stress -

test of the financial system. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 283 -288. 

Battiston, S., Caldarelli, G., May, R. M., Ro ukny, T., & Stiglitz, J. E. (2016). The price of 

complexity in financial networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 

113(36), 10031 -10036. 

Battiston, S., Puliga, M., Kaushik, R., Tasca, P., & Caldarelli, G. (2012).  Debtrank: Too central 

to fail? financial networks, the fed and systemic risk. Scientific reports, 2, 541. 

Black, F., & Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of 

political economy, 81(3), 637 -654. 

Carney, M. (2015). Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon –climate change and financial 

stability. Speech given at Lloyd’s of London, 29, 220 -230. 

DeFries, R. S., Edenhofer, O., Halliday, A. N., Heal, G. M., Lenton, T., Puma, M., . . . 

Schellnhuber, H. J. (20 19). The missing economic risks in assessments of climate 

change impacts. 

Greenwald, B. C., & Stiglitz, J. E. (1986).  Externalities in economies with imperfect 

information and incomplete markets. The quarterly journal of economics, 101(2), 

229 -264. 

IPCC. (2018). Global Warming of 1.5◦C - Summary for Policymakers. Technical Report 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 

IPCC. (2014). Climate change 2014: synthesis report. Contribution of Working Groups I. II and 

III to the fifth assessment report of th e Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 

151. 

Kriegler, E., Tavoni, M., Aboumahboub, T., Luderer, G., Calvin, K., Demaere, G., . . . Schaeffer, 

M. (2013). What does the 2 C target imply for a global climate agreement in 2020? 

The LIMITS study on Durba n Platform scenarios. Climate Change Economics, 4(04), 

1340008. 

McCollum, D. L., Zhou, W., Bertram, C., De Boer, H. -S., Bosetti, V., Busch, S., . . .  Fay, M. 

(2018). Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris Agreement and achieving the 

Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Energy, 3(7), 589 -599. 

Monasterolo, I. (2020). Climate change and the financial system. Annual Review of Resource 

Economics, Vol 12, forthcoming. Chapter 4

72 

Monasterolo, I., Battiston, S., Janetos, A. C., & Zheng, Z. (2017). Vulnerable yet relevant: the 

two dimensions of climate -related financial disclosure. Climatic Change, 145(3 -4), 

495 -507. 

Monasterolo, I., Zheng, J. I., & Battiston, S. (2018). Climate Transition Risk and Development 

Finance: A Carbon Risk Assessment of China's Overseas Energy Portfolios. China & 

World Economy, 26(6), 116 -142. 

New Climate Economy. (2018). Unlocking the inclusive growth story of the 21st century: 

Accelerating climate action in urgent times. 

NGFS. (2019). First comprehensive report: A call for action, April 17, 2019. 

Roncoroni, A., Battiston, S., Farfàn, E., Leonardo, L. O., & Martinez Jaramillo, S. (2019). 

Climate risk and financial stability in the network of banks and investment funds. 

Ava ilable at SSRN 3356459. 

Solomon, S., Plattner, G. -K., Knutti, R., & Friedlingstein, P. (2009). Irreversible climate change 

due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 

106(6), 1704 -1709. 

Stiglitz, J. E., Stern, N., Du an, M., Edenhofer, O., Giraud, G., Heal, G. M., . . . Pangestu, M. 

(2017). Report of the high -level commission on carbon prices. 

Weitzman, M. L. (2009). On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate 

change. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 1 -19. 

WMO. (2019). July matched, and maybe broke, the record for the hottest month since 

analysis began. Retrieved from https://public.wmo.int/en/media/news/july -

matched -and -maybe -broke -record -hottest -month -analysis -began Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

73 

# Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit 

# Risks 

by 

Industrial and Commercial Bank of China 1

# Abstract 

The benefits of the positive externalities of an unpolluted environment and stable climate are 

enjoyed by all economic actors. Conversely, the costs of the negative externalities of the 

pollution and emissions that damage the environment and cause climate change have 

historically not affected individual firms. However, both positive and negative externalities can 

be internalized by a firm with the introduction of relevant policy - and market -based 

mechanisms. For the first time for a Chinese financial instit ution, this paper discusses the 

impact of internalizing environmental costs onto a firm ’s balance sheet and the consequent 

risks this creates for commercial banks. A relevant theoretical framework, transmission 

mechanisms and analytical methodologies are e stablished to assess the impact of tightening 

environmental protection standards and climate change policies, joint and several liabilities 

that banks are exposed to via their customers ’ activities and changes in the bank ’s reputational 

standing in the eye s of its shareholders and depositors. Two industries, namely thermal power 

and cement production, are selected for stress testing against a range of high, medium and 

low stress scenarios and the impact on their financial performance and credit ratings is 

assessed as a result. Actionable responses to this analysis are put forward. This bank -led 

approach to research in this focused field (i.e. , assessing the impact of environmental factors 

on credit risk of commercial banks) is pioneering in China. 

Key words : environmental Factors, credit Risk, stress testing, commercial banks 

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, the international community has increasingly recognized that commercial 

activities, including pollutant discharges and the exploitation of natural resources, are 

accelerating environmental degradation, testing the planet ’s carrying capacity ( Bank of 

England, 2015 ). In response, government, public and non -governmental organizations have 

proposed ever tighter restrictions on companies ’ environmental footprints. These restrictions 

in turn have forced businesses to assume more costs associated with environmental 

protection and face growing challenges for managing environmental and social risks. 

Consequently, commercial banks and other lenders have had to reconsider risks on the loans 

they provide to businesses, including risks of default due to rising costs of complying with 

environmental regulations, of being liable for pollution, of third -party claims for damage 

compensations, and of losses of reputation and marke t shares due to non -compliance.         

> 1This chap ter is written by Yin Hong, Deputy Director of Morden Finance Research Institute , email: yinhong@icbc.com.cn ;
> Ma Suhong ,Head of strategy and development department, ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co.,Ltd. ; L e Yu, Yang
> Xing, Lv Zhenyan, Qiu Muyuan, Zhang Jingwen from ICBC. Cha pter 5

74 

In response to these rising environmental risks, ICBC set up a research group to study how 

environmental factors impact risks faced by commercial banks since 2015. In this chapter, we 

first point out that both positive and negative externalities of a firm ’s impact on the 

environment can be converted into endogenous variables in the firm ’s financial performance 

by policy, market or legal factors. We then apply stress test approaches to analyze how the 

impact of environmental protection policies on firms ’ costs translates to credit risks for 

commercial banks and how significant that impact on credit risks may be. It is noteworthy that 

due to business confidentiality, we have not disclose d the quantitative outcomes of the stress -

test exercises led by ICBC. 

# 2 Basic framework of ICBC’s environmental stress -testing 

A traditional stress -testing consists of six steps: 1) select the portfolios to be tested; 2) select 

the stress factors and indicators to be applied; 3) select stress -beari ng objects and determine 

stress -bearing indicators; 4) build scenarios; 5) construct the transmission model; 6) perform 

the stress -testing and analyze results (see  Figure 5-1, Peria et al., 2001 ; Berge & Lindquist, 

2007 ). In this section, we set out the detail of our approach to environmental stress -testing 

using this process. 

Figure 5-1 Flow chart of stress -testing 

Stress -bearing objects and indicators 

Stress -bearing objects refer to targets under the stress -testing, while stress -bearing indicators 

represent the performance of stress -bearing objects in specific aspects. The main businesses 

of com mercial banks in China relate to deposits and loans, therefore stress -testing should 

target the impact on credit and business indicators of depositors and borrowers. We classify 

the stress -bearing objects of bank credit risk tests into debtors or counterpa rties, portfolios 

and macro objects. Debtors or counterparties refer to individuals, portfolios can be further 

divided by different standards, such as by product, industry, customer and region, while macro 

objects refer to the banks overall, focusing on th e bank ’s entire assets and overall risk. 

Based on ICBC ’s experience, there are two types of stress -bearing indicators commonly used 

at the portfolio level, namely technical indicators and management indicators. The former 

represents risks of losses, such a s probability of default (PD), loss given default (LGD), expected 

loss, unexpected loss and risk exposure, all closely related to the day -to -day operations of 

financial institutions including commercial banks. Management indicators include capital Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

75 

adequacy ratio (CAR), non -performing loan (NPL) ratio, economic capital, and profit margin, 

which are usually the focus of regulatory authorities and governments (see  Table 4-1). 

Table 5-1 Commonly used stress -bearing indicators 

Through this environment stress -testing, ICBC developed a bottom -up approach, which 

started with one factor and one industry at the basic -level impact to multiple targets with 

more complex implications. For the first step, major polluting industries -combined discharged 

pollutants account for more than half of the country ’s total, such as thermal power generation, 

cement, iron and steel, nonferrous metals, chemical engineering and paper making, were 

selected as the priority for a nalysis and research. 

We took the bottom -up approach because the different production technology, resource 

consumption and discharge indicators in various industries necessitate different stress -bearing 

capabilities under environmental protection policies. Placing the entire economy under the 

stress -testing initially would have made it difficult to ensure the soundness of the results. 

Industries such as thermal power and cement have not only been the main source of 

manufacturing -related environmental pollut ion, but also the focus of environmental 

protection policies. Selecting these industries as the pilot industries for environmental stress -

testing also ensures that the analysis and results are inclusive. Further, the selected stress -

bearing indicators are those representing firms ’ long -term operating capacities because the 

impact of environmental risks on firms is a long -term variable subject to market conditions. 

The indicators selected according to a more traditional stress -testing might have been 

insuffi cient to wholly capture the impact of environmental factors and are likely to generate 

biases in formulating policies. 

# 3 Stress factors under environmental stress -testing 

Policy standards and enforcement 

Tightened environmental regulations add costs and affect firms ’ profitability. Increased 

regulatory standards and enforcement may affect the debt -paying capabilities of those in high -

pollution and high -emissions industries, thereby impacting the credit and solvency of the 

lenders. In recent years, the Chinese government has introduced a slew of environmental 

protection policies aiming to improve environmental standards and strengthen law 

enforcement. 

On Jan 1, 2015, the Environmental Protection Law was for mally enacted with the purpose to 

promote ecological awareness and promote a sustainable socioeconomic development, 

establishing the principle of harmony between man and nature and prioritizing protection. 

Technical indicators  Management indicators 

PD  CAR 

LGD  NPL ratio 

Duration  Economic capital 

Gap  CAR 

EL  Profit margin 

Loan loss  Industry profitability 

Provision Cha pter 5

76 

Since 2013, China has steadily implemented regula tions to increase protection of air, water 

and soil. A range of guidelines have been introduced, such as pollution control technologies 

on the production of cement, iron and steel, sulfuric acid, and volatile organic compounds 

(VOCs), as well as drawing up ecological protection red lines. 

Price factors 

Changes in balance sheets and income statements due to price variations have always been 

the focus of stress -testing. In the Chinese economy, price factors impacted by environmental 

protection policies are ma inly carbon trading, pollution rights trading and carbon taxes. As 

important economic means to internalize environmental and social costs, the three factors 

have been so widely used in developed countries that mature and practical experiences have 

accumula ted. China is also actively pushing for related reform in this respect to facilitate its 

economic transition, efforts that will add costs and test the repayment capacities of firms 

engaged in highly polluting and energy -intensive activities. 

Impact of natu ral disasters 

Climate change is posing unprecedented threats to human societies. The increased frequency, 

scale and spread of natural disasters such as droughts and floods have added risks to firms and 

financial institutions and therefore need to be incorp orated into the range of stress -testing to 

be performed. 

Scenario setting 

The next step scenario setting concerns the ranges of stress factors. Common scenarios fall 

into three types: historical, hypothetical, mixed. A historical scenario refers to stresso rs set 

pursuant to historical data. A hypothetical scenario is subjectively selected by risk managers, 

allowing more flexibility and the ability to simulate hypothetical events. The most common is 

the combination of a historical and a hypothetical scenario , the so -called mixed scenario, 

which contains historical information and has the flexibility to hypothesize. The last type of 

scenario is strongly advocated by regulatory authorities as it can prevent risk managers from 

being too divergent in their scenar io analysis and it is also forward -looking. 

In setting scenarios, the first step is considering future trends of environmental protection 

policies and the small -probability events. Traditional stress -testing focuses on the evaluation 

of small -probability e vents ( Goldstein, 2015; Hahn, 2007; Weber et al., 2008 ). Risks from 

macroeconomic volatilities have generally been accounted for in the financial system through 

robust risk -reduction arrangements and countermeasures. The major difference is that 

commercial banks have not made adequate preparations for environmental risks. Even Basel 

I,II,III ( Carney, 2015; CISL & UNEP FI, 2014 ) , the latest risk management standard for the 

banking industry, failed to explicitly address environmental factors ( CISL & UNEP FI, 2014 ). 

Therefore, environmental policy factors must first be considered in scenario setting. 

Transmission path 

Modeling how the stressors bring about financial impact is the core of the stress -testing. 

Stress -testing for different risks, such as those rel ated to the market, credit, liquidity and 

operations, adopt different transmission mechanisms. For some credit risk types, the stress 

transmission mechanism is relatively clear and easily described by the adoption of a financial 

model. For a macro stress -testing on credit risks, however, the transmission process might be 

difficult to describe due to the complicated impact of the macroeconomy on many individuals 

at the micro level. In such cases, it is more suitable to describe the transmission mechanism 

thr ough an econometric model. The modelling methods can include a top -down centralized 

model, a subsection model, a structural model and a simplified model. For those more 

ordinary stress -testing, the target assets, stress -bearing objects and indicators are a ll quite Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

77 

clear. However, for those uncommon stress -testing, the objects under tests may not be clearly 

definable. For environmental stress -testing, one needs to factor in the wide -ranging impact of 

environmental risks on the firms ’ balance sheets, cash flo ws and income statements, and the 

transition mechanism needs to address costs profits and risks. 

# 4 Stress -testing on impact of environmental factors on bank credit 

# risk: thermal power and cement industries 

ICBC selected two industries, thermal power and cem ent, and included 437 and 80 companies 

respectively, for first -round stress -testing. The main steps were as follows: 

Identify environmental stress 

The research group first worked out the stress -transmission diagrams for environmental 

factors in the thermal power and cement industries (see  Figure 5-2 and  Figure 5-3). Our 

research found at the end of 2013, 91.6% thermal power plants in China were installed with 

desulfurization facilities while 50% we re equipped with denigration. The adoption of dust 

removal facilities had only recently begun, so the proportion of dust -removal -fitted units in 

service stood at 20% only, with much potential for energy saving. In the future, the thermal 

power industry wil l see more changes responding to environmental protection policies. One 

is the heightened atmospheric pollution emissions limits. The emission limit of nitrogen oxides 

will be tightened to 100mg/m 3 from 450mg/m 3, stricter than the standards of the US (135 mg/ 

m3) and EU (200mg/m 3). The allowed limit for SO2 will be restricted to 100 -200mg/m 3 from 

400mg/m 3 (higher than that of the US (184mg/ m 3) and EU (200mg/m 3). The standard for 

smoke dust will be reduced to 30 -20mg/m 3 from 50mg/m 3, matching those of the U S and EU. 

Another policy is the higher pollutant discharge fees, which raised the standards for major 

polluting firms and regions. After a transition period, firms ’ discharge fees are expected to 

increase by as much as three times 2.         

> 2Different regions have different transition period s.E.g. ,the transition period is one year for Beijing, three years for Hebei
> and five for Shanghai. Cha pter 5

78 

Figure 5-2 Stress transmission of changes in environmental protection policies -

thermal power industry 

Figure 5-3 Stres s transmission of changes in environmental protection polici es -

cement industry Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

79 

As for the cement industry, environmental policy changes may be expected in the followings 

areas. The first is the stricter atmospheric pollutant emission limits. Particulate Matters (PM) 

emission limits will be lowered to 30mg/m 3（general regions ）and 20mg/m 3（key regions ）,

40% and 33% lower than the original limits. NOx (nitrogen oxide) emission limits will be 

adjusted to 400mg/m 3 (general)and 320 mg/m 3 (key) from 800mg/m 3, or 50% and 60% 

reductions. The second is that collaborative use of cement kilns will become a new way for 

firms to balance environmental stresses with growth. Overseas cement giants such as Lafarge, 

Holcim and Cemex have a fuel substitution rate above 10%. Due to deficiencies in domestic 

trash treatment, immature cement co -treatment technology and pressure to recover 

investment, the average fuel substitution rate of leading cement firms in China stands at only 

around 4.5% (with an exception of Huaxin Cement ’s13%), trailing international peers. The third 

is higher p ollutant discharge fees. Fee standards have already been raised significantly in the 

eastern areas, such as Beijing, Tianjin and Shanghai, while national standards are basically 

observed in the central and western areas. After the end of the transition per iod, the total 

firm discharge fees are estimated to increase by up to three times pursuant to the new 

pollutant discharge fee standards and the possibility of “fee - to -tax ” reform. 

Build scenarios 

One of the flaws of a traditional stress test is the focu s on a single scenario, even as the 

probability of the scenario can be quite low. The scenarios built by the research group included 

many policies and standards formulated or to be issued, making up a relatively higher 

probability. The research group set s tress scenarios based on heavy, medium and light levels 

of stress. For the thermal power industry, the research group created heavy, medium and light 

stress scenarios for the energy saving and emissions reduction of thermal power generation 

companies accor ding to the standards released by the Ministry of Environmental Protection 

(end of 2014), the State Council (end of 2015), and special limits for eastern regions released 

by the State Council (end of 2020). 

The research team then took into consideration th e impact of increasing pollutant discharge 

fees by four, three and two times on firms ’ costs. With respect to the cement industry, after 

several rounds of research and expert discussions, the research group set the stress scenarios 

based on two main factor s: first,, policy changes concerning pollution control, co -treatment 

and pollutant discharge were selected pursuant to new environmental protection standards 

set in 2013 and new pollutant discharge fee standards in 2014; second, given that ICBC ’s most 

ceme nt customers were in the mid and upstream, expert values were selected for the setting 

of environmental protection costs. 

Conduct stress -testing through financial transmission model 

Due to the lack of historical data in China on the impact of enhanced environmental standards 

on banks ’ credit, a bottom -up approach was adopted in the stress -testing to analyse the 

impact of environmental policy changes on the financial standings of firms .

We estimated new financial statements under the stress scenarios through the relationships 

of the different financial sheets. Next, we calculated the changes in the firms ’ credit ratings 

and PDs under the stress scenarios using ICBC ’s existing rating mod el and derived the growth 

of the NPL ratios of related industries based on the relationship between PD and the NPL ratio. 

See  Figure 5-4 for specific pri nciples: Cha pter 5

80 

Figure 5-4 Schematic diagram of financial transmission model 

Step 1 Set the function of the impact of changes in environmental protection standards on 

financial indicators of firms ： C=f  ， where C i ndicates the change in a firm ’s cost and f 

denotes environmental protection standards. For thermal power companies, the annual 

power generated was estimated according to prime operating revenue and on -grid power 

tariffs, while the increase in the amount of prime operating cost was then calculated based on 

the increased cost per kilowatt*hour under the stress scenarios. For cement producers, the 

prime operating costs under the stress scenarios were calculated by prime operating costs and 

the percentage incre ases. 

Step 2 Calculate main indicators for balance sheet and income statement according to changes 

in prime operating costs and financial statement articulation. 

When applying stress on the financial position of a sample firm, we paid attention primarily t o

two indicators in the income statement: revenue and cost of goods sold (COGS). 

Correspondingly, other accounts in the income statement would also change, thus affecting 

profit and retained earnings in the balance sheet. 

We assumed △ B = percentage of cost change, △ P = percentage of price change, and △ Q = 

percentage of quantity change. After accounting for changes in cost, price and quantity we 

arrived at revenue, COGS and profit from the equations below: 

△ R=(1+ △ P)(1+ △ Q)  － 1

△ COGS=(1+ △ B)(1+ △ Q)  － 1

△ Profit= △ R －△ COGS 

Here △ R= revenue change in percentage, △ COGS= COGS change in percentage, △ Profit= 

profit change in percentage. 

1) Income statement under stress conditions 

The prime operating revenue and income in the income statement were directly 

impacted and adjusted accordingly. Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

81 

2) Balance sheet under stress conditions 

A decrease in net profit in the income statement leads to decrease of the owner ’s

equity in the balance sheet. We adjusted the current assets and liabilities according to 

the cash flow cycle while maintaining other assumptions. 

Similar changes in the income statements can have different impact on the balance sheets of 

different borrowers. We translated the impact into a reduction in retained earnings on the 

ba lance sheet, with the understanding that no general rules were applicable to all borrowers. 

One limitation of such a simple approach is that it does not account for individual companies ’

adjustments to their own financing structures responding to the decli ne in revenue. As well, 

cash flow cycle may deteriorate under stress conditions. However, given that cash flow cycle 

has no significant weighting in the customer credit rating model, we believed that results 

based on this simplified approach were sufficien t to deduce a credit rating migration matrix. 

Step 3 Input above financial indicators into the corresponding score sheets. At ICBC, different 

corporate customer credit ratings and evaluation models were applied to thermal power and 

cement companies. The ev aluation model consisted of quantitative and qualitative evaluations. 

To be prudent, we assumed that scores on qualitative and quantitative evaluations declined 

by the same proportion. 

From the change in a firm ’s evaluation score we obtained the change in its credit rating, which 

through relationship mapping allowed us to estimate the change in PD. Raising the 

environmental protection standards for firms would cause their profits to decline, reducing 

their solvency and causing declining credit standings and rising PDs. 

Step 4 Construct credit rating transition matrices for the industries that the companies were 

in by summarizing changes in credit ratings of firms; further analyze changes in loan quality in 

related industries based on the relationship between the PD and the NPL ratio. 

Main findings of stress -testing and policy recommendations 

Thermal power firms 

Stricter environmental protection standards will impose great cost pressure on the thermal 

power industry, but the industry will maintain stable given steady economic growth and rising 

demand for electricity as China furthers industrialization. Enhanced en vironmental protection 

standards will nonetheless have major structural impact on the thermal power industry. 

Policy recommendations 

• Maintain existing AAA customers while continuing to attract high -quality customers 

from the five major power companies. 

• Pay attention to the impact of changes in environmental protection policies on the 

financial cost and credit risk of firms with AA+ ratings and below, especially corporate 

customers that may be degraded to BBB+ or below. 

• Recognize opportunities to grant lo ans to firms with energy -saving and emission -

reduction plans. 

• Recognize new upstream and downstream segments resulted from environmental 

technologies, such as solid waste treatment. 

• Strictly prevent thermal power firms violating environmental protection laws and 

regulations from obtaining funding. Cha pter 5

82 

Cement industry 

The cement industry will by and large enter a slow -growth stage under pressure to reduce 

capacity. Raised environmental protection standards will impose obvious financial pressure. 

Policy recom mendations 

• Guard against risks faced by small and medium -sized cement firms as they adapt to 

the green economy. 

• Keep track of possible credit risks from industry capacity reduction. 

• Select companies strong on desulfurization, denitration and dust remova l and help 

them expand given growth potential. 

• Monitor mergers, acquisitions and reorganizations in the industry and improve bank ’s

customer quality by seizing appropriate environmental improvement opportunities. 

• Use ICBC ’s financial portfolio products t o focus on the development of the industrial 

solid waste market and lend more support to cement co -treatment projects. 

• Grant loans to firms well -positioned in the green transformation of the cement 

industry, support companies with the potential to go glob al. 

Further development of environmental stress -testing 

In our research, the first problem was data availability and accuracy, so relevant ministries and 

commissions are advised to implement requirement on companies for mandatory disclosures 

of environment al data. Our research group is strengthening cooperation with the Ministry of 

Environmental Protection in a bid to improve the accuracy of estimates for the internalization 

of environmental cost. 

As ICBC sets high standard for high -polluting and high -energ y-consuming industries to access 

its business, the customers selected for this stress -testing were mainly large and medium -

sized companies, which likely produced above -average results. These test results therefore are 

more indicative of ICBC customers and do not reflect the entire industry. The quality of the 

stress -testing would have been much improved if data representing the whole industry had 

been obtained. 

These stress -testing targeted thermal power and cement industries. We plan to cover other 

pollut ing industries including iron and steel, nonferrous metals, chemical and paper. The 

methods will be enhanced to include prices, regions and climate change, with the goal to yield 

quantitative results. For example, stress -testing concerning the impact of en vironmental 

factors on the credit risks of commercial banks will be conducted from the perspective of 

pricing (carbon trading), the sustainable rating (ESG) for firms will be explored, and the 

feasibility of incorporating environmental factors into the ban k customer credit rating system 

will be considered to help research and develop an “ICBC Green Index ”, prioritizing loans to 

and investment in green firms and fields. 

# 5 Conclusion and recommendations 

Environmental risks have become an important factor impacting the daily operations of 

commercial banks, therefore environmental stress -testing should be incorporated into bank 

credit risk rating systems and processes. This will improve the ability of the b anking sector to Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

83 

identify environmental risks and the customers most able to contribute to sustainable 

development, thereby enhancing the ability of the banking system to continuously support 

the green economy, while also becoming resilient to environmenta l risks itself. In our opinion, 

stress -testing the impact of environmental factors is important for commercial banks for the 

following four reasons: first, stress -testing can help precisely estimate and quantify the impact 

of more extreme environmental fac tors on a bank ’s credit risks, improving the capacity of a 

bank ’s environmental risk management processes; second, environmental risk factors can be 

included in the customer credit rating system, enabling environmental risk measurement to 

form a basis for the pricing of credit products; third, stress -testing leads to rational 

arrangement of bank loans and investment portfolios, thus actively promote the adjustment 

of credit and investment structures; fourth, stress -testing could be taken as a reference poin t

for banks and regulators in their future considerations of environmental factors and risks. 

ICBC has stayed at the forefront exploring the impact of environmental risks through stress -

testing analysis. The following are the highlights of our stress -testi ng: 

• The scenarios constructed by ICBC accounted for many complex factors with a series 

of policies and standards formulated or due to be released. 

• A number of aspects of the environmental stress -testing methodology developed by 

ICBC may be innovative in C hina or globally, such as the transmission mechanism from 

environment protection policies to firm impacts to bank impacts, the formulation of 

scenarios despite the complexity faced and the forecasting methodology based on 

ICBC ’s big data. 

• ICBC started the stress test on a single industry and gradually extended to multiple 

industries, an innovative and practical approach to developing the research 

methodology. 

• Both first -round and corresponding feedback effects were accounted for. For example, 

in stress -te sting thermal power companies, the impact from changes in the on -grid 

power tariffs was considered; for the cement industry, the study discussed subsequent 

improvement measures that firms could take in response to environmental protection 

policies, includi ng co -treatment operations 

• The approach of expanding coverage from one to many factors and from one to many 

industries created a path for the banking industry to intensify its capabilities on stress -

testing. 

We believe the construction of this market -orie nted mechanism can greatly help reduce the 

impact of economic development on the environment. To improve the efficacy of this method, 

we make the following recommendations: 

• The authorities should actively and collaboratively promote research on fiscal poli cy, 

financial policy and industrial policy and develop a whole set of policy support systems 

for the internalization of environmental costs. 

• Emissions standards should be tightened with strict supervision and implementation, 

additional pollutant discharge taxes should be collected from polluting firms, and 

companies should be encouraged to make green investments and upgrade 

technologies through tax reductions, discounts, government procurement .Cha pter 5

84 

• Voluntary agreements and tradable permits should be introduced to establish a well -

running carbon trading market. 

• Special re -lending policy for “environmental protection fields “should be formulated, 

along with positive development of green bonds and green insurance, to reduce the 

operating cost of firms through a m arket -oriented approach supporting green 

investment. 

• Intermediary service system should be actively cultivated, and policies on the open 

and transparent disclosure of environmental information should be enacted. 

• Policy and market signals should both aim t o enhance the value of preserving natural 

resources and reduce the value of carbon intensive investments to spur the 

transformations of the industrial structures and companies toward a green economy. 

Table 5-2 China major environmental laws & regulations since 2013 

Title  Issued by  Issued in  Main content 

Pollution 

Prevention and 

Control 

Techniques in the 

industries of 

cement steel, 

sulfuric acid, 

volatile organic 

compounds 

(VOCs) 

Ministry of 

Environmental 

Protection 

May 2013 

Cement: Key pollutants to be effectively 

controlled in 2015, with NOx emissions 

kept below 1.5 million tons and 

particulate matter emissions (including 

unorganized emissions) below 2 million 

tons and full control will be in place in 

202 0. 

Steel: Sintering fume should be fully 

desulfurized. 

Blast furnace gas (BFG) dry dedusting is 

encouraged. Low -sulfur fuel, regenerative 

combustion and low -nitrogen combustion 

technologies are encouraged for steel -

rolling industrial furnaces. 

Sulfuric a cid: The pickling process shall be 

employed for acid production in iron -

sulfur plants and acid production from 

smelting fume; acidic wastewater and 

cooling water shall be treated separately. 

The water reuse ratio shall not be lower 

than 90%. 

Volatile orga nic compounds (VOCs): VOCs 

prevention and control system will be 

established in key areas in 2015; 

emissions reduction will be basically 

materialized from raw materials to final 

products and from production and 

consumption in 2020. 

Circular of the 

State Council on 

State Council  September 

2013 

Overall air quality to be improve, heavy 

pollution days to be reduced significantly, 

by 2017, the concentrat ion of inhalable Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

85 

Issuing the 

Action Plan for 

Air Pollution 

Prevention 

and Control (G.F. 

[2013] No. 37) 

particulate matters to fall by over 10% 

from 2012 in prefectural or higher -level 

cities. 

Air quality to improve notably in the 

Beijing - Tianjin -Hebei region, the Yangtze 

River Delta and the Pearl River Delta. The 

concentration of fine par ticulate matters 

to fall by 25%, 20% and 15% in the above 

three regions. 

Environmental 

Protection Law 

National 

People ’s

Congress 

April 2014 

Establish a sound system of environment 

and health monitoring, investigation and 

risk assessment, and create a mechanism 

for public monitoring and early warning of 

environmental pollution; define red lines 

for ecological protection in key ecological 

protection zones, ecologically sensitive 

areas and ecologically vulnerable areas to 

maintain strict protection; expan d the 

scope of complainants in environment -

related public interest litigations so that 

all social organizations that are registered 

with the civil affairs department of the 

people ’s government at or above the level 

of city divided into districts, are 

speci alized in environmental protection 

activities in public interests for more than 

five years and maintain good reputation 

are eligible for lodging a lawsuit with the 

people ’s court. Firms that discharge 

pollutants illegally and refuse to take 

corrective acti ons can be fined for 

successive days in the amount of initial 

fine. 

Action Plan for 

Water Pollution 

Prevention and 

Control 

State Council  April 2015 

Close down 10 categories of small firms. 

Close down all product projects of small 

paper making, leather mak ing, dyeing, 

dye making, coking, sulfur refining, 

arsenic refining, oil refining, electroplating 

and pesticide firm that will seriously 

contaminate water bodies. 

Launch crackdown on 10 key industries. 

Develop pollution crackdown plans for 

paper making, co king, nitrogen fertilizers, 

nonferrous metals, dyeing, agricultural 

and sideline foodstuffs processing, active 

pharmaceutical ingredient (API) 

manufacturing, leather making, pesticide 

and electroplating industries and 

implement cleaner upgrading. Implement 

equivalent or reduction replacement of 

main pollutant emissions from new, Cha pter 5

86 

alteration and expansion projects in the 

above industries. 

In 2020, over 70% of water bodies in 

seven key drainage basins (Yangtze River, 

Yellow River, Pear River, Songhua River, 

Huaihe River, Haihe River and Liaohe 

River) will reach or exceed Class III. 

Black -and -malodorous water bodies will 

be controlled within 10% in developed 

areas of cities at the prefectural and 

higher levels. In 2030, over 75% of water 

bodies in seven key d rainage basins will 

reach or exceed Class III. Black -and -

malodorous water bodies in developed 

urban areas will be basically removed. 

About 95% of centralized drinking water 

sources in urban areas will reach or 

exceed Class III. 

Technical Guide 

to Delimitation 

of Bio -protection 

Red Line (Trial) 

(H.F. [2014] No. 

10) 

Ministry of 

Environmental 

Protection 

May 2015 

Areas that are very important to water 

conservation are included within the 

bio - protection red line according to 

results of water conservation function 

assessment and classification. Grade 1 

and Grade 1 protected areas of 

important drinking water sources are 

included within the bio -protection red 

line. The specific method shall be as 

set forth in HJ/T338. 

Highly sensitive areas are included 

within the bio - protection red line 

according to the results of soil erosion 

sensitivity assessment and classification. 

Zones of key soil erosion prevention and 

protection areas that pose a relatively 

significant risk of soil erosion also shall 

be included within the bio -protection 

red line. 

Assess the materiality of biological 

diversity preservation function. 

Soil 

Environmental 

Quality 

Standard for 

Agricultural 

Land (2nd 

Exposure 

Ministry of 

Environmental 

Protection 

August 

2015 

10 soil contaminants (i.e., total 

manganese, total cobalt, total selenium, 

total vanadium, total antimony, total 

thallium, fluoride (water soluble fluorine), 

benzoapyrene, total petroleum 

hydrocarbon and total phthalic acid 

esters) are added to the test op tions 

according to relevant foreign standards Environmental Stress -Testing on Banks’ Credit Risks 

87 

Draft) 

(revision of 

GB15618 -

1995) 

and Risk 

Screening 

Guideline 

Values for Soil 

Contamination 

of Development 

Land (2nd 

Exposure Draft) 

(supplement to 

HJ 25.3 -2014) 

and China’s National Technical Rules for 

Evaluation of Soil Contamination Status, 

which are applicable to soil contamination 

investigation and evaluation in specified 

areas. 

The soil pH level of 6.5 or below u nder the 

original standard is further divided into 

two levels: pH ≤ 5.5 and 5.5  ＜ pH ≤ 6.5, 

with different limits applied to the two 

levels, so that the three levels (pH ≤ 6.5 ，

6.5 7.5) under the original standard are 

increased to four levels (pH ≤ 5.5 ，5.5  ＜

pH ≤ 6.5, 6.5< pH ≤ 7.5,pH>7.5). 

The limit on lead content of soil in 

agricultural land is lowered to 80 mg/kg. 

The original standard prescribes three 

limit levels according to pH value 

according to the impact of lead on crop 

growth: 250mg/kg (pH<6.5), 300mg/kg 

(pH6.5 -7.5) and 350mg/kg (pH>7.5). 

The limit on HCH and DDT contents of 

soil is lowered to 0.1 mg/kg from the 

original standard of 0.5mg/kg. Cha pter 5

88 

# Bibliography 

Bank of England. (2015). The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector .

Berge, T.O., & Lindquist, K.G. (2007). A suite -of -models approach to stress -testing financial 

stability, preliminary paper presented at the "2nd Expert Forum on Advanced 

Techniques on Stress -testing: Applications for Supervisors", IMF and DNB, 

Amsterdam, O ctober 23 -24. 

Carney, M. (2015). Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon –climate change and financial 

stability. Speech given at Lloyd’s of London, 29 , 220 -230. 

CISL, & UNEP FI. (2014). Stability and Sustainability in Banking Reform: Are Environmental 

Risks M issing in Basel III? 

Goldstein, M. (2015). Bank Stress -testing and Financial Stability: Lessons from the 2009 -14 

US and EU_Wide Tests for Asian Emerging Economies. Peterson Institute for 

International Economics Working Paper .

Hahn, F. R. (2007). Environme ntal determinants of banking efficiency in Austria. Empirica, 

34 (3), 231 -245. 

Peria, M. M. S. M., Majnoni, M. G., Jones, M. M. T., & Blaschke, M. W. (2001). Stress testing 

of financial systems: an overview of issues, methodologies, and FSAP experiences :

International Monetary Fund. 

Weber, O., Fenchel, M., & Scholz, R. W. (2008).  Empirical analysis of the integration of 

environmental risks into the credit risk management process of European banks. 

Business Strategy and the Environment, 17 (3), 149 -159. Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

89 

# Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on 

# Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

By 

Research Center for Green Finance Development, Tsinghua University 1

# Abstract 

In this chapter, we present an analytical framework and the methodologies for measuring the 

impact of climate -related physical risks on the default risks of bank loans. The framework 

consists of the setting of climate scenarios and a suite of catastrophe m odels and financial 

models. For the case study, we analyzed the impacts of climate change on typhoons ’ intensity 

and frequency and on credit risk metrics (e.g. PD and LGD) of mortgage loans in China ’s coastal 

cities. The model shows that, under an extreme scenario (RCP8.5 with extreme exacerbation 

effect on typhoons), the expected annual credit loss of mortgage loans could rise nearly three 

fold in 2050 compared with the baseline scenario which assumes no change in typhoons ’

occurrence pattern. This framewo rk can also be applied to estimate potential climate 

exacerbated impacts of other natural disasters including floods, heatwaves, drought and 

wildfires on financial risk metrics such as default probability and valuation of assets. 

Keyword s: climate -relate d physical risks, typhoon, mortgage loan, default probability, 

quantitative 

# 1 Introduction 

A growing consensus among the scientific community is that global warming will lead to 

changes in the occurring patterns of future weather and climate events, such as typhoons, 

floods and heat waves. These climate -related physical risks can cause considerable damages, 

many of which unexpected, to the real economy and the financial sector that provides funding 

for economic activities. The losses to the real economy and the associated impact on the 

financial sector can be enormous as estimated by several central banks and research 

institutions ( EIU, 2015; PRA Bank of England, 2015; Regelink et al., 2017 ). 

Against this backdrop, the international financial community has c alled for attention and 

actions to integrate climate -related physical risks into financial decision making by financial 

institutions. For example, the G20 Green Finance Study Group, the Central Banks and 

Supervisors ’ Network for Greening the Financial Syst em ( NGFS, 2019 ) and the Taskforce for 

Climate -Related Financial Disclosure ( TCFD, 2017 ) have advised financial regulators and 

institutions to conduct environmental risk analysis (ERA) and disclosing information related to 

climate -risk exposures and the res ulting financial risks. To manage these environmental and 

climate risks, the primary step is to quantify these risks. Many literatures, including other                             

> 1The primary authors of this chapter are Dr. S UN Tianyin, Senior Research Fellow , email: sunty@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn, and
> Dr. MAJun, Director, Research Center for Green Finance Development at Tsinghua University ,email:
> maj@pbcsf.tsinghua.edun.cn. The authors would like to thank Dr Gabriela Aznar Siguan, Prof David Bresch and Eberenz
> Samuel from ETH Zurich, Z HU Yun and M ENG Tingyi from Tsinghua University and W ANG Jiayi and Z HAO Xinran from
> UIBE for their advices and contributions. The authors acknowledge the support of the INSPIRE grant. Chapter 6

90 

chapters in this Occasional Paper, have discussed the methodologies for quantifying transition 

risks and their impact on banks ’ and institutional investors ’ exposures. 

In this chapter, we present an analytical framework and the methodologies for measuring the 

impact of climate -related physical risks on credit risk metrics of bank loans. In a case study 

usi ng this framework, we quantify the increase in the probabilities of default (PD) and Loss -

Given -Default (LGD) of mortgage loans for properties in coastal cities of China, caused by the 

increased intensities and frequencies of typhoons under various climate change scenarios. 

The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the applications of 

the proposed analytical approach; Section 3 presents the general analytical framework, the 

modules within the framework, and several modell ing details; Section 4 presents the results 

of a case study that shows the quantitative estimates of the impact of typhoons on the PD and 

LGD of mortgage loans in coastal cities of China; Section 5 discusses the limitations of the 

current methodologies and outlines future work for our research. 

# 2 Applications 

This climate physical risk analysis framework is mainly developed for financial institutions, 

especially banks, to analyze the financial risks arising from the impact of physical risks under 

various clim ate scenarios. The framework could be applied to a wide range of hazards 

including typhoons, floods, heat waves, droughts etc., and various sectors, especially those 

vulnerable to natural disasters such as housing, agriculture, energy and transportation. T he 

rationale of these risks translating into credit risks and most affected sectors are briefly 

described in the following  Table 6-1.Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

91 

Table 6-1 Examples of physical risks’ impact on credit risks 

Climate -related 

physical risks  Mechanism for translating into credit risks  Most exposed 

sectors 

Typhoons/hurricanes 

Higher intensities and frequencies of 

typhoons/hurricanes cause severer 

destruction to properties and assets, and 

consequently reduce their values and lead 

to higher default rates for loans to these 

sectors 

Real estate 

Transportation 

Agriculture 

Power 

Floods 

More frequent floods cause severer 

destruction to properties and assets and 

interrupt business operations, impacting 

financial performance of the firms affected, 

and leading to higher default rates on loans 

to these sectors 

Transportation 

Real estate 

Mining 

Manufacturing 

Droughts 

More se vere and frequent droughts reduce 

water supply to sectors heavily relying on 

water and affect production activity and 

revenues. Droughts also push up water 

prices and consequently operational 

expenses while reduce profitability, leading 

to more loan defaul ts 

Agriculture 

Food and beverage 

Textile and dying 

Steel 

Power 

Mining 

Heat waves 

Increasing frequency, severity and length of 

heatwaves cause more wildfires, reduce 

labor productivity and lower agricultural 

production; heatwaves also raise 

temperatures of cooling water for power 

plants and cause cable outages, 

interrupting power produc tion and 

transmission. These lead to worse financial 

performance of affected firms and higher 

rates of loan defaults. 

Agriculture 

Forestry 

Energy 

Transportation 

All labor -intensive 

sectors 

Sea -level rise 

Rising sea levels cause irreparable 

destruction of properties and assets 

located in coastal areas, leading to higher 

loan default rates 

All sectors 

deploying assets 

and facilities along 

the coastal area 

Source: Compiled by authors 

This framework can a lso be used by local governments to assess the financial and fiscal impact 

of climate physical risks to cities and regions. For example, a coastal city prone to typhoons 

can apply this methodology to quantify the potential financial destruction caused by f uture 

typhoons (e.g., reduction in property values) and the needed expenditure for repairment. This 

analysis could be used to derive the financial risks facing a local government (e.g., the 

reduction in value of government -owned properties), the future inc rease in fiscal expenditure 

(for repairment and disaster relief) and the resulting government debt obligations and debt 

risks (assuming that the government will need to borrow to meet its additional expenditure 

needs). Chapter 6

92 

# 3 Analytical framework and methodologi es 

In this section we describe the general framework of our analysis and the methodologies used 

in the four modules of the disaster loss and the financial models. 

Analytical framework 

The general analytical framework consists of two major components: a d isaster loss model and 

a group of financial models, as illustrated in  Figure 6-1.

Figure 6-1 General phy sical risk assessment framework 

The disaster loss model is used to estimate the value losses from physical property damages, 

economic losses (e.g., decline in GDP or income), and/or financial losses due to business 

interruptions by natural disasters. The output of the disaster model is then used as an input 

into the financial models to adjust the estimated financial statements of an entity (e.g., a 

company), such as assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and profits/losses. These adjusted 

variables are late r used to calculate various financial ratios such as the loan -to -value, return -

on - equity, asset/liability and interest coverage. 

The disaster loss model itself is made up of four major modules. These are the climate 

exacerbation module, the hazard module, the asset exposure module and the vulnerability 

module. The financial models used in the analysis could include the insurance actuarial model, 

the PD and LGD models, and the valuation model for asset management, depending on the 

type of financial business and the underlying assets affected by disasters. The two components 

of the analytic framework are interconnected by several economic and financial variables 

including GDP, household income, revenues, costs, and the loan -to -value ratio (LTV). 

The modules 

In this subsection we describe the specific modules used in the disaster loss model and the 

financial models. 

3.2.1 Disaster loss model 

The disaster loss model within this framework is largely built on the on -going python package 

CLIMADA developed by a gro up of researchers at ETH Zurich ( Aznar Siguan & Bresch, 2019 ). Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

93 

The exacerbation module produces the exacerbation effect of climate change on the 

occurrence pattern and intensity of historical disaster events. The hazard module describes a 

hazard ’s historical intensity and occurrence probability in a specific region. These two modules 

are together used to predict the profile of future typhoons. The asset exposure module 

describes the geographical distribution of assets being affected to coordinate wi th the 

geographical locations of a hazard. The vulnerability module combines hazard and asset 

modules translating the intensity of a hazard ’s damages to assets. 

Exacerbation module 

The exacerbation module addresses the exacerbated effect of global warming on typhoons ’

and other natural disasters ’ intensities and frequencies. Specifically, it correlates the 

incremental change of intensity and occurrence probability of a hazard and a rise in 

temperature caused by higher carbon concentration in the atmosphere. Depending on the 

ocean basins investigated, many studies show considerable discrepancy of predicted changes 

in typhoons ’ speed and frequency derived from climate change ( Knutson et al., 2019 ). For any 

given location, there is a high amount of uncertainty in climate change -exacerbation effect on 

typhoon i.e., the probability distribution of the impact on typhoons ’ intensity and frequency 

caused by climate change has fat tails. In our study presented later in this chapter, we use the 

mean, 90th percentile an d the 99th percentile of the statistical distribution of exacerbation 

effects from these studies for parameterization, which form respectively our mild, severe and 

extreme scenarios. 

Hazard module 

The hazard module models future hazard profiles under clima te scenarios defined by IPCC 

(Allen et al., 2014 ). For our case study, this is done through combining historical typhoons ’

tracks obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the 

output of climate exacerbation module. More s pecifically, the data of typhoon tracks along 

the coast of China are provided in the International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship 

(IBTrACS) project of the NOAA ( NOAA, 2019 ). The IBTrACS project is a centralized database 

providing historical tro pical cyclone track data to aid the understanding of the distribution, 

frequencies, and intensities of tropical cyclones worldwide. The database pools data from all 

the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers and other international centers and 

individ uals, creating a global best track dataset that merges information from multiple centers 

into one product and archive for public use. 

Asset exposure module 

The asset exposure module describes the geographical locations and value distribution of the 

concern ed assets/properties potentially exposed to natural disaster events. These are often 

expressed by the latitudes, longitudes and altitudes of the assets/properties and their 

corresponding monetary values at specific sites. Depending on the specific assets b eing 

investigated, this information can be obtained from data providers or asset owners. 

Vulnerability module 

The vulnerability module addresses the correlation between the magnitude of damages to 

assets and the intensity of a hazard. The data used for de termining the correlation are 

empirical studies and expert judgement. This relationship is often depicted by a damage 

function curve, as  Figure 6-2 show s. Here the x axis indicates the intensity of the hazard and 

the y axis the magnitude of damage that the assets suffer in a monetary context as a 

percentage of their initial values. In  Figure 6-2, the lines of different colors represent the 

damage curves for various assets for the same hazard. This is because different assets (e.g., 

buildings, power plants and bridges) with different physical structures and qualities 

demonstrate varied responses (i.e., sustaining different levels of damage) while bearing the Chapter 6

94 

same level of shocks from the hazards. The damage curve for a specific asset against a hazard 

is determined by several critical points on the curve. For example, the critical points on the 

property damage curve include (1) the threshold intensity point at which the wind speed of 

typhoon starts to cause damages and (2) the full damage intensity point at which the wind 

speed of typhoon causes 100% damage . These critical points determining the damage curve 

are based on empirical studies of historical records ( Emanuel, 2011 ). 

Figure 6-2 Schematic damage function curves of a natural disaster for different 

asset s

3.2.2 Financial models 

As mentioned earlier, many financial models could be used to analyze the impact of disasters 

on financial variables related to insurance, asset management and banking operations, taking 

the output of the “disaster loss model ” as inputs. 

In this study, we adopt the Expected Loss (EL) model widely used by banks to estimate credit 

risks. Typically, EL is expressed as the product of three individual risk -measure components, 

namely Probability of Default (PD), Exposure at Default (EAD) and Loss Given Default ( LGD) as 

suggested in BCBS, 2017 and other studies ( Hull, 2012 ): 

∑ 𝐸𝐿 𝑖 = ∑ 𝑃𝐷 𝑖 ∗ 𝐿𝐺𝐷 𝑖 ∗ 𝐸𝐴𝐷 𝑖 … … … … … … … … … … [1]

As we assume banks ’ future exposure (EAD) (the real estate properties in the coastal areas) is 

unchanged for the purpose of this study, so only impacts of typhoons on PD and LGD need to 

be evaluated to derive future disasters ’ impact on EL. The models estimating the PD and LGD 

are integrated to calculate the expected loss fraction of asset 𝑖 , expressed as a percentage of 

EAD: 

𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝐸𝐴𝐷 𝑖 = 𝑃𝐷 𝑖 ∗ 𝐿𝐺𝐷 𝑖 … … … … … … . … [2].Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

95 

In a typical PD model for mortgage loans, the dependent variable is the probability of a default 

by a borrower, and the explanatory variables may include household income, mortgage l oan 

interest rates, risk -free rates, loan -to -value ratios (LTV), and loan maturity ( Tian, 2014; Xu et 

al., 2010 ). In our case study, we identify the LTV and household income as the two principal 

“directly impacted ” variables, which bridge the disaster loss model and the PD model. These 

variables translate increased property losses and declined household income to PD ’s

incremental change (the delta PD). The logic is that the property impairment and household 

income decline due to disasters would increase the LTV and damage the borrower ’s repayment 

capacity, which tends to increase the incentive and risk for the borrower to default. In this case, 

we also use per capita GDP growth as a proxy for household income growth, assuming the 

disaster ’s impact on GDP is proportional to its impact on household income. 

For a typical LGD model, its explanatory variables could be categorized into contract 

characteristics, borrower characteristics, differences across industry and industry conditions, 

and macroeconomic systemat ic risk factors ( Qi & Yang, 2009 ). Among these variables, the 

Loan -to -value (LTV) ratio is often considered as a key driver of LGD ( Calem & LaCour -Little, 

2004; Hou et al., 2019; Leow & Mues, 2012; Lu, 2014 ). It can bridge the disaster loss model 

and LGD m odel by translating the property impairment to incremental LGD (the delta LGD). 

The logic behind this is that an increase in LTV implies that the impaired value of collateral is 

less likely to cover the outstanding loans at default. 

Using the PD and LGD e stimates produced by the two models above, we can assess the 

expected percentage loss of EAD by equation [2]. In the current case study which is for 

illustrative purposes, we consider only the household income and LTV as the links between 

hazard damage and the PD, and LTV as the link between hazard damage and the LGD. It doesn ’t

mean that other explanatory variables in the PD model and LGD model are completely 

irrelevant, although they are less important from the perspective of climate risk analysis. 

# 4 Case study: quantifying typhoon impact on EL of mortgage loans 

In the following, we present some methodological details on how to apply the framework to 

estimate the impact of increased intensity and frequency of typhoons on the EL of mortgage 

loans for proper ties in China ’s coastal cities. This application involves the following seven steps: 

Step 1: Select the cities 

In this study, we select 40 Chinese coastal cities in eight provinces frequently exposed to 

typhoons according to geographical locations and his torical typhoon landfall records. In the 

period 2004 -2016, properties located in these eight provinces suffered 85% of the direct 

economic losses from typhoons according to our own analysis based multiple sources of loss 

data on historical typhoon events 2. A full list of these cities is shown in  Table 6-2 below.           

> 2Data sources: China Meteorological Administration, link: www.tcdata.typhoon.gov.cn China Meteorological
> Administration: Yearbook of Meteorological Disasters (2004 -2016); YIN Jie et al: A study on the relati onship between
> typhoon intensity grade and disaster loss in China (2013); and other press releases. Chapter 6

96 

Table 6-2 40 Chin ese coastal cities selected in our case study 

Index  Coastal Cities  Provinces 

1 Binzhou 

Shandong 

2 Weifang 

3 Weihai 

4 Yantai 

5 Qingdao 

6 Rizhao 

7 Lianyungang 

Jiangsu 

8 Yancheng 

9 Nantong 

10  Suzhou 

11  Shanghai  Shanghai 

12  Jiaxing 

Zhejiang 

13  Hangzhou 

14  Shaoxing 

15  Zhoushan 

16  Ningbo 

17  Taizhou 

18  Wenzhou 

19  Ningde 

Fujian 

20  Fuzhou 

21  Putian 

22  Quanzhou 

23  Xiamen 

24  Zhangzhou 

25  Chaozhou 

Guangdong 

26  Shantou 

27  Jieyang 

28  Huizhou 

29  Shenzhen 

30  Dongguan 

31  Guangzhou 

32  Zhongshan 

33  Zhuhai 

34  Jiangmen 

35  Maoming 

36  Zhanjiang 

37  Foshan 

38  Qingyuan 

39  Beihai  Guangxi 

40  Haikou  Hainan Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

97 

Step 2: Estimate outstanding mortgage loans 

The next step is collecting/estimating data on the mortgage loans of these cities. However, few 

municipalities at the district administrative level reported such data, which would have 

provided the required geographical resolution for our analysis. Therefo re, we scaled the 2018 

national mortgage loan data to district municipality level using the share of each district ’s GDP 

of the national total, arriving at an estimate of the district ’s outstanding mortgage loans. The 

underlying assumption, validated by ou r study using many samples, is that the ratio of a 

district ’s outstanding mortgage loans to the national aggregate is similar to the ratio of the 

district ’s GDP to the national GDP. 

Step 3: Identify the locations of properties 

Another important data poin t we need for the analysis is the geographical locations of the 

district level properties (assets), so that the potential disaster damages could be mapped 

accordingly. We apply an online tool to geocode the center of municipal districts as the 

location of the properties in a specific municipal district. The output includes the latitudes and 

longitudes for the properties in the municipal districts of the 40 cities (see  Figure 6-3). 

Figure 6-3 Distribution of properties (and values) along the coast of China 

Source: authors’ estimates Chapter 6

98 

Step 4: Generate typhoons ’ future profiles under various climate scenarios 

The historical track data of the typhoons used in our case study are extracted from the NOAA ’s

IBTRACS database, which to our best knowledge provides the most complete record of 

historical tropical cyclone tracks worldwide. From this database, all the rec orded tracks of 

historical typhoons landed on the 40 Chinese coastal cities are selected for our modelling. The 

historical data of typhoon tracks, together with the exacerbation effects induced by global 

warming estimated and summarized by NOAA climate res earcher Thomas R. Knutson ( Knutson 

et al., 2019 ), are used in the hazard module, which generates the future typhoon profiles 

under several IPCC ’s climate scenarios, as shown by  Figure 6-4.

Figure 6-4 Locations and intensities of typhoons along Chinese coast 

Source: Authors ’ simulations 

Step 5: Develop vulnerability curves for properties in each district 

Our case study takes Emanuel ’s vulnerability curve ( Emanuel, 2011 ) as the basis and adjusts 

its parameters, namely the threshold velocity and half damage velocity which determine the 

final shape of the curve, to match the historical records of typhoons ’ impact on the selected 

cities in China ( Sun, 2019 ). The historical records of impact are derived from the data of China ’s

provincial and municipal economic losses caused by typhoon, provided by a professional 

research data provider CSMAR 3. The final vulner ability curve of properties against typhoons 

is shown in  Figure 6-5. This procedure is also applicable for defining the vulnerability curve of 

GDP of th e Chinese coastal cities. The only difference is that the vulnerability curve of GDP is     

> 3Dat a used are derived from CSMAR, historica l records of economic loss es caused b y typhoons in China, 2019, link:
> ht tp://www.gtarsc.com Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults

99 

calibrated with data sources contained in empirical studies on economic losses due to 

typhoons ( Liu, 2017; Ma, 2016; Wang et al., 2019; J. -y. Zhang et al., 2013; Q. Zha ng et al., 2009 ). 

Figure 6-5 Property value loss as a function of winds speed (in %) 

Source: authors’ estimates 

Step 6: Estimate property value losses (value reduction in collaterals) under two 

climate sc enarios 

We use the disaster loss model to estimate the potential annual value losses of properties 

(used as collaterals for mortgage loans) and impact on GDP (taken as proxy to the decline in 

household income), under two IPCC ’s climate scenarios and three levels of climate 

exacerbation effects as shown in  Table 6-3. The two climate scenarios are represented by two 

Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP s). An RCP is a greenhouse gas concentration 

trajectory adopted by the IPCC in its Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) in 2014. The RCPs describe 

possible climate future scenarios depending on the volume of greenhouse gases (GHG) 

emitted in the decades to come. According to IPCC ’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) ( IPCC, 

2014 ), the four RCPs, namely RCP2.6, RCP4.5, RCP6.0, and RCP8.5, are labelled after a possible 

range of radiative forcing values in the year 2100 (2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5 W/m 2, respectively). 

In our case study, we focus on RCP 6.0 and RCP8.5, the two scenarios that we believe are more 

likely to occur than others based on the observed trend of human mitigation efforts ( Berg et 

al., 2018 ). In addition, three levels of climate exacerbation effects on typ hoons are considered 

for each of the two IPCC ’s climate scenarios. The first considers the average (i.e., 50 th 

percentile of the statistical distribution of) exacerbation effect (“ mean case ”). The second 

incorporates the 90 th percentile exacerbation effect s (“ severe case ”). The third incorporates 

the 99th percentile exacerbation effect (“ extreme case ”). There are thus six combinations of 

two climate scenarios and three levels of exacerbation effects (see  Table 6-3). As a comparison, 

the baseline scenario is one that assumes historical typhoon occurrence pattern remains 

unchanged in the future. Chapter 6

100 

Table 6-3 shows that, under the baseline scenario the estimated annual value losses of 

properties (physical loss in the table) in the 40 cities will be around RMB100billion (0.65% of 

total value) in 2030 and 2050. Th e value losses would surge to RMB210billion (1.36% of total 

value) and 443 billion (2.87% of total value) in 2030 and 2050 respectively under the RCP8.5 

extreme case. As for the impact on GDP, 1% of annual loss is expected under the baseline 

scenario from 2030 and 2050, while under RCP8.5 extreme case the GDP loss would amount 

to 2.2% in 2030 and 5.0% in 2050. 

Table 6-3 Estimated annual value losses of collaterals and GDP in 40 Chinese 

coastal cities due to ty phoons 

Source: authors’ estimates 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 

Physical loss 101 101 101 101 101 GDP loss 62 62 62 62 62 

Exacerbation Climate 

Physical loss 109 110 112 114 116 GDP loss 67 69 70 71 73 Physical loss 113 117 121 125 130 GDP loss 71 74 77 80 83 Physical loss 134 142 150 160 172 GDP loss 80 85 91 98 105 Physical loss 157 179 203 231 261 GDP loss 96 110 126 146 167 Physical loss 163 178 194 217 240 GDP loss 104 114 126 142 159 Physical loss 210 256 308 371 443 GDP loss 137 170 208 255 310 

2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 

Physical loss 0.65% 0.65% 0.65% 0.65% 0.65% GDP loss 1.00% 1.00% 1.00% 1.00% 1.00% 

Exacerbation Climate 

Physical loss 0.70% 0.71% 0.72% 0.74% 0.75% GDP loss 1.09% 1.11% 1.13% 1.15% 1.18% Physical loss 0.73% 0.76% 0.78% 0.81% 0.84% GDP loss 1.15% 1.20% 1.24% 1.30% 1.35% Physical loss 0.87% 0.92% 0.97% 1.04% 1.11% GDP loss 1.30% 1.38% 1.47% 1.58% 1.71% Physical loss 1.02% 1.16% 1.31% 1.49% 1.69% GDP loss 1.55% 1.78% 2.05% 2.36% 2.71% Physical loss 1.05% 1.15% 1.26% 1.40% 1.56% GDP loss 1.68% 1.85% 2.04% 2.29% 2.57% Physical loss 1.36% 1.66% 1.99% 2.40% 2.87% GDP loss 2.21% 2.75% 3.37% 4.14% 5.02% 

Scenarios 

Scenarios 

Extreme 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Estimated annual value losses (Billion Yuan) 

Mean 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Severe 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Baseline 

Estimated annual value losses (%) 

Extreme 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Severe 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Baseline 

Mean 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

101 

Step 7: Estimate changes in PD, LGD, and EL of mortgage loans due to typhoons 

In this step, we estimate the impact of future typhoons on key credit risk metrics, including PD, 

LGD, and EL, of mortgage loans in the 40 Chinese cities under various climate scenarios with 

different exacerbation effects. The key to estimating the change in PD as a result of changes in 

LTV and Payment -to -Income Ratio (PTIR) is identifying the elasticity of change in PD to change 

in LTV, and the elasticity of change in PD to change in PTIR. These coefficients are estimated or 

calibrated based on relevant em pirical studies such as ( Tian, 2014 ) and ( Fu, 2005 ). 

𝛥 𝑃𝐷 ≈ 𝛼 × ( 1 − 𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 

1 − ∆𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 − (1 − 𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ))

+ 𝛽 × ( 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 

𝛥 ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒 ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒 ) … … … … … … … [5]

The changes in PD (probability of default in a year) under the six scenarios (2 IPCC scenarios × 

3 exacerbation effects) are estimated and shown in  Table 6-4 below. The delta PD (i.e., change 

in PD) shown in  Table 6-4 refers to the increase (in percentage points) of the PD of mortgage 

loans in any given year due to the heightened typhoon risks comp ared with the baseline level 

for the same year. For example, under the “extreme case ” (RCP8.5 with extreme exacerbation), 

the PD for 2050 would increase by 0.97ppts (to 1.37%) from the baseline level of 0.4%. The 

estimated results for the increase of LGD a re shown in  Table 6-5. Compared to the impact on 

PDs, the changes to LGD caused by heightened typhoon risks are significantly smaller, with the 

highest increment of 1.58ppts in 2050 under the extreme case (RCP8.5 with extreme 

exacerbation), from the baseline LGD value of 27%. Chapter 6

102 

Table 6-4 Estimated increase in PD under various typhoon scenarios (in ppts) 

Source: authors’ estimates 

Note: the unit of all figures in the table, unless otherwise indicated, is percentage 

point. 

Table 6-5 Estimated increase in LGD under various typhoon scenarios (in ppts) 4

Source: authors’ estimates 

Note: the unit of all figures in the table, unless otherwise indicated, is percentage 

point. 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 

Base PD 0.40% 0.40% 0.40% 0.40% 0.40% 

Exacerbation Climate 

delta PD from LTV 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 delta PD from Income 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 

Total delta PD 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 

delta PD from LTV 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 delta PD from Income 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.09 

Total delta PD 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.11 0.13 

delta PD from LTV 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.08 0.09 delta PD from Income 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.09 

Total delta PD 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.15 0.18 

delta PD from LTV 0.07 0.10 0.14 0.17 0.21 delta PD from Income 0.07 0.10 0.13 0.17 0.21 

Total delta PD 0.14 0.20 0.27 0.34 0.43 

delta PD from LTV 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.15 0.19 delta PD from Income 0.08 0.11 0.13 0.16 0.20 

Total delta PD 0.17 0.21 0.25 0.32 0.38 

delta PD from LTV 0.15 0.21 0.28 0.36 0.46 delta PD from Income 0.15 0.22 0.30 0.39 0.50 

Total delta PD 0.30 0.43 0.57 0.76 0.97 

Scenarios 

Extreme 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Estimated delta PD induced by future typhoons 

Mean 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

Severe 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) 

Baseline 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 

Base LGD 27% 27% 27% 27% 27% 

Exacerbation Climate 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.13 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.15 0.18 0.22 0.27 0.32 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.25 0.35 0.46 0.59 0.73 

RCP6.0 

(≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.28 0.35 0.43 0.53 0.64 

RCP8.5 

(≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta LGD 0.50 0.71 0.95 1.25 1.58 

Scenarios 

Extreme 

Estimated delta LGD induced by future typhoons 

Baseline 

Mean 

Severe Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

103 

After obtain ing the estimated changes in PD and LGD under various scenarios, these results 

are used to calculate the percentage change in EL of banks ’ mortgage assets at exposure. The 

results are shown in  Table 6-6 and  Figure 6-6. The expected loss ratio (ratio of EL to exposure) 

under the baseline scen ario remains at 0.11% from 2030 -2050 assuming no change in climate 

conditions. Under the extreme case (RCP8.5 with extreme exacerbation), the heightened 

typhoon risk could add another 0.28ppts (to 0.39%) to the expected loss ratio in 2050, 

compared with ba seline level of 0.11%. 

Table 6-6 Estimated change of EL (Expected Loss) fraction under various scenarios 

(in ppts) 

Source: authors’ estimates 

Note: the unit of all figures in the table, unless otherwise ind icated, is percentage 

point.                                                 

> 4The base LGD value is derived from Lu (2014). 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
> Base EL 0.11% 0.11% 0.11% 0.11% 0.11%
> Exacerbation Climate
> RCP6.0
> (≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
> RCP8.5
> (≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03
> RCP6.0
> (≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.05
> RCP8.5
> (≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12
> RCP6.0
> (≈ Δ1.3℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.11
> RCP8.5
> (≈ Δ2.0℃ in 2050) delta % EL 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.22 0.28

Scenarios 

> Mean
> Severe
> Extreme

Baseline 

Estimated delta fraction of Expected Loss (EL) induced by future typhoons Chapter 6

104 

Figure 6-6 Development of estimated EL (Expected Loss) fraction under various 

scenarios (2020 -20 50) 

Source: authors’ estimates 

# 5 Limitations and future research 

This chapter presents a framework for quantifying the impact of climate physical risks (e.g., 

natural disasters) on banks ’ credit risk metrics. We illustrate the approach with an application 

of the various modules in a case study, in which we assess the im pact of future typhoon 

scenarios on the PD, LGD and EL of mortgage loans in China ’s coastal cities. The preliminary 

finding shows that the PD of mortgage loans could rise by several folds due to intensified 

typhoon risks under severe and extreme scenarios. 

The case study presented here is a simplified, illustrative example intending to show the 

mechanics of how different modules work in the framework, and the quantitative results 

should be interpreted with cautions for several reasons. First, there are two channels of 

damages from typhoons, wind and flood surge, while our case study only considered damages 

from heightened wind risk. Second, the impact of typhoons on economic variables such as 

household income in our model is derived from an approximation to historical direct damage 

loss. A more sophisticated economic -disaster model could be constructed to capture possible 

interruptions to broader economic activities and rising unemployment as well as their indirect 

impact on household income. 

The potential applications of this analytical framework are not limited to assessing the impact 

of typhoons on mortgage loan PDs. It could be used to analyze the impact of many other types 

of environmental and climate risks –e.g., droughts, floods, heatwa ves, winter storms, wildfires, 

deforestation and environmental accidents – on financial indicators such as valuations and VAR 

of investment portfolios, in addition to credit risk metrics. The most critical work needed for 

the various applications lies in b etter understanding sector -specific issues, such as the reliance 

of agriculture firms on water supply and the climate impact on water supply and water prices. Quantifying the Impact of Physical Risks on Probabilities of Bank Loan Defaults 

105 

# Bibliography 

Allen, M. R., Barros, V. R., Broome, J., Cramer, W., Christ, R., Church, J. A., . . . Dubash, N. K. 

(2014). IPCC fifth assessment synthesis report -climate change 2014 synthesis report. 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland .

Aznar Siguan, G., & Bresch, D. N. (2019). CLIMADA v1: a global weather and climate risk 

assessment platform. Geoscientific Model Development, 12 , 3085 -3097. 

BCBS . (2017). Basel III: international regulatory framework for banks. Bank for International 

Settlements. URL: https://www.bis. org/bcbs/basel3. htm (Accessed 2018 -02 -22) .

Berg, A. O., Clapp, C., Lannoo, E., & Peters, G. (2018). Climate scenarios demystified. A 

climate scenario guide for investors. CICERO Report .

Calem, P. S., & LaCour -Little, M. (2004). Risk -based capital requirements for mortgage loans. 

Journal of Banking & Finance, 28 (3), 647 -672. 

EIU. (2015). The cost of inaction: Recognising the value at risk from climate change .

Emanuel, K. (2011). Global warming effects on US hurricane damage. Weather, Climate, and 

Society, 3 (4), 261 -268. 

Fu, G. (2005). An empirical study on the credit risk model of household's mortgage loan. 

Hunan University, 

Hou, T., Huang, H., & Wang, C. (2019). Study of Explanatary Variables for Loss Given Default. 

Journal of Regional Financial Research No.3 , 39 -46. 

Hull, J. (2012). Risk managem ent and financial institutions,+ Web Site (Vol. 733): John Wiley 

& Sons. 

IPCC. (2014). AR5 Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change .

Knutson, T., Camargo, S. J., Chan, J. C., Emanuel, K., Ho, C. -H., Kossin, J., . . . Walsh, K. (2019). 

Tropical cyc lones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to 

anthropogenic warming. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (2019). 

Leow, M., & Mues, C. (2012). Predicting loss given default (LGD) for residential mortgage 

loans: A two -stage model and empirical evidence for UK bank data. International 

Journal of Forecasting, 28 (1), 183 -195. 

Liu, J. (2017). Evaluation of correlation between typhoon and regional economic loss: a case 

study of guangxi. Technoeconomics & Management Research (11), 120 -125. 

Lu, H. (2014). A Study of Loss -Given -Default Prediction Model for Residential Mortgage Loan. 

Paper presented at the Finance Forum. 

Ma, h. (2016). Economic loss assessment of typhoon disaster in coastal areas. Guangdong 

University of Foreign Studi es, 

NGFS. (2019). A call for action Climate change as a source of financial risk .

NOAA. (2019). International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS). Retrieved 

from https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/ibtracs/ 

PRA Bank of England. (2015). The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector .

Qi, M., & Yang, X. (2009). Loss given default of high loan -to -value residential mortgages. 

Journal of Banking & Finance, 33 (5), 788 -799. 

Regelink, M., Reinders, H. J., & van de Wiel, M. V. e. I. (2017). An exp loration of climate -

related risks for the Dutch financial sector .

Sun, T. (2019). Historical impacts of Tythoon in Chinese cities . Research Center for Green 

Finance Development. Tsinghua University. 

TCFD. (2017). The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -Related Risks and 

Opportunities 

Tian, B. (2014). An empirical study on the factors affecting the default risk of mortgage 

loans. Economic Research Guide (28), 108 -110. 

Wang, H., Xu, M., Onyejuruwa, A., Wang, Y., Wen, S., Gao, A. E., & Li, Y. (2019). Tropical 

cyclone damages in Mainland China over 2005 –2016: losses analysis and 

implications. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 21 (6), 3077 -3092. Chapter 6

106 

Xu, P., Hou, J., & Xue, Q. (2010). An empirical study on credit risk of individual housing loan 

based on Logistic model -- taking the data of shaanxi construction bank as an 

example. Financial Theory & Practice (11), 52 -56. 

Zhang, J. -y., Wu, L. -g., & Zhang , Q. (2013). TROPICAL CYCLONE DAMAGES IN CHINA UNDER 

GLOBAL WARMING. Journal of Tropical Meteorology, 19 (2). 

Zhang, Q., Liu, Q., & Wu, L. (2009). Tropical Cyclone Damages in China 1983 –2006. Bulletin of 

the American Meteorological Society, 90 (4), 489 -495. Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

107 

# Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related 

# Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power 

# Companies 

By 

Research Center for Green Finance Development, Tsinghua University 1

# Abstract 

This chapter presents an analytical framework for measuring the impact of key transition 

factors (e.g. , demand reduction, development of renewable energy technologies, carbon price 

increases, and funding c ost increases) on the credit risks of thermal power companies. We 

apply this framework to the estimation of average probability of default (PD) of representative 

Chinese companies in the thermal power sector under various climate -related transition 

scenari os. We find that under a 2 -degree scenario, the average PD of major thermal power 

companies could rise to 1 0% in 2025 and 2 3% in 2030, up from about 3% in 2020. We also 

conclude from our case study that compared with demand reduction and carbon price 

incre ases, price competition from renewables will likely be the most significant driver for the 

growing credit risks of Chinese thermal power c ompanies. 

Keyword s: transition risk, thermal power, probability of default, credit risk 

# 1 Background 

Climate transitio n and its financial impact 

The financial r isks associated with climate change have attracted considerable attentions and 

sparked extensive discussions recently in the financial sector ( Bank of England, 2018; Jun Ma 

et al., 2017; Jun Ma et al., 2018; NGFS, 2019 ). These risks include potential financial losses 

from climate -related physical events (e.g., extreme weather events and sea level rises) as well 

as climate -related transition factors, including public policies and technological changes 

facilitating the transition to a low -carbon economy. Climate -related transition risks mainly 

result from human effort s to prevent or mitigate climate change. 

In the climate transition process, actions to mitigate climate change could result in wide -

ranging impacts on companies in industries such as energy, transportation, manufacturing and 

construction. These impacts on the sectors of the real economy could be transmitted to 

financial institutions (FIs) engaged in financial transactions with them, thus lead to financia l

risks and losses. These losses and impacts received by the financial sectors could be enormous 

as estimated by several central banks and research institutions ( EIU, 2015; PRA Bank of 

England, 2015; Regelink et al., 2017 ). From a financial stability perspective, to better anticipate                   

> 1The authors of this chapter are Dr. MAJun, Director of Research Center for Green Finance Development at Tsinghua
> University , email: maj@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn ;Dr. S UN Tianyin, Senior Research Fellow ,email: sunty@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn ;
> ZHU Yun, Economist, email: zhuyun@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn. The authors would like to thank P ENG Weijian from Tsinghua
> University a nd Dr. QI Yuandong from University of Maryland for their contributions. Chapter 7

108 

and mitigate the potential risks and losses resulting from climate transition, the international 

financial community has called for actions to have FIs integrate these risks into financial 

dec ision -making. The most noticeable efforts are the G20 Green Finance Study Group ( G20 

GFSG, 2017 ), the Network for Greening the Financial System ( NGFS, 2019 ) and the Taskforce 

for Climate -Related Financial Disclosures ( TCFD Financial Stability Board, 2016 ). 

Recent developments in methodologies 

To effectively manage climate -related transition risks, the key step is to quantify the impacts 

of climate transition on financial risk metrics, such as the probability of default (PD) of loans 

and bonds and the valuation of securities, properties, and infrastructure assets. PD , as a crucial 

risk indicator for banks and bond investors, describes the probability that a borrower will be 

unable to meet its debt obligations. 

Battiston et al. (2017) conducted a stress -test study and assessed the potential losses in banks ’

equities for major European banks by mapping the assets, which the banks hold and are 

exposed to fossil fuel production sectors and energy -intensive sectors, to the potential 

devaluation impacts under various climate scenarios ( Battiston et al., 2017 ). By accounting 

both a bank ’s direct exposure to these sectors and the indirect exposures from holding 

financial products exposed to the aforementioned sectors issued by other institutions, they 

find that for the 20 most -severely affected EU listed banks, 8% to 33% equity losses could be 

expected. 

Commissioned by the UNEP Financial Initiative, Oliver Wyman (OW) developed a transition 

risk analytical approach, having been tr ial -used, by 16 international b anks to analyze their 

transition risks ( UNEP FI, 2018 ). Based on data from a subgroup of these 16 banks, the research 

shows that the PD for bank loans to the energy utility sector under the “2 degrees (2DS) by 

2040” scenario could be 2.3 -2.4 times greater than under a baseline scenario (no efforts taken 

to mitigate climate change). The University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership 

(CISL) also developed a transition risk analytical framework for asset management 

(ClimateWise, 2019 ). 

Resear chers of 2 Degrees Investment Initiative(2ii) developed a framework for measuring the 

impact of abrupt late economic decarbonization scenarios. They incorporate disorderly 

transition scenarios that do not strictly follow the conventional “smooth ” transitio n scenarios 

generated by Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) ( Hayne et al., 2019 ). They find that 

probabilities of default of bonds issued by climate -sensitive sectors in 2035 could rise by 2 -3

folds under a “too late, too sudden ” transition against to tha t of business -as -usual scenario. 

Our approach: incorporating price competition and funding cost increases as 

additional risk drivers 

Most studies in this area attempt to estimate the changes to revenues and costs of the affected 

companies or assets due to demand reduction and carbon price increase during the transition 

of energy sources. These estimated changes are then used to derive changes in valuation of 

securities and/or credit risk metrics. However, these studies have not explicitly considered 

declin es in renewable energy prices (which put downward pressure on fossil fuel prices) and 

increases in funding costs (due to credit rating downgraded, changing regulations and banks ’

internal credit polices). We believe that these factors (price competition an d funding cost 

increases) are highly relevant, and possibly more important than carbon price increases, to 

companies ’ financials and the resulting increase in credit risks. Failures to consider these 

factors may lead to significant underestimation of the f inancial risks faced by banks and 

investors. Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

109 

In our analysis presented in this chapter, we explicitly modelled the impact of price 

competition and funding cost increases, in addition to the usual transition drivers such as 

demand reduction and carbon pri ce increases, on financial performance and credit risks of 

Chinese coal -fired power generation (hereafter thermal power) companies under various 

climate -related transition scenarios. 

The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows : Section 2 introdu ces the methodology 

and general framework of our analysis and its modules , Section 3 presents a detailed case 

study on Chinese thermal power companies, and discusses the results, while Section 4 

concludes with comments on policy implications and future wor k. 

# 2 Methodology 

Risk drivers 

In this study, we took a comprehensive approach to analyzing the credit risk impact of climate 

transition on Chinese coal -fired power generation companies (hereafter thermal power 

companies). Our analysis considered five risk d rivers in assessing the financial impact on 

thermal power companies and their credit risks during the transition to achieve a 2 -degree 

climate outcome: 

First, the impact of climate -related transition on demand for thermal power companies. 

Compared to base line scenario that assumes no change s in current policies and technologies, 

the 2DS scenario requires a substantial reduction in the consumption of electricity generated 

by coal -fired power plants. This reduced demand will affect future revenues of thermal power 

companies. 

Second, the impact of renewable technology changes on thermal power tariffs. We expect 

that due to technology progress, the cost (per kW) of renewable energies such as solar and 

wind will continue to decline rapidly in the foreseeable fut ure. This will exert competitive 

downward pressure on thermal power tariffs, thus reducing revenues of thermal power 

companies. 

Third, the impact of carbon prices on the costs of energy firms. China ’s national carbon 

emission trading system (EST) is expe cted to cover all major thermal power companies in 1 -2

years and all major oil & gas companies in the next 2 -4 years. According to IEA forecast, under 

the 2 -degree scenario, China ’s carbon price will have to rise by about 10 times in the 10 years 

through 2 030 ( IEA, 2019 ). As a result, these companies will have to pay for carbon emissions 

at a rapidly rising price for a growing proportion of their output. 

Fourth, the impact of financial deterioration on funding costs of the affected companies. 

Due to the d eclining revenue s and rising costs caused by reasons stated above, these 

companies ’ financial metrics (such as cash -flow) will deteriorate and thus their credit ratings 

will likely be downgraded by banks and credit -rating agencies. Such rating downgrades w ill 

result in higher funding costs for the firms. 

Fifth, the impact of a possible increase in risk weight for environmentally unsustainable 

assets on funding costs of the affected companies. As mentioned earlier, the on -going policy 

discussions in China o f changing risk weights for bank loans to “environmentally unsustainable ”

and “green ” companies may also result in higher borrowing rates for fossil fuel companies. We 

estimate that a 50 -percentage -point increase in risk weight (from 100% to 150%) for Chapter 7

110 

“env ironmentally unsustainable companies ” could lead to an increase in average lending rate 

of about 50bps for companies in thermal power industry. 

Framework of climate transition risk analysis 

Our analytical framework for climate transition risk assessment integrates the following drivers 

of energy transition that impact companies in the thermal power industry: changing demand, 

progress in renewable technology, changing carbon price and rising funding cost. We use this 

framework to quantify the impact of en ergy transition on Chinese thermal power companies 

under the baseline scenario and the 2DS climate scenario. More specifically, we apply this 

analytical approach to estimating the differences in companies ’ financials among alternative 

climate mitigation sc enarios and the changes in probability of default (PD) of these companies 

receiving financing from banks and the bond market. 

As shown in  Figure 7-1, our framework of climate transition risk analysis consists of four steps, 

with three of which referred to as “modules ”. These four steps are: setting climate scenarios, 

transition impact eval uation, corporate impact analysis, and financial risk assessment. In the 

following section, we provide a detailed description of these steps and the linkages between 

the modules. 

Figure 7-1 Framework of clim ate transition risk assessment model 

2.2.1 Setting climate scenarios 

A climate risk analysis requires first setting the various climate scenarios of future annual 

global emissions targets and the corresponding public policies are set to achieve them. Here 

we consider two climate scenarios: the baseline and the 2 -degree scenario. The baseline 

scenario assumes that current climate measures taken in China will remain unchanged, i.e., no 

further mitigation efforts to curb demand, no change s in carbon price s, no further 

development of renewable and energy -savings technologies, and no change s in funding costs 

for thermal power firms. It serves as a benchmark for other scenarios to evaluate the variables 

under study. For the 2 -degree scenario, we adopt the IEA ETP ’s definition and estimates of 

future demand for coal -fired power generation, changes in carbon prices, and future market 

shares of renewable energies ( International Energy Agency, 2017 ). Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

111 

2.2.2 Transition impact evaluation module 

The transition impact module describes a sector ’s potentially changing performance under a 

set climate scenario or pathway compared to that under the baseline scenario. The so -called 

sector performance includes changes in demand, changes in production costs and sales prices 

un der given climate scenarios. For example, under IEA ETP ’s 2DS scenario, coal -fired power 

generation is estimated to drop nearly 50% from its current volume in 2020 -2030. In this study, 

we adopt the modelling output of IEA ’s ETP -TIMES supply model to parame terize the demand 

or production changes of coal -fired power generation and renewables (wind and solar power), 

which are further fed as inputs into the analysis in the corporate impact module. 

In addition to the impact of energy -policy changes on demand for fossil fuel energy, climate 

transition may also involve regulatory changes in the financial sector. In China, Dr. Ma Jun, one 

of the authors of this chapter and a member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the People ’s

Bank of China, proposed explicit ly that regulators should consider adjusting the risk weights 

to differentiate policies for green and environmentally unsustainable loans, as Chinese bank 

data clearly show that the default probability of green loans has been much lower than that 

of enviro nmentally unsustainable loans. In 2019, the French bank Natixis announced that it 

had launched an internal approach to raise the analytical risk weights for environmentally 

unsustainable loans and reduce analytical risk weights for green loans based on in ternal risk 

models. We believe that other banks may follow suit and some countries ’ regulators may also 

adopt such policies. These policies will result in higher funding costs for environmentally 

unsustainable companies (such as fossil fuel companies) whi le reducing costs for green 

companies. 

In applying the transition impact module to our case study, we considered the impacts of 

demand reduction and carbon price increases, based on the results of the ETP -TIMES model, 

the impact of price competition from renewables, and the impact of funding cost increases, 

partly based on the assumption of a risk weight increase for “environmentally unsustainable 

companies ” and partly reflecting the growing credit risk premium charged by banks or bond 

investors. These impacts were then fed into the corporate impact module to quantify the 

changes in the company financials .

2.2.3 Corporate impact module 

The corpora te impact module integrates the impacts of climate scenarios (e.g., impacts on 

demand and funding costs) into company financial analyses, and derive the changes in 

financial indicators, such as revenues, costs, profits, assets, liabilities, and equities an d various 

financial ratios of the affected companies. Specifically, it involves modelling the three financial 

statements to reflect the direct financial effects of climate -related transition. These outputs 

will then be used as inputs or explanatory variabl es in financial risk models such as PD models 

and valuation models to gauge impacts on banks and investors. 

2.2.4 Financial risk module 

The financial risk module could utilize various financial models, such as logit/probit PD models, 

Merton -based default risk model as well as valuation models (e.g., DCF model), and risk 

analysis tools such as VAR model. These models are used to quantify the impacts of the climate 

transition shocks on credit or market risks facing financial assets (e.g., loans, bonds, stock s, 

real estate and infrastructure assets), by integrating the results from the corporate impact 

module. For example, changes in the financial ratios of the affected companies, together with 

the economic impacts estimated by the transition impact evaluation module, can be used as 

inputs in this module to feed the financial risk models such as a PD and/or LGD model. The PD 

model estimates the change in the default risk of a loan or a bond due to factors driven by Chapter 7

112 

climate transition. In our case study, we app ly a PD model to estimate the impact of climate 

transition on default rates of thermal power companies in China. 

# 3 Case study of Chinese thermal power companies 

We apply the above -mentioned transition risk analytical framework to estimat ing the impact 

of c limate -related transition on the PD of loans to three large representative Chinese thermal 

power companies under the 2DS scenario. This is a typical scenario analysis to simulate what 

would happen to thermal power companies and to associated banks once new policies and 

technologies are introduced to mitigate climate change and to achieve 2DS target. The 

contents below are organized in the following four sections: 1) description of transition 

scenarios; 2) financial impact on the companies; 3) the PD model; and 4) the results. 

Description of transition scenarios 

In this case study, we consider two climate scenarios: the baseline scenario and the 2DS 

scenario. The baseline scenario considers the current commitments by the government to 

limit emissions and imp rove energy efficiency, including the NDCs pledged under the Paris 

Agreement, but assumes no additional efforts going forward. The 2DS scenario incorporates 

the further government actions and technological progress necessary to mitigate climate 

change and to meet the 2DS climate target. 

From the perspective of the thermal power sector, we identify the following critical impact 

factors under the 2DS scenario, namely market demand, power tariffs, carbon price, and 

funding costs. The first two factors will af fect a company ’s revenue, and the last two factors 

will largely impact the costs of the company.  Table 7-1 summarizes the assumptions that we 

use for the se impact factors under the baseline and 2DS scenario. Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

113 

Table 7-1 Summary of impact factors under various climate scenarios 

Year 

Impact factors  2020  2025  2030  Data Sources/Comments 

Demand 

change (%) 

Baseline scenario  0%  4%  2%  Five -year cumulative change (in %) in demand for 

coal -fired power generation. 

Source: Gross electricity generation by coal in China, 

IEA ETP 2017. 

2DS scenario  0%  -

16%  -30% 

Carbon Price 

(RMB/tonne) 

Baseline scenario  45  45  45  Mean carbon price in China in 2019 taken from 

www.tanpaifang.com 

2DS scenario  80  294  508 

Forecasts by IEA: IEA WEO 2019 Documentation 

Table 5 (P.18); World Bank (2019): State and Trends 

of Carbon Pricing. P.10 

Power tariff 

(in RMB/KW) 

Baseline scenario  0.33  0.33  0.33 

Tariff of thermal power in Shanxi, China 

Source: Development and Reform Commission of 

Shanxi Province, 2017 

2DS 

scenario 

Elasticity of 

thermal 

power 

tariff to 

change in 

renewable 

power 

tariff 

7%  44%  80% 

The decline in renewable power tariffs (due to 

technology progress) is assumed to exert downward 

pressure on coal -fired power tariffs with an elasticity 

shown in the table. For example, a 1% drop in 

renewable energy tariff would lead to a 0.07% dr op 

in coal fired power tariff from baseline in 2020; and 

a 1% drop in renewable energy tariff would lead to a 

0.8% drop in coal fired power tariff from baseline in 

2030. Projection of China renewable power tariffs 

for 2020 -2030 are provided by Bloomberg N ew 

Energy Finance. 

Tariff  0.33  0.27  0.20 

Funding cost increase reflecting change in credit risk 

Due to the revenue declines and cost increases 

caused by transition drivers listed above, these 

companies’ financial metrics will deteriorate and 

thus their credit ratings will be downgraded by banks 

and credit rating agencies. Such rating downgrades 

will result in higher funding costs for the firms. 

Funding cost increase due to increase in risk weight for environmentally 

unsustainable assets 

We assume Chinese banks or bank regulators will 

adopt some form of “ environmentally 

unsustainable ” penalizing policy (e.g., an increase in 

risk weight for environmentally unsustainable assets 

from 100% to 150%), which will lead to an increase 

in average funding cost by 50bps for companies in 

thermal power industry. 

Based on the above impact factors, we selected six transition scenarios for our analysis. The 

main reason for developi ng these transition scenarios is that changes to these factors may not 

occur simultaneously, as some of them affect each other (e.g., a carbon price increase will 

result in a demand contraction, so demand reduction should not be considered as an 

independen t factor if a large carbon price shock is assumed). A detailed description of each 

scenario is shown in  Table 7-2.

Table 7-2 Six transition scenarios for our case study 

Risk drivers 

Transition 

Scenarios 

Demand change  Carbon 

Price  Power Tariff  Funding Costs 

NDC  2DS -

aligned 

Carbon 

price shock 

Renewable 

price shock 

PD 

impact 

on 

interest 

rate 

Rate rise on 

environmentally 

unsustainable 

assets 

Baseline  √

2DS 

Carbon price  √ √ √ √

Demand drop  √ √ √

Impact from 

renewables  √ √ √ √

Carbon + Renewables  √ √ √ √ √

Demand + Renewables  √ √ √ √Chapter 7

114 

1) Baseline scenario 

This scenario assumes no changes to carbon price, the current trajectory of demand for 

thermal power, renewable technologies, and funding costs in the future. 

2) 2DS sub -scenarios: 

Under the 2DS scenario, we consider five sub -scenarios. All of these sub -scenarios incorporate 

the impact of financial deterioration on funding costs (i.e., an increase in funding cost for a 

year due to the change in estimated PD based on data of the previous year) and the impact of 

a risk weight increase for environmentally uns ustainable assets on funding costs. The 

difference among the sub -scenarios is that some of them consider one or two risk factors from 

the three non -financial factors (demand, carbon price, and impact from renewables). There 

are certainly other possible com binations of these factors, but we present only five to illustrat e.

i. Carbon price 

Under this sub -scenario, only the carbon price is assumed to change (based on IEA and World 

Bank projection of carbon prices for China), while thermal power demand and its tariff remain 

the same as in the baseline scenario. 

ii. Demand drop 

Under this sub -scenario, only demand for thermal power is assumed to change (based on IEA 

ETP ’s projection under 2DS scenario for China), while the carbon price and power tariff remain 

th e same as in the baseline scenario. 

iii. Impact from renewables 

Under this sub -scenario, the thermal power tariff is assumed to decline due to competitive 

pressure from lower prices of renewable energy, while thermal power demand and the carbon 

price remai n the same as in the baseline scenario. We assume a gradual increase in price 

elasticity (from about 0.1 in 2020 to 0.8 in 2030) between thermal power tariff and the 

weighted -average renewable energy price (wind and solar), and derive thermal power tariff 

projections based on tariff projections for renewables provided by Bloomberg New Energy 

Finance. 

iv. Carbon + Renewables 

Under this sub -scenario, we assume a carbon price increase along with a power tariff decline 

due to competitive pressure from renewabl es, but demand for thermal power remains the 

same as in the baseline scenario. 

v. Demand + Renewables 

Under this sub -scenario, we assume a demand drop for thermal power along with a power 

tariff decline due to competitive pressure from renewables, but the carbon price will remain 

the same as in the baseline scenario. 

Impact on financial performance of thermal power companies 

To reflect the aforementioned factors into the climate risk analysis of the thermal power sector, 

we selected three representative Ch inese coal -fired power generation companies for a case 

study. These companies are large publicly listed firms and derive their majority revenues from Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

115 

coal -fired power generation and sales.  Table 7-3 summarizes our estimates of these companies ’

key financial ratios, including asset/liability ratio, return on assets (ROA), total revenue growth, 

current ratio, operating margin and return on capital employed ( ROCE), under the baseline 

scenario and the five 2DS sub -scenarios. The results show that, under all 2DS sub -scenarios, 

all financial ratios will worsen over time compared to their initial values (in 2020) and against 

those of the baseline scenario in the s ame year. This suggests that every climate risk driver 

will have a negative impact on the financial performance of the thermal power sector in the 

coming decade. 

Table 7-3 Key financial ratios of thermal pow er companies under various scenarios 2 

> 2

The i mpact s of financial deterioration  and  a possible risk weight increase for “ environmentally unsustainable ” assets on 

funding costs  of the affected companies  are implicitly included in all the cases of 2 DS scenario. 2020 2025 2030 2020 2025 2030 2020 2025 2030 

0.84 0.82 0.80 0.74 0.69 0.64 0.73 0.69 0.64 

Carbon price 0.84 0.91 1.19 0.74 0.79 1.15 0.73 0.74 0.97 

Demand drop 0.84 0.90 1.09 0.74 0.79 1.06 0.73 0.74 0.87 

Renewables impact 0.84 0.95 1.28 0.74 0.85 1.36 0.73 0.76 0.99 

Carbon + Renewables 0.84 1.04 1.70 0.74 0.98 1.95 0.73 0.84 1.42 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price 0.84 1.01 1.47 0.74 0.95 1.64 0.73 0.82 1.19 

3% 4% 4% 4% 5% 5% 4% 5% 5% 

Carbon price 3% 0% -5% 4% -1% -10% 4% 1% -7% 

Demand drop 3% 1% -2% 3% 0% -6% 4% 1% -2% 

Renewables impact 3% -1% -5% 3% -4% -13% 4% 0% -6% 

Carbon + Renewables 3% -4% -14% 3% -10% -30% 4% -4% -18% 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price 3% -2% -7% 3% -7% -17% 3% -2% -9% 

1% 1% 0% 1% 1% 0% 1% 1% 0% 

Carbon price 1% 1% 0% 1% 1% 0% 1% 1% 0% 

Demand drop -2% -5% -8% -2% -5% -8% -2% -5% -8% 

Renewables impact -1% -5% -7% -1% -5% -7% -1% -5% -7% 

Carbon + Renewables -1% -5% -7% -1% -5% -7% -1% -5% -7% 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price -3% -10% -15% -3% -10% -15% -3% -10% -15% 

0.51 0.47 0.47 0.47 0.61 0.81 0.35 0.65 1.00 

Carbon price 0.50 0.47 0.47 0.47 0.35 0.36 0.35 0.35 0.21 

Demand drop 0.50 0.37 0.26 0.46 0.28 0.19 0.34 0.36 0.11 

Renewables impact 0.50 0.38 0.28 0.46 0.29 0.21 0.34 0.27 0.12 

Carbon + Renewables 0.49 0.38 0.28 0.45 0.29 0.21 0.34 0.17 0.12 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price 0.49 0.30 0.15 0.44 0.22 0.12 0.33 0.13 0.07 

15% 17% 17% 9% 11% 12% 17% 19% 20% 

Carbon price 14% 2% -22% 8% -2% -23% 16% 3% -24% 

Demand drop 14% 7% -12% 8% -1% -24% 16% 7% -16% 

Renewables impact 14% -3% -39% 7% -10% -48% 16% 0% -34% 

Carbon + Renewables 13% -21% -105% 7% -26% -106% 15% -20% -109% 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price 13% -15% -88% 6% -24% -108% 15% -14% -95% 

5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 

Carbon price 5% 1% -7% 4% -1% -12% 5% 1% -8% 

Demand drop 5% 2% -2% 4% 0% -7% 5% 2% -3% 

Renewables impact 5% -1% -8% 4% -4% -16% 5% 0% -7% 

Carbon + Renewables 4% -6% -21% 3% -11% -35% 4% -5% -23% 

Demand + Renewables / 

Demand + price 4% -4% -11% 3% -9% -20% 4% -3% -11% 

Key financial ratios Climate scenarios Risk drivers 

Thermal power sector 

Company A Company B Company C 

Debt ratio 

Base 

2DS 

Return on assets (ROA) 

Base 

2DS 

Total revenue growth 

Base 

2DS 

Current ratio 

Base 

2DS 

Operating margin 

Base 

2DS 

Return on capital employed (ROCE) 

Base 

2DS Chapter 7

116 

Impact on probability of default 

These ratios estimated in the above analysis are then taken as inputs into our PD model for 

estimating the probabilities of default of these companies under various scenarios. Our lo gistic 

PD model is constructed as follows: 

𝑃 (𝐷𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡 )𝑖 = 𝛽 0 + ∑ 𝛽 𝑖 𝑋 𝑖 + 𝜖 

Where Xi is the bond and firm characteristics affecting bond default probability, including 

variables such as interest coverage ratio, ROA, asset/liability ratio, current ratio and total 

revenue growth, as well as dummies on state ownership and sector char acteristics. These 

explanatory variables above are selected based on the advice from finance experts and 

preliminary model results. The main purpose of this econometric model is to provide numeric 

interpretations of the effect of changing certain factors on the probability of a bond default. 

The model parameters are estimated using five -year data on all Chinese firms that have issued 

bonds in the domestic market. 

Using the same set of variables, we build a machine learning (ML) model where the 

afore men tioned logistic regression serves as the base model to make predictions for future 

defaults. Given that the proportion of default observations is low in historical data, to ensure 

the predictive performance of our ML model, we oversample our data before sp litting it into 

training and testing sets for model building. By oversampling, we use a bootstrap method to 

draw observations from the minority class (default bonds) with replacement. We keep doing 

this until the minority (default) and majority (non -defaul t) become balanced (equal -sized). We 

utilize recall, which is defined as (true positive)/(true positive + false positive), to measure our 

model ’s predictive performance, which turns out to be reasonably good. 

Results 

PDs under various scenarios 

Figure 7-2 shows the estimated annual PD values averaged from the three Chinese thermal 

power companies under various scenarios. In all 2DS sub -scenarios , these companies ’ PDs rise 

sharply from 2020 to 2030, indicating the negative impact of each of the transition risk drivers 

on credit risks facing banks and/or bond investors with exposures to thermal power companies. 

Similarly, the PD estimates in 2025 a nd 2030 under all 2DS sub -scenarios are significantly 

higher than those under the baseline scenario for the same years. 

Under the 2DS sub -scenario of “carbon + renewables ”, which takes into account both the 

carbon price increase and price competition from renewables in addition to funding cost 

increase, the average of estimated annual PD values of the three companies surge from about 

3% in 2020 to 1 0% in 2025 and 2 3% in 2030, representing a nearly four -fold increase during 

2020 -2025 and more than eight -fol d increase during 2020 -2030. Under the other 2DS sub -

scenarios, including that considering only price competition (carbon price increase) from 

renewables, the average of estimated PDs still rise s sharply from about 3% in 2020 to around 

6% (5%) in 2025 and around 13% (10%) in 2030. The clear conclusion is that regardless of the 

technical assumptions characterizing the 2DS transition, the likelihood of credit default will 

become extremely high and unbearabl e in 5 -10 years for thermal power companies. Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

117 

Figure 7-2 Average PD estimates of Chinese thermal power companies under 

different scenarios 

Relative significance of climate risk drivers 

Our quantitative analysis under various 2DS sub -scenarios allows us to compare the relative 

significance of several energy transition factors in driving the deterioration of company 

financials and the rise in credit risks. This analysis may help companies and FIs to identify and 

prepare responses to the main sources of the climate -related risks and help governments and 

regulators to understand the most effective ways to facilitate the energy transition. 

In this section, we focus on quantifying and compar ing the magnitude of the credit risk impact 

of each of the following factors: demand contraction (for coal -fired power generation), change 

in carbon price, and price competition from renewable energies. The impacts of these three 

factors can be measured by taking the difference between the PD estimate for 2030 and the 

PD estimate for 2020 in the three 2DS sub -scenarios: 2DS (demand drop), 2DS (carbon price), 

and 2DS (price competition from renewables). Note that in each of these three sub -scenarios 

funding cost increases are built -in assumptions. Chapter 7

118 

Figure 7-3 Increase in PD as a result of risk drivers during 2020 -30 (in ppt s) 

Source: Authors’ calculation 

Figure 7-3 shows the price competition from renewable energies is the most significant driver 

for the increase in credit risks of thermal power companies. Along with funding cost increases, 

it could raise th e PD by as much as 9.9 ppts between 2020 and 2030, while that impact from 

carbon price increase and demand drop may drive 7.5 ppts and 6.0 ppts respective during the 

same period. One implication of this result is that technology progress in the renewables 

sector probably deserves more attention than it currently gets from policy makers who would 

like to see a faster pace of energy transition. 

# 4 Conclu sion 

We presented a framework for analyzing the impact of climate transition on thermal power 

companies and the quantitative results using data on sele cted Chinese companies. Our model 

takes into account not only the commonly assumed transition factors such as carbon price 

increase and demand contraction for coal -fired power generation, but also three other factors 

that we believe will become increasingly more important risk determinants: 1) price 

competition from renewable energies that will experience a rapid decline in costs, 2) upward 

pressure on funding costs due to the deterioration of company financials, and 3) upward 

pressure on funding costs as banks or/or regulators begin to tighten credit policies against or 

raise risk weights for environmentally unsus tainable assets. 

Our findings suggest the estimated PDs for the thermal power companies will rise sharply (by 

three -to -eight fold) in the coming ten years under various transition scenarios. It is a clear 

warning to FIs that exposures to environmentally unsustainable assets such as loans or bonds 

issued by thermal power companies pose significant credit risks for them in the medium - to 

longer term. Actions need to be taken soon to reduce the exposures to such risks or adopt Assessing the Impact of Climate -Related Transition on Default Probabilit ies of Thermal Power Companies 

119 

appropriate hedging strategies to offset these risks. For thermal power companies, they must 

immediately move toward green transformation, i.e., shifting their businesses away from coal -

fired power generation and increase investments in green energies. Without embarking on an 

aggressiv e green transformation, many of them will likely fall into financial distress five years 

from now. 

Although this chapter only presents a case study on thermal power companies, the research 

approach that we developed can be applied to energy companies and carbon -intensive 

companies in many sectors. Our next project is an application to analyze credit risks of Chinese 

oil and gas companies. We will also continue to refine our methodologies by working on more 

granular aspects of the scenario settings, macro -micro feedback mechanisms, as well as 

company -level responses to climate transition shocks. Chapter 7

120 

# Bibliography 

Bank of England. (2018). Transition in thinking: The impact of climate change on the UK 

banking sector .

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A climate stress -

test of the financial system. Nature Climate Change, 7 (4), 283 -288. 

ClimateWise. (2019). Transition risk framework: Managing the impacts of the low carbon 

transition on infrastructure investments .

EIU. (2015). The cost of inaction: Recognising the value at risk from climate change .

G20 GFSG. (2017). G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report 2017 .

Hayne, M., Ralite, S., Thomä, J., & Koopman, D. (2019). Factoring transition risks into 

regulatory stress -tests : The case for a standardized framework for climate stress 

testing and measuring impact tolerance to abrupt late and sudden economic 

decarbonization ACRN Journal of Finance and Risk Perspectives, 8 , 206 -222. 

IEA. (2019). World Energy Model Documentation .

International Energy Agency. (2017). Energy Technology Perspectives 2017 .

Ma, J., Henderson, I., Gilbert, S., & Cheng, L. (2017).  Improving the availability and usefulness 

of publicly available environmental data for financial analysis .

Ma, J., Zhou, Y., & Yin, H. (2018).  Environmental Risk Analysis by Financial Institutions .

Beijing. 

NGFS. (2019). A call for action Climate change as a source of financial risk .

PRA Bank of England. (2015). The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector .

Regelink, M., Reinders, H. J., & van de Wiel, M. V. e. I. (2017).  An exploration of climate -

related risks for the Dutch financial sector .

TCFD Financial Stability Board. (2016). Recommendations of the task force on climate -

related financial disclosures. Financial St ability Board, Basel, Switzerland .

UNEP FI. (2018). EXTENDING OUR HORIZONS -- Assessing credit risk and opportunity in a 

changing climate: Outputs of a working group of 16 banks -- piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations PART 1: Transition -related risks & opportunities .Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 121 

# Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 

By Francisco Ascui and Theodor F. Cojoianu 1

# Abstract 

In recent years, the financial sector has become increasingly aware of the implications of its impacts and dependencies on natural capital. Typically, these impacts and dependencies are indirect, mediated through the direct exposures of the companies and other entities to which the financial sector provides services such as lending, investment and insurance. This implies a need for the financial sector to develop new methods and tools for conducting these activities. This chapter outlines recent developments in taking natural capital considerations into account in commercial bank lending, through the credit risk assessment process. It situates natural capital credit risk assessment (NCCRA) within the context of the earlier development of environmental credit risk assessment (ECRA) and provides a detailed explanation of how NCCRA can be conducted in practice. Various studies have now demonstrated that NCCRA is feasible, using a combination of quantitative and qualitative inputs. Implementation challenges include the complexity and interconnectedness of natural capital processes, data availability and cost, spatial data analytical capacity and the need for transformational change, both within lending organisations and across the banking sector. 

Keywords: natural capital; risk; credit risk assessment; environmental credit risk; lending 

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, the financial sector has become increasingly aware of the implications of its impacts and dependencies on natural capital – the stocks of the world’s renewable and non-renewable natural assets (e.g. natural resources and ecosystems) that yield flows of environmental goods and services (e.g. timber, food, flood mitigation) which directly and indirectly underpin the global economy and human wellbeing (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2019b; Bebbington & Gray, 1993; Costanza et al., 1997; Costanza & Daly, 1992; Pearce, 1988; Schumacher, 1973). An impact can be defined as “[t]he negative or positive effect of business activity on natural capital” while a dependency is “[a] business reliance on or use of natural capital” (Natural Capital Coalition, 2016, pp. 16-17). Typically, the majority of the financial sector’s impacts and dependencies on natural capital are indirect, i.e. mediated through exposures to the companies and other entities to which the financial sector provides services (e.g. lending, investment and insurance). Historically, many of these impacts and dependencies, and the risks that flow from them, have been overlooked. Despite its importance, natural capital rarely appears on the balance sheets of corporations and has usually been ignored in financial decision-making. Ignoring natural capital ultimately translates into unpriced material risks for financial institutions that may emerge at either local or 1 Francisco Ascui is an Associate Professor in Business and Climate Change at the University of Edinburgh and an independent consultant; email: francisco.ascui@gmail.com. Theodor F. Cojoianu is an Assistant Professor of Finance, Queen's University Belfast and a Member of the Platform on Sustainable Finance at the European Commission, email: t.cojoianu@qub.ac.uk. Chapter 8 122 systemic levels. A corollary of this is that opportunities exist for competitive advantage for those institutions that are better able to assess and manage natural capital risks, and for benefits to flow to society from improved management of natural capital (Cojoianu et al., 2015; Mulder et al., 2013; Natural Capital Coalition, 2018; UNEP, 2015). In 2012, around 40 international financial institutions signed the Natural Capital Declaration, committing to integrate natural capital considerations into their financial products, and their accounting and reporting frameworks, by 2020 (Mulder et al., 2013). In this chapter, we focus on developments in a single financial sector activity: commercial lending. A founding signatory of the Natural Capital Declaration, National Australia Bank (NAB), has declared an intention to “manage our natural capital with the same diligence that we manage our financial capital” (Henry, 2016). However, they acknowledge that this will require a “significant step-change” in credit decision-making and the development of entirely new credit risk assessment methods, because “[t]o date, credit decisions to agribusiness customers have been based on standard banking considerations like cash flow, assets, risk analyses and banker-customer relationships” (NAB, 2018). This echoes broader feedback from across the financial sector that consideration of natural capital credit risks has been held back by a lack of natural capital credit risk assessment (NCCRA) methods and tools (Cojoianu et al., 2015). However, in the last few years, a number of new guidance documents, methods and tools for natural capital risk assessment have been developed. This chapter will review the current state of these. First, however, we place NCCRA in the context of earlier work on environmental credit risk assessment (ECRA) in the financial sector. 

# 2 From ECRA to NCCRA 

Credit risk can be defined as “the risk of an economic loss from the failure of a counterparty to fulfil its contractual obligations” (Mengze & Wei, 2015, p. 159). Credit risk assessment traditionally involves quantitative and/or qualitative assessment of information on borrower characteristics – such as reputation, leverage, earnings and collateral – as well as other contextual factors which are considered to influence the risk of borrower default (Altman & Saunders, 1997; Caouette et al., 2010). Banks started incorporating some environmental risks into their credit risk assessment processes in the early 1990s (Coulson, 2002; Weber et al., 2008), driven by legislation such as the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act 1980 in the United States, which imposed remediation liabilities on the owners of contaminated sites. Such legislation created a direct risk for banks taking possession of contaminated land which had been used as security for a loan (Coulson & Dixon, 1995). Banks also began to appreciate that they were exposed indirectly to environmental risks affecting the borrower, which could increase the risk of default on the loan. Finally, banks became aware of the reputational risk associated with lending to industries or activities attracting negative publicity because of environmental issues. Each of these types of risk – direct, indirect and reputational – is different in nature, requiring a distinct approach to risk assessment and management. Banks responded to the legal imposition of direct risks by undertaking rigorous environmental risk assessments of sites associated with borrowers in polluting industries; becoming more cautious in their lending; and requiring borrowers to provide additional security, guarantees or insurance to protect the lender from future liabilities (Coulson & Dixon, 1995; Delamaide, 2008). The existence of a direct risk to the lender is usually something that can be relatively easily determined and quantified (assigned a probability of occurrence and potential financial impact). Indirect risk, Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 123 on the other hand, requires a different type of borrower-specific analysis that is potentially much wider-ranging in nature, reflecting the diversity of environmental risks affecting businesses in general (Dobler et al., 2014; James, 1994). Finally, reputational risk is usually addressed through high-level responsible lending policies, rather than via explicit measurement procedures (Dell’Atti & Trotta, 2016; Mukherjee et al., 2013). Environmental credit risk assessment (ECRA) has evolved in the past three decades, although the evidence suggests that, aside from consideration of direct risk, it is not yet highly sophisticated in practice. For example, a survey of 50 European banks in the mid-2000s found that they generally claimed to take environmental risks into account in the credit rating stage, but “there is still a lack of a systematic and quantitative integration of these kinds of risk in all phases of the credit risk management process” (Weber et al., 2008, p. 157). In addition, the survey found considerable variation in approaches taken by banks, from a single assessment question to applying sophisticated risk evaluation tools (in a minority of cases). Furthermore, within the vast scope of indirect risks, banks tended to concentrate on just two areas: the impacts of mandatory environmental regulations, and changes in buyer or consumer attitudes (Thompson & Cowton, 2004; Weber et al., 2008). Both of these areas relate primarily to the environmental impacts of borrower companies, and the possibility that these impacts could result in adverse financial outcomes for those companies, which in these examples could occur as a result of government regulation or consumer disapproval (or what we term a ‘societal response’ in Figure 8-1 below). The turn towards ‘natural capital’ thinking in the financial sector since 2012 (Natural Capital Declaration, 2012) significantly extends the scope from environmental impacts to include 

dependencies . We use the term ‘natural capital credit risk assessment’ (NCCRA) to denote this enlarged scope, which primarily involves evaluating indirect risk for the lender, arising from financial impacts on the borrower. Figure 8-1 below illustrates the ways in which a borrower company can be exposed, either directly or through its supply chain, to adverse financial outcomes as a result of its impacts or dependencies on natural capital (note that each pathway is a simplification of actual causal pathways, which may contain many intermediate steps, as well as interactions with other causal pathways). Under this framing, contaminated land can be viewed as a typical example of a negative impact on natural capital (potentially affecting the quality of soil, water and ecosystems/biodiversity) as a result of pollution discharge as an 

impact driver , which can result in a financial impact on the business (e.g. through the societal response of legally-imposed remediation obligations). Dependencies are quite different, and often taken for granted: businesses may depend on inputs of natural capital in the form of land, water, energy or materials, as well as a vast range of ecosystem services, such as climate regulation, pollination, flood protection and waste assimilation. Exogenous environmental or social changes, such as climate change or deforestation, or even the company’s own impacts on natural capital (via the ‘ecosystem response’ pathway in Figure 8-1), may threaten the availability or quality of these dependencies in future. Where these inputs and services are priced (either in markets or through regulation), they may feature in existing risk assessment metrics; but the problem is that many natural capital dependencies are either not priced at all, or not priced at their full social cost (Helm, 2014; van den Belt & Blake, 2015). Such dependencies – as well as similarly mispriced impacts – may therefore carry a risk of being priced or otherwise affecting the business in future, whether directly, indirectly or through the supply chain, thus translating into indirect risk for a lender. Chapter 8 124 

Figure 8‐1: Natural capital impact and dependency pathways 

Source: Adapted by the authors from concepts in Natural Capital Coalition (2016) and PwC (2015). 

The sectors most likely to be both highly dependent on natural capital, and with high potential for impacts on natural capital, are typically primary production industries such as agriculture, fisheries and forestry (KPMG, 2014; Natural Capital Coalition, 2016; van den Belt & Blake, 2015). Unfortunately, these sectors also have highly complex and diverse natural capital impacts and dependencies, which have received relatively little attention from ESG analysts: a survey of 66 financial research providers in 2015 (Cojoianu et al., 2015) found that only nine claimed to have any methodological expertise in assessing natural capital risks in agriculture and 13 in forestry; furthermore, this expertise was limited to whole-sector analysis, rather than the ability to provide more granular assessment of risks at the individual asset level. We now turn to consider the new guidance documents, methods and tools that have been developed in recent years that are relevant to assisting financial institutions with conducting NCCRA. 

Natural capital risk assessment guides, methods and tools 

The Natural Capital Coalition was launched in 2012 as a global platform to support the development of methods for natural and social capital valuation in business. A key objective of the Coalition was to develop a standardised framework for businesses to measure and value their direct and indirect impacts and dependencies on natural capital. This came to fruition with the 2016 release of the Natural Capital Protocol (Natural Capital Coalition, 2016). The Natural Capital Protocol is a generic decision-support framework for businesses to identify, measure, and value their impacts and/or dependencies on natural capital, covering all types of natural capital assessment for all types of business, operating in any geography, at any organisational level. The framework is a step-by-step guide arranged in four stages, each helping to answer a fundamental question: ‘Why’ (framing the purpose of conducting a natural capital assessment), ‘What’ (determining the objectives and scope), ‘How’ (measuring and valuing impacts and/or dependencies) and ‘What next’ (interpreting results and taking action). As a generic framework, its direct relevance for implementing NCCRA in practice is limited. However, it serves to establish an important common platform of concepts, terminology and a standardised process for businesses to follow in assessing their own impacts and dependencies on natural capital, which should in turn make it easier for the financial sector to evaluate their indirect exposure. 22 A number of sector-specific supplements to the Protocol have subsequently been produced, including one for the financial sector (produced in partnership with the Natural Capital Finance Alliance): Connecting Finance and Natural Capital: A Supplement to the Natural Capital Protocol (Natural Capital Coalition, 2018). Again, this is a generic framework, covering    

> Environmental or social change Change in natural capital Change in ecosystem services Company or supply chain Impact driver Change in natural capital Societal impact Impact pathway Dependency pathway Societal response Ecosystem response Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment

125 In 2018, the Natural Capital Finance Alliance issued Integrating natural capital in risk assessments: A step‐by‐step guide for banks (Natural Capital Finance Alliance & PwC, 2018). This document provides a guide for banks to undertake rapid assessment of natural capital risks across a lending portfolio, and is supplemented with the online tool ENCORE (Exploring Natural Capital Opportunities, Risks and Exposure). 3 Both the guide and ENCORE focus on natural capital dependency risks only. 4 A key rationale for developing the guide and online tool was that in the past, environmental risk has tended to be assessed only at the transaction level, whereas natural capital dependencies may give rise to systemic risks that only become apparent at portfolio level, such as regional concentration risk or process concentration risk (Natural Capital Finance Alliance & PwC, 2018). Potential applications of this approach include supporting discussions with borrowers about risk management measures, and monitoring risks in a given region or market segment. A parallel report by the Natural Capital Finance Alliance and PwC (2018) notes that there are at least two broad options for a bank to integrate natural capital considerations into their decision-making: either to embed it within their organisation-level environmental, social and governance (ESG) management frameworks; or to integrate it into their credit risk assessment processes. The guide and ENCORE provide a more specific set of resources for banks to understand their exposure to natural capital risks, but with an emphasis on portfolio screening rather than individual transaction credit risk assessment. In 2019, the Natural Capital Finance Alliance launched Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment in Agricultural Lending: An Approach Based on the Natural Capital Protocol (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2019b). This is the first guide to focus specifically on how to conduct NCCRA, based on and consistent with the Natural Capital Protocol. Although its principles can be applied to credit risk assessment in any sector, it focusses on a particularly challenging sector: agriculture. Having a standardised method for NCCRA in agricultural lending is important for two main reasons. The first is that agriculture is a front-line sector in terms of both its impacts and dependencies on natural capital. Agriculture is a major driver of global land-use change, which is estimated to cause losses of ecosystem services worth US$4.3-20 trillion/year (Costanza et al., 2014). The FAO (2015) estimates the cost of the combined impacts on natural capital of eight major cereal crops and livestock production systems at over US$2.3 trillion/year, or 150% of their measured production value. At the same time, agriculture is fundamentally dependent on a range of both renewable and non-renewable natural capital inputs, from soil and water to nutrients and pollination services. A study by the Natural Capital Finance Alliance and UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre (2018) found that large-scale agriculture topped the list of all primary industry sectors in terms of its exposure to material natural capital dependency risks. Secondly, the agricultural sector needs substantial flows of new investment, on top of the approx. USD 436 billion currently invested every year (Donckt & Chan, 2019), in order to increase production by 60-100% on 2005 levels to feed a growing global population by 2050 (Alexandratos & Bruinsma, 2012; Tilman et al., 2011). Commercial bank lending has an important role to play in scaling up agricultural investment, both for larger companies and for the many small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs) that dominate the sector, with over 90% of farms world-wide being family-owned (Graeub et al., 2016; Lowder et al., 2016). For many such SMEs, commercial bank lending may be the only available source of external finance, aside from government or donor grants. Until now, however, secured lending – particularly at   

> all financial services (e.g. investment, lending, insurance etc.) provided to all sectors of the economy. It provides a common platform for the financial sector, but it does not provide any specific guidance on how to undertake NCCRA.
> 3https://encore.naturalcapital.finance/ (accessed 3 June 2019).
> 4At the time of writing (June 2020), impact drivers have recently been added to the ENCORE tool, but it does not yet provide any assessment of the level of risk associated with these. Chapter 8

126 the relatively small scale typical of loans to farmers – is an asset class that has been relatively overlooked in the shift towards greater awareness of natural capital issues across the finance sector. The most widely applied ESG risk management framework for debt is the Equator Principles, which were launched in 2003 and as of March 2020 have been adopted by 104 financial institutions from 38 countries, covering the majority of project finance debt in developed and emerging markets. 5 However, the Equator Principles are targeted at project finance transactions over US$10 million, or project-related corporate loans over US$100 million, and are therefore not normally applied to the smaller-scale lending that is more typical in the agricultural sector. In addition, the Equator Principles focus mainly on environmental impacts, not broader risks arising from dependencies on natural capital, and they do not provide any specific guidance for credit risk assessment (Equator Principles, 2013). 

Natural capital credit risk assessment in practice 

In this section we outline the key steps in carrying out NCCRA, drawing principally on the NCFA guide (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2019b), supplemented with the authors’ experience of carrying out NCCRA studies across a number of sectors, including livestock and dairy farming, cropping and forestry. 

2.2.1 Stage 1: Frame 

The Frame Stage helps a user establish why they would conduct a natural capital credit risk assessment. This involves, first of all, understanding key natural capital concepts and the business case for undertaking a NCCRA. The Natural Capital Protocol provides extensive guidance on this, which we will not replicate here. It is up to each lender to clarify their own reasons for undertaking NCCRA. For example, NAB realised that they faced commercial risks and opportunities related to natural capital degradation, as the largest lender to agribusiness in Australia, and that their credit exposure to agriculture was in fact larger than it was to the mining sector. Through surveying 10,000 agribusiness customers over four years, they also realised that natural capital was important to their customers, and that perceptions of NAB’s level of environmental commitment made a significant difference to customer satisfaction with the company (NAB, 2018). 

2.2.2 Stage 2: Scope 

The Scope Stage involves defining what should be included in an assessment. This in turn should be informed by defining the objectives and target audience for the assessment. A number of technical decisions need to be made about the scope of the assessment: for example whether to focus on impacts and/or dependencies, which value perspective to take (e.g. that of the lender, the borrower, the community or society in general), and where to set spatial and temporal boundaries. The guide also recommends considering whether the scope of boundaries should be ‘attributional’ or ‘consequential’ in nature: an attributional analysis measures impacts according to a defined scope of responsibility, while a consequential analysis measures the total system-wide impacts resulting from a decision or action (Brander & Ascui, 2015; Finnveden et al., 2009). The two approaches can yield quite different conclusions, for example about whether biofuels increase or decrease global greenhouse gas emissions (Searchinger et al., 2008). The last and most important step in the Scope Stage is to conduct a materiality assessment , in order to limit the scope of potential risks that need to be considered and measured in an individual assessment. This is particularly important for NCCRA in the agricultural sector, as a distinctive and challenging feature of the sector is that relevant natural capital impacts and dependencies vary considerably across geographies and agricultural sub-sectors (e.g. different 5 http://equator-principles.com/members-reporting/ Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 127 crops and livestock production systems). For example, a soil condition that is harmful for one crop type can be tolerated by another, and even the same crop grown on the same soil under different climatic conditions can require very different inputs. However, limiting the scope of potential risks to those which are most likely to be material is an important step for NCCRA in any sector. 6An important concept to clarify in any risk assessment exercise is that of risk itself. Risk can be regarded as referring to uncertainty of outcomes that are significantly different to expectations, whether in a positive or negative direction (Hardaker, 2000). However, common usage tends to focus on the probability of outcomes that are negative or worse than expectations, or ‘downside risks’. This also fits with credit as a form of financing that is mainly exposed to downside risks, in contrast to equity investment which is exposed to both positive and negative outcomes. Nevertheless, even in the context of lending, the concept of ‘opportunities’ can be employed to consider broader positive outcomes, beyond the improved performance of a specific loan, that may eventuate from extending credit to a borrower, such as the possibility of accessing a new market or improving the lender’s reputation. The concept of ‘resilience’ (Darnhofer, 2014) can also be useful as a way of conceptualising the value of lower risk. Materiality is another key concept that can be interpreted in many ways. The NCFA NCCRA guide, in line with the Natural Capital Protocol, defines materiality broadly, as “anything that has reasonable potential to significantly alter the decisions being taken” (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2019b, p. 11). Each lender will have to determine what it considers to be the threshold for ‘reasonable potential’ (in the definition of materiality), bearing in mind that the significance of a risk is the product of its probability of occurrence and its impact. The most significant risks are those which are highly likely to occur and the impact of which is also high (high-probability/high-impact), whereas low-probability/low-impact risks can often safely be accepted (subject to periodic monitoring, in case the probability of occurrence or degree of impact should change in future). It is important to be aware of low-probability/high-impact risks, as they may be mitigated by suitable preparation, insurance or other forms of portfolio-level diversification. Likewise, high-probability/low-impact risks should be flagged as opportunities for management intervention, and checked to ensure that they do not aggregate to higher impacts at portfolio level. For NCCRA in the agriculture sector, the NCFA guide provides a simplified high-level framework or categorisation of likely material risk areas for agriculture in general, for use as a starting point in sector/region scoping. An updated version of this is provided in Table 8-1 below. The term ‘risk area’ is used for groups of related risk factors, which in turn are grouped under six thematic areas: water; weather and climate; land and soil; biodiversity and ecosystems; energy; and air (emissions). These risk areas cover both potential impact and dependency risks that have been found to be material through bottom-up analysis across a number of different agricultural sub-sectors, from large-scale cropping to livestock production (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2017, 2019a, 2019b; Cojoianu & Ascui, 2018). It should be noted that the example impact risks describe only the potential impacts on natural capital – the likelihood that these might in turn 6 The NCFA guide recommends that a two-stage approach is taken, in which the key potential risks are first scoped at sector/region level (e.g. for wheat farming in Australia) to establish a framework within which loan-specific assessments, for that sector and region, can then be made. The first stage is similar to scoping for a portfolio-level assessment (Natural Capital Finance Alliance & PwC, 2018). The NCFA ENCORE tool provides one option for this. A bank can select a sector (one of 11 high-level sectors as defined in the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)) and, if desired, one of 157 sub-sectors, in some cases further sub-divided by production processes within the sub-sector; and then obtain a materiality assessment for relevant ecosystem services and natural capital stocks that the sector depends on. However, it is worth noting that the ENCORE tool only covers natural capital dependency risks, and furthermore, materiality has been assessed at a generic, global level rather than at any more specific level. Chapter 8 128 result in adverse financial outcomes for the borrower company (via the societal or ecosystem response pathways shown in Figure 8-1) would need to be evaluated based on the specific context. 

Table 8‐1 Example key natural capital risk areas for agricultural loan natural capital risk assessment 

Thematic area Example natural capital risk areas Example impact risk Example dependency risk Water 

Water use/ availability Water used is non-renewable, extracted beyond its renewal rate, or diverted from other ecosystem uses. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to insufficient water being available to meet target production levels. Availability has a quantity dimension (how much water is available), a temporal dimension (when water is available), and a reliability dimension (how likely it is to be available when required). Too much water can be as problematic as too little water. Risks may also be associated with the reliability of water supply infrastructure, e.g. for irrigated crops; water rights and pricing; and efficiency of water use. Water quality Negative effects on the quality of surface or sub-surface water. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to sub-optimal water quality. Relevant aspects of water quality will vary according to the agricultural system (e.g. livestock vs. crops). 

Weather and climate 

Temperature Not generally applicable, although certain activities can affect local micro-climates and/or contribute to larger-scale effects, e.g. through changing the albedo of land surfaces. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to exposure to sub-optimal temperature patterns, such as hot and/or cold temperature extremes. Extreme weather Not generally applicable, although certain activities can exacerbate or mitigate the effects of extreme weather-related events. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to exposure to extreme weather-related events such as floods, bushfires and storms. 

Land and soil 

Soil quality Negative effects on soil properties. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to sub-optimal soil quality. Relevant aspects of soil quality as a dependency will vary according to the agricultural system. Fertiliser Inputs to fertiliser production are non-renewable, extracted beyond their renewal rate, or diverted from other ecosystem uses. Fertiliser use is also a driver of other impacts (e.g. on soil quality, water quality and greenhouse gas emissions) which can be assessed separately. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to deficiency of key nutrients. Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 129 Waste Wastes produced are improperly disposed, harmful, or exceed assimilative capacity . Not generally applicable, although certain farming activities may depend on inputs which are considered wastes elsewhere, e.g. application of treated effluent as a fertiliser. 

Biodiversity and ecosystems 

Biodiversity Negative effects on biodiversity, habitats or ecosystems. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to loss of ecosystem services such as pollination. Weeds, pests and diseases Increased incidence of weeds. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to increased incidence of weeds. Animal welfare Negative effects on welfare of farmed animals. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to poor animal welfare. 

Energy Energy use Energy inputs are non-renewable, extracted beyond their renewal rate, or diverted from other ecosystem uses. The use of energy derived from fossil fuels is also a driver of greenhouse gas emissions, which can be assessed separately. Mortality, lower productivity and/or increased costs due to inadequate availability or inefficient use of energy. 

Air 

Greenhouse gas emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases may be regulated or priced at higher levels in future. Generally not applicable, as even though plants depend on carbon dioxide for their growth, it is generally not limited in supply, and hence not relevant as a dependency, except for crops grown in greenhouses. Other air emissions Negative effects from other air emissions (e.g. particulates, drift from pesticide/herbicide application). Generally not applicable, although there could be examples of one form of agriculture depending on emissions from another, e.g. wind erosion depositing soil nutrients from one location to another. 

Source: Adapted by the authors from Ascui and Cojoianu (2019b) and Ascui and Cojoianu (2019a) 

2.2.3 Stage 3: Measure and Value (Assess) 

The NCFA NCCRA guide proposes the following model for credit risk assessment (Figure 8-2), which proposes that the overall risk level for a given risk factor is a product of the current (historical) risk level, the likely future trend over the relevant timescale(s), the probability of the risk being priced (if relevant) and the borrower’s ability to mitigate the risk. The current (historical) risk level for natural capital risks is analogous to a borrower’s financial credit history: it provides a strong indication of the borrower’s fundamental vulnerability to expected natural capital risks. In the absence of a method (such as this framework) for assessing natural capital risk at the level of the individual transaction, historical natural capital risks may have been partially reflected in the lender’s overall risk premium for the sector. However, what is not necessarily currently taken into account is what will happen to the risk level over time, in physical terms (the future trend) and in economic terms (the probability of the risk being priced). Many physical risks translate directly into impacts on farm financial performance (e.g. by reducing yields or increasing input prices) and therefore do not require separate assessment of the probability of being priced, but some (often regarded as ‘externalities’) come about through being priced in some way, for example by government regulation or changes in consumer demand. Assessments of the current (historical) situation and future Chapter 8 130 projection need to be considered in combination with an assessment of the borrower’s ability to manage the given risk (step 2c), in order to evaluate the overall risk (step 3). 

Figure 8‐2: Risk assessment model 

Source: Adapted from Ascui and Cojoianu (2019b). 

The next step is to measure or assess each of these components of risk. First of all, it is important to understand what the example risk areas shown in Table 8-1 mean in terms of specific risks for the relevant sector or sub-sector. For example, ‘water availability’ may be associated with different risks in different sectors and geographies. When considering Australian wheat production, which is predominantly rain-fed, ‘water availability’ primarily concerns the availability of soil moisture derived from rainfall, whereas for Australian horticulture, access to sufficient supplies of irrigation water would be the key issue (and in some areas this would imply risks associated with dependency on surface water flows, whereas other areas would depend on groundwater resources). Each of these specific risks could be assessed with reference to different indicators, such as a variability-adjusted precipitation metric or the trend in groundwater resource levels. Identifying specific risks and indicators is an art that should be informed by science. From a lender’s perspective, credit risk is primarily concerned with the possibility of default or delay in repayment by the borrower. Material natural capital related risks are, therefore, those outcomes that are significantly negative in terms of the borrower’s future financial performance (a secondary consideration would be outcomes that are significantly negative in terms of the value of the underlying asset (such as land) offered as security). In the case of agriculture, the main determinants of financial performance of a typical farm are input costs, yields or productivity, and output prices; therefore, material risks can be identified as those factors which could produce a significant adverse variation in any of these (increased input costs, lower yields or productivity, or lower output prices). In the case of water availability for Australian wheat production, there is a strong correlation between plant water use and grain yield. Lower yields could therefore come about either if the average amount of plant available water reduces in future, or if available water becomes less reliable. This suggests that suitable risk indicators would include a quantity measure and a variability measure. In general, across the regions of southern Australia, which make up the bulk of Australian wheat production, wheat is a winter crop which relies mainly on rainfall received during the growing season (as opposed to northern Australia, where winter crops rely mainly on stored soil moisture from summer rainfall). Therefore, for most Australian wheat cropping regions, the amount and variability of rainfall received during the growing season could be suitable indicators of water availability risk (French & Schultz, 1984). Highly detailed historical data is available from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, and climate forecasts can provide an assessment of likely 

> Step 1:
> Assess current situation
> Step 2a:
> Estimate likely future trend
> Step 2b:
> Estimate probability of risk being priced (where relevant)
> Step 2c:
> Assess borrower's ability to mitigate risk
> Step 3:
> Evaluate overall risk

Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 131 future trends in these indicators. In general, future trends for most risk indicators could assessed using a variety of different methods, including simple extrapolation from historical trends, modelling and expert judgement. The borrower’s ability to mitigate risk can be considered part of overall assessment of management capability, which lenders already undertake as part of agricultural credit risk assessment. Table 8-2 provides examples of potential specific risks, indicators and data sources for assessing natural capital credit risks for Australian wheat production. 

Table 8‐2: Example risk factors, possible indicators and potential data sources for wheat farming in Australia 

Thematic area Risk area Risk factor Indicator Data sources (current or historical situation) 

Data sources (future projection or pricing) 

Risk mitigation evidence Water 

Water availability Growing season rainfall Millimetres of rainfall during growing season for the region (historical average) Regional rainfall datasets Regional outputs from long-term climatic models Farmer’s ability to use rainfall prediction tools and adapt accordingly Rainfall reliability Variability index for the above Water use Water use efficiency Total annual millimetres of rainfall divided by tonnes of wheat yield (historical averages) Regional or farm-specific rainfall datasets combined with farm-specific yield records Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to improve water use efficiency Water quality 7Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 

Weather and climate 

Temperature extremes Heat stress Total annual high degree hours (historical average) Regional or farm-specific temperature records Regional outputs from long-term climatic models Farmer’s ability to use temperature prediction tools and adapt accordingly Frost damage Total annual frost days (historical average) Extreme weather Floods, cyclones, hailstorms, bushfires, drought Number of significant events in last 10 years Regional data from government agencies or insurers, or farm-specific records Regional outputs from long-term climatic models Farmer’s ability to use extreme event prediction tools and adapt accordingly 7 Not considered applicable in this particular example, because wheat farming in Australia is primarily rain-fed and there are no significant risks associated with the quality of this water input. Nevertheless, water quality could be a relevant risk factor for irrigated wheat farms, and it is highly likely to be relevant for any livestock farming. Agricultural activities may also impact on water quality; however, in the case of wheat farming, the main water quality impact risk is of fertiliser run-off, which is considered separately under ‘Fertiliser use’. Chapter 8 132 

Land 

and 

soil 

Soil quality Soil acidity Percentage of crop area with soil pH <4.5 Farm-specific soil samples Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to monitor and actively manage these risks Soil salinity Percentage of crop area with soil salinity >100mM/L Soil organic carbon Percentage of crop area with soil organic carbon <1% in top 10cm Soil erosion Percentage of farm with ground cover <50% Farmer observations (e.g. photos); ground cover maps derived from satellite data Fertiliser Fertiliser use Total tonnes of fertiliser used divided by application area (historical average) Farm-specific records Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to monitor and actively manage these risks Fertiliser cost as % of total farm costs Farm-specific records or analyst reports Fertiliser application Partial Nutrient Balance (kg nutrient removed from soil/kg applied) Farm-specific soil samples combined with farm-specific application records Partial Factor Productivity (kg yield/kg nutrient applied) Kilogrammes of nitrates released to surface water Farm-specific records and/or environmental protection agency water quality monitoring data 

Biodiversity 

and 

ecosystems 

Biodiversity Extent and/or quality of biodiversity % of land set aside for biodiversity/native vegetation Farm-specific records and/or satellite data Scientific assessments of likely future changes in ecosystems and biodiversity; or extrapolation Farmer’s awareness of biodiversity and implementation of conservation strategies Quality of biodiversity Biodiversity maps, e.g. Atlas of Living Australia Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 133 of historical trend Weeds, pests and diseases Rate and/or severity of incidents Cost per hectare of weeds, pests and diseases control (historical average) Farm-specific or regional records Scientific assessments of likely future changes in weeds, pests and diseases incidence; or extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s capacity and equipment to respond to weeds, pests or diseases outbreaks Animal welfare 8

Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 

Energy Energy use Energy use efficiency Total energy used divided by tonnes of wheat yield (historical averages) Farm-specific records Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to monitor energy consumption and implement energy efficiency measures Energy cost Energy cost as % of total farm costs Analysts’ energy cost projections 

Air 

Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon intensity Total tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions (in CO 2equivalent) divided by tonnes of wheat yield (historical averages) Farm-specific records Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to monitor greenhouse gas emissions and implement emission reduction measures Cost of carbon Greenhouse gas emissions cost as % of total farm costs Analysts’ carbon price projections Other air emissions Other emissions intensity Total tonnes of other air emissions divided by tonnes of wheat yield Farm-specific records Extrapolation of historical trend Farmer’s ability to monitor other air emissions and implement emission reduction measures 

Source: Adapted by the authors from Ascui and Cojoianu (2019b). 

Having identified suitable risk factors and obtained data on indicators, the next step is to evaluate what that information means in terms of risk levels. Given the challenges of natural capital data collection and assessing the uncertainty of future conditions, quantitative or monetary valuations are unlikely to be feasible in many circumstances. The exceptions might be for certain narrowly defined risks (e.g. if legislation might be passed which would introduce 8 Not considered applicable in this particular example, because it focuses only on the activity of growing wheat. However, in Australia, wheat farming is often combined with livestock farming, in which case animal welfare would be a relevant risk factor for the latter activity. Chapter 8 134 a specific cost of carbon for certain on-farm emissions which were previously unregulated, this risk could be quantified and assigned a monetary value, which could in turn be added as a cost in a model of the farm’s financial situation). In many other cases, however, a qualitative assessment, based on a combination of quantitative and qualitative inputs from the measurement stage, will be feasible in order to assign a risk level to each risk factor. Ideally, over time, such qualitative assessments would be validated by back-testing against quantitative performance data, enabling the development of more robust and replicable metrics. A variety of techniques can be used to convert information gathered through the measurement stage into assessed risk levels. If data is available across a portfolio of loans, then one way of assigning risk levels may be on the basis of benchmarking against peers, with risk levels assigned to percentiles. For example, water use efficiency could be assigned the following risk levels, based on performance relative to peers: 

 High risk = below 40 th percentile; 

 Medium risk = between 40 th and 60 th percentiles; 

 Low risk = above 60 th percentile. The chosen percentile ranges should be based on evidence of impacts, such as historical information showing that the lowest 40% of farms have significantly lower yields than the upper 40%. Use of percentiles is particularly appropriate when the risk factor has a linear relationship with impacts or dependencies. For example, water availability risk, measured as millimetres of rainfall during the late growing season, was found to have a linear relationship with wheat yields in New South Wales, Australia (CelsiusPro AG, 2010). However, risks may have a variety of relationships with indicators. For example, a risk may increase sharply at certain thresholds (a stepped relationship, as described in the case of soil acidity below), or it may increase exponentially towards some limit (such as total crop failure or death of livestock). These relationships are illustrated conceptually in Figure 8-3. However, it should be noted that many other relationships are possible. The type of relationship and its critical parameters (e.g. threshold levels) may vary by sector/region. They may also depend on the materiality criteria (what level of impact or dependency is considered to be significant). Furthermore, it should be noted that in some cases the critical parameters or their relationships may be unknown, or imperfectly understood. 

Figure 8‐3: Types of risk relationship 

Source: Ascui and Cojoianu (2019b). Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 135 

Example: risk thresholds for soil acidity – wheat farming in Australia Soil acidification is a slowly occurring natural process accelerated by agriculture, mainly due to excessive use of ammonium-based fertilisers, and partly because the product removed (e.g. grains or other crops) is alkaline. Nitrogen in ammonium-based fertilisers is readily converted to nitrate and hydrogen ions in the soil. As acidity increases, aluminium becomes more soluble, resulting in poor root growth, which in turn restricts access to water and nutrients. Acidification can also make nutrients chemically unavailable, and negatively affect soil microbial activity. It is estimated that approximately 50% of Australia’s agricultural soils are affected by soil acidity, which results in over A$1.5/year in lost production (de Caritat et al., 2011; Hajkowicz & Young, 2005).The optimal pH range for wheat is around or above pH 5.5 in the topsoil and 4.8 in the subsurface – key thresholds below which aluminium begins to dissolve and starts to affect root growth (Gazey & Andrew, 2009). One technique to help overcome this risk is to apply lime, which can help increase grain yield when soil pH is a constraint. 

Figure 8‐4 Key thresholds for soil pH for wheat 

Source: Wheatbelt NRM (2013) 

While the existence of these biophysical thresholds provides a relatively clear identification of risk levels at the level of a specific soil sample site (e.g. High risk = pH<4.5, Medium risk = 4.5<pH<5.5 and Low risk = pH>5.5), further steps are required to convert data from soil samples to a risk assessment for the farm as a whole. If sampling has been done correctly, it should be possible to infer the proportions of the farm’s arable land that fall into the above three risk categories. Quantification of the yield penalty and/or cost of liming could be used to derive rules for converting these proportions into an overall risk assessment. The risk assessment model in Figure 8-2 proposes that the overall risk is a product of the risk level of the current (historical) situation, the expected future trend (including the probability of pricing, where relevant) and the farmer’s ability to mitigate the risk. The question therefore arises, how should the latter factors be considered to alter the current risk level? One approach is to use expert judgement to evaluate each stage iteratively, on its own merits. For example, let us assume that the current risk level for a given risk factor is assessed as being medium. Reputable forecasts project that the risk will increase in future, but an expert (either the assessor themselves, or a third party) judges that the risk level is still best described as Chapter 8 136 medium. Based on the farmer’s demonstrated capability to manage the risk, however, an expert (again either the assessor themselves, or a third party) judges that the overall risk is best described as low. Another alternative, which may be used in the absence of a basis for expert judgement, is to construct a risk logic table or algorithm to determine how risk assessments for each stage will be combined into an overall risk assessment. An example is given in Table 8-3, in which the assessment at each stage moderates the preceding risk level (up, down or keeps it the same). Similar tables can be constructed for assessments with more risk levels or stages. Tables such as these, or algorithms built on their logic, can help automate the overall risk assessment, but care should always be taken to ensure that they do not inhibit better judgement, where it is available. In other words, it should always be possible to over-ride the automated process, where the assessor has good reason to believe the overall risk should be assessed otherwise. 

Table 8‐3: Example risk logic table 

Current (historical) risk Future projection Risk mitigation Overall risk Low Decrease Ineffective Low 

Low Decrease Moderately Effective Low 

Low Decrease Highly Effective Low 

Low Stay the same Ineffective Medium 

Low Stay the same Moderately Effective Low 

Low Stay the same Highly Effective Low 

Low Increase Ineffective High 

Low Increase Moderately Effective Medium 

Low Increase Highly Effective Low 

Medium Decrease Ineffective Medium 

Medium Decrease Moderately Effective Low 

Medium Decrease Highly Effective Low 

Medium Stay the same Ineffective High 

Medium Stay the same Moderately Effective Medium 

Medium Stay the same Highly Effective Low 

Medium Increase Ineffective High 

Medium Increase Moderately Effective High 

Medium Increase Highly Effective Medium 

High Decrease Ineffective High 

High Decrease Moderately Effective Medium 

High Decrease Highly Effective Low 

High Stay the same Ineffective High 

High Stay the same Moderately Effective High 

High Stay the same Highly Effective Medium 

High Increase Ineffective High 

High Increase Moderately Effective High 

High Increase Highly Effective High 

Source: Adapted from Ascui & Cojoianu (2019b) .Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 137 

2.2.4 Stage 4: Apply 

The Apply Stage provides guidance on how to validate and verify the results of an assessment, and the actions a user could take to apply results and integrate them into existing processes. The end result of conducting the risk assessment may be a set of ‘traffic lights’ as illustrated in Table 4. This may be sufficient for the assessor to factor into their overall judgement (along with other qualitative inputs, such as an assessment of the farmer’s financial management ability) in order to make a decision about whether or not to offer credit to the applicant. Alternatively, a further step could involve assigning weights (for example based on expert judgement) to the different risk factors and risk levels, in order to calculate an overall risk assessment automatically. As with combining current, future projection and risk mitigation assessments into an overall risk assessment for single risk factors, any automated overall risk assessment for the applicant entity as a whole should be treated with caution, and not allowed to inhibit better judgement, where it is available. 

Table 8‐4: Example overall risk assessment                    

> Thematic area Risk area Risk factor Current (historical) risk Future projection Risk mitigation Overall risk Water
> Water availability Growing season rainfall Rainfall reliability Medium Increase Highly effective Medium Water use Water use efficiency Medium Stay the same Highly effective Low Water quality Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable
> Weather and climate
> Temperature extremes Heat stress Frost damage High Increase Moderately effective High Extreme weather Floods, cyclones, hailstorms, bushfires, drought High Increase Moderately effective High
> Soil
> Soil quality Soil acidity Soil salinity Soil organic carbon Soil erosion Low Stay the same Moderately effective Low Fertiliser use Fertiliser use efficiency Fertiliser cost High Stay the same Highly effective Medium Chapter 8

138 Fertiliser application Fertiliser run-off                

> Biodiversity and ecosystems
> Biodiversity Extent and/or quality of biodiversity Low Increase Ineffective High Weeds, pests and diseases Rate and/or severity of incidents High Increase Moderately effective High Animal welfare Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable
> Energy Energy use Energy use efficiency Energy cost Medium Decrease Highly effective Low
> Air emissions
> Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon intensity Cost of carbon Medium Increase Moderately effective High Other air emissions Other emissions intensity Low Stay the same Moderately effective Low

Source: Ascui and Cojoianu (2019b). 

Once a risk assessment framework has been constructed for a given sector/region, it should be validated, reviewed and continuously improved. Validation can take many different forms. One option could take the form of an expert review. Alternatively, a quantitative validation could be based on applying the framework to a set of loans and then comparing the performance of those loans with a control sample, over a suitable period of time. It may be possible to conduct a hypothetical risk assessment exercise on a set of historical loans (i.e. backtesting), in order to avoid the problem of having to wait a long time to see the effect of natural capital risk factors on performance. 

# 3 Conclusions 

An increasing awareness of natural capital across the financial sector is driving the development of new methods and tools for integrating NCCRA into financial services activities. This chapter has outlined recent developments in taking natural capital considerations into account in commercial bank lending, through the credit risk assessment process, with a detailed review of the guidance now available for NCCRA in agricultural lending. Whilst that guidance focuses on agriculture, the framework can easily be adapted for secured lending in other sectors, particularly other primary industries such as forestry, fisheries and aquaculture. Incorporating natural capital considerations into the credit assessment process addresses a gap in the ESG landscape around smaller-scale secured lending, and is an important step for financial institutions to meet their commitments under the Natural Capital Declaration (Mulder et al., 2013; Natural Capital Declaration, 2012). The objective of systematically assessing natural capital risks is to improve financial institutions’ overall assessments of credit risks. NCCRA extends the scope of ECRA to include consideration of risks associated with Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 139 natural capital dependencies, in addition to impacts. An improved understanding of a borrower’s risk profile is likely to enable improved allocation of capital and enhance overall loan performance, thus allowing increased finance to flow towards more sustainable activities in future. One of the benefits of a standardised procedure is that it reduces the risk of each lender developing different measurement and valuation approaches to natural capital risks, thereby obtaining different results. There is a distinct ‘public good’ advantage to the standardisation of methods as far as is practicable. It is therefore to be hoped that banks will continue to collaborate on further methodological development of the framework. Detailed studies of natural capital risks in relation to specific sectors and geographies (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2017, 2019a; Cojoianu & Ascui, 2018) have demonstrated that NCCRA is feasible, using a combination of quantitative and qualitative inputs. Many challenges to implementing NCCRA in practice remain, however. In the agricultural sector in particular, natural capital impacts and dependencies are often difficult to define and measure, because they are complex, multi-dimensional and interconnected (and sometimes still poorly understood). Identifying suitable risk measures is therefore a matter of balancing complexity and comprehensiveness with practicality: a mix of art and science. There is no definitive ‘right’ answer to the question of how to measure a particular risk, but studies have shown that there are, for nearly all of the identified risks, some options currently available to begin assessment (Ascui & Cojoianu, 2017, 2019a; Cojoianu & Ascui, 2018). Only by starting to collect such information, and then comparing it with loan performance, will lenders be able to evaluate quantitatively the effectiveness of different metrics and measurement options (Katchova & Barry, 2005). There is of course a trade-off between the cost of obtaining and analysing information, and the associated benefit – and at present, neither side of this equation has been adequately measured, with respect to sector- and geography-specific NCCRA. This is an important area for further research (Weber, 2012; Weber et al., 2010). The benefit should not only consider the lender’s improved ability to identify, avoid and/or price natural capital risk due to a reduction in information asymmetry (Akerlof, 1970), but also the potential benefits for the borrower that could result from understanding risks, and mitigation options or best practices, of which they might not previously have been aware. In general, more research is required that explores the links between natural capital impacts and dependencies, and borrower financial performance. Another challenge is that credit risk assessment is by its very nature a forward-looking process that requires judgements to be made about an unknown future. NCCRA therefore differs fundamentally from backward-looking natural capital accounting, for example as practiced under the UN System of Environmental-Economic Accounting, or SEEA (European Commission et al., 2013). Nevertheless, a forward-looking risk assessment can start from an assessment of the historical situation, and convergence with frameworks such as SEEA (for example by sharing concepts and definitions, thus promoting consistency of data) is certainly desirable. Other areas for further research and development include: 

 Developing and refining natural capital risk factors, indicators and thresholds for different sectors and regions; 

 Validating the application of the framework against loan performance; 

 Quantifying the impact of risk mitigation on overall risk impact; 

 Developing methods for dealing with interlinked risks; Chapter 8 140 

 Developing methods for weighting and combining risks into an overall risk assessment – as opposed to relying on credit officers’ subjective integration; 

 Developing methods for aggregation at different levels (e.g. diversified operations, regions or lending portfolios); and 

 Extending the framework for use in ongoing monitoring and client engagement. In order to implement NCCRA effectively, banks and/or research providers will need to start investing in spatial ‘Big Data’ capabilities, for example using Geographical Information Systems (GIS), which have not yet been widely adopted in the financial sector (Cojoianu et al., 2015). Many existing natural capital datasets are already GIS-based (e.g. rainfall and other climatic data, soil maps etc.), and by collecting and collating their own data, elicited through the lending application process (Goss & Roberts, 2011), banks may begin to benefit from the ability to detect systemic risks (and opportunities) across a portfolio, in a bottom-up manner as opposed to the top-down assessment currently offered by tools such as ENCORE. Such systemic effects are likely to be relevant because many natural capital and sustainability issues involve long-term, large-scale processes, where systemic understanding is still emergent. Ideally some form of data-sharing process – such as various initiatives underway in the area of product sustainability claims (Gale et al., 2017) – would develop, so that such information would not remain siloed within individual lenders, where its potential utility is significantly decreased. Data integration platforms could potentially integrate data from multiple external sources (such as meteorological data, soil quality, satellite data) as well as holding borrower data in confidence, which the borrower could then elect to release to different lenders or other parties as required. The Natural Capital Coalition is working with a variety of partners to address natural capital data issues through its Data Information Flow project. 9Finally, truly valuing natural capital will require radical transformations in awareness and culture both within lending organisations and across the banking sector. At present, only a handful of the world’s banks have signed up to the Natural Capital Declaration. It is likely that, as experienced in the past with environmental risk, banks may be concerned that asking their customers too many difficult questions may result in them being competitively disadvantaged (Coulson, 2002, 2009). Furthermore, at the level of individual credit assessment officers, focussing primarily on financial information is a powerful mind-set which will need to be actively transformed to a new framing that is inclusive of natural capital impacts and dependencies. There is an urgent need for both critical and empirical social science research which addresses the many challenges associated with achieving this transformation, if the goal of managing our natural capital with the same diligence that we manage our financial capital is to be achieved, in the relatively short time before that natural capital is irrevocably depreciated. 9 See https://naturalcapitalcoalition.org/projects/data-kit/ Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 141 

# Acknowledgements 

Parts of this chapter have been reproduced or adapted with permission from Ascui, F. and Cojoianu, T. F. (2019) ‘Implementing natural capital credit risk assessment in agricultural lending’, Business Strategy and the Environment , 28(6), pp. 1234–1249 © 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment; and Ascui, F., & Cojoianu, T. F. (2019) Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment in Agricultural Lending: An Approach Based on the Natural Capital Protocol .Oxford: Natural Capital Finance Alliance. Chapter 8 142 

# Bibliography 

Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3), 488. Alexandratos, N., & Bruinsma, J. (2012). World agriculture towards 2030/2050: The 2012 revision . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Altman, E. I., & Saunders, A. (1997). Credit risk measurement: Developments over the last 20 years. Journal of Banking & Finance, 2 (11-12), 1721–1742. Ascui, F., & Cojoianu, T. F. (2017). Assessing environmental and natural capital risks in lending to Australian agriculture . Hobart: University of Tasmania. Ascui, F., & Cojoianu, T. F. (2019a). Implementing natural capital credit risk assessment in agricultural lending. Business Strategy and the Environment, 28 (6), 1234–1249. Ascui, F., & Cojoianu, T. F. (2019b). Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment in Agricultural Lending: An Approach Based on the Natural Capital Protocol . Oxford: Natural Capital Finance Alliance. Bebbington, J., & Gray, R. (1993). Corporate accountability and the physical environment: social responsibility and accounting beyond profit. Business Strategy and the Environment, 2 (2), 1-11. Brander, M., & Ascui, F. (2015). The attributional-consequential distinction and its applicability to corporate carbon accounting. In S. Schaltegger, D. Zvezdov, I. Alvarez, M. Csutora, & E. Günther (Eds.). Corporate Carbon and Climate Accounting , 99-120. Caouette, J. B., Altman, E. I., Narayanan, P., & Nimmo, R. (Eds.). (2010). Managing Credit Risk: The Great Challenge for the Global Financial Markets . (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. CelsiusPro AG. (2010). Weather Dependency of Wheat Yields in NSW, Australia: Hedging Wheat Yields with Weather Derivatives .Cojoianu, T. F., & Ascui, F. (2018). Developing an evidence base for assessing natural capital risks and dependencies in lending to Australian wheat farms. Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, 8 (2), 95-113. Cojoianu, T. F., Hoepner, A. G., Rajagopalan, R. D., & Borth, D. S. (2015). Towards including natural resource risks in cost of capital: State of play and the way forward . Oxford: Natural Capital Declaration. Costanza, R., d'Arge, R., de Groot, R., Farber, S., Grasso, M., Hannon, B., . . . van den Belt, M. (1997). The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature, 387 (6630), 253-260. Costanza, R., & Daly, H. E. (1992). Natural capital and sustainable development. Conservation Biology, 6 (1), 37-46. Costanza, R., de Groot, R., Sutton, P., van der Ploeg, S., Anderson, S. J., Kubiszewski, I., . . . Turner, R. K. (2014). Changes in the global value of ecosystem services. Global environmental change, 26 , 152-158. Coulson, A. B. (2002). A Benchmarking Study: Environmental Credit Risk Factors in the Pan‐ European Banking Sector . London: ISIS Asset Management. Coulson, A. B. (2009). How should banks govern the environment? Challenging the construction of action versus veto. Business Strategy and the Environment, 18 (3), 149-161. Coulson, A. B., & Dixon, R. (1995). Environmental risk and management strategy: the implications for financial institutions. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 13 (2), 22-29. Darnhofer, I. (2014). Resilience and why it matters for farm management. European Review of Agricultural Economics, 41 (3), 461–484. de Caritat, P., Cooper, M., & Wilford, J. (2011). The pH of Australian soils: field results from a national survey. Soil Research, 49 (2), 173–182. Natural Capital Credit Risk Assessment 143 Delamaide, D. (2008). Environmental risk management: A Growing Trend in Commercial Lending. The Secured Lender, 64 (3), 56–58. Dell’Atti, S., & Trotta, A. (Eds.). (2016). Managing Reputation in The Banking Industry: Theory and Practice . Cham: Springer. Dobler, M., Lajili, K., & Zéghal, D. (2014). Environmental Performance, Environmental Risk and Risk Management. Business Strategy and the Environment, 23 (1), 1-17. Donckt, M. V., & Chan, P. (2019). The new FAO global database on agriculture investment and capital stock . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Equator Principles. (2013). Equator Principles III . The Equator Principles Association. European Commission, OECD, United Nations, & World Bank. (2013). System of Environmental‐Economic Accounting 2012: Experimental Ecosystem Accounting .New York: United Nations. FAO. (2015). Natural Capital Impacts in Agriculture: Supporting Better Business Decision‐ Making .Finnveden, G., Hauschild, M. Z., Ekvall, T., Guinée, J., Heijungs, R., Hellweg, S., . . . Suh, S. (2009). Recent Developments in Life Cycle Assessment. Journal of Environmental Management, 91 (1), 1-21. French, R., & Schultz, J. (1984). Water use efficiency of wheat in a Mediterranean-type environment. I: The relation between yield, water use and climate. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research, 35 (6), 743-764. Gale, F., Ascui, F., & Lovell, H. (2017). Sensing reality? New monitoring technologies for global sustainability standards. Global Environmental Politics, 17 (2), 65-83. Gazey, C., & Andrew, J. (Eds.). (2009). Soil pH in northern and southern areas of the WA wheatbelt . Perth, Western Australia: Department of Agriculture and Food, Government of Western Australia. Goss, A., & Roberts, G. S. (2011). The impact of corporate social responsibility on the cost of bank loans. Journal of Banking & Finance, 35 (7), 1794–1810. Graeub, B. E., Chappell, M. J., Wittman, H., Ledermann, S., Kerr, R. B., & Gemmill-Herren, B. (2016). The State of Family Farms in the World. World Development (87), 1–15. Hajkowicz, S., & Young, M. (2005). Costing yield loss from acidity, sodicity and dryland salinity to Australian agriculture. Land Degradation & Development, 16 (5), 417–433. Hardaker, J. B. (2000). Some issues in dealing with risk in agriculture . Armidale: University of New England Graduate School of Agricultural and Resource Economics. Helm, D. (2014). Taking natural capital seriously. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 30 (1), 109-125. Henry, K. (2016). Dr Ken Henry AC Speech – Advancing Australia’s Natural Capital. http://news.nab.com.au/dr-ken-henry-ac-speech-advancing-australias-natural-capital/ James, P. (1994). Business environmental performance measurement. Business Strategy and the Environment, 3 (2), 59–67. Katchova, A. L., & Barry, P. J. (2005). Credit risk models and agricultural lending. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87 (1), 194-205. KPMG. (2014). Natural Capital at Risk . KPMG. Lowder, S. K., Skoet, J., & Raney, T. J. W. D. (2016). The number, size, and distribution of farms, smallholder farms, and family farms worldwide. World Development, 87 , 16-29. Mengze, H., & Wei, L. (2015). A comparative study on environment credit risk management of commercial banks in the Asia-Pacific region. Business Strategy and the Environment, 24 (3), 159-174. Mukherjee, N., Zambon, S., & Lucius, H. (2013). Do banks manage reputational risk? A case study of European Investment Bank . Dublin: The Society of Actuaries in Ireland. Chapter 8 144 Mulder, I., Mitchell, A., Peirao, P., Habtegaber, K., Cruickshank, P., Scott, G., & Meneses, L. (2013). The NCD Roadmap: implementing the four commitments of the Natural Capital Declaration . Geneva and Oxford: UNEP Finance Initiative and Global Canopy Programme. NAB (2018). Natural Value @ NAB . Melbourne: National Australia Bank. Natural Capital Coalition. (2016). Natural Capital Protocol . London: Natural Capital Coalition. Natural Capital Coalition (2018). Connecting Finance and Natural Capital: A Supplement to the Natural Capital Protocol . London: Natural Capital Coalition. Natural Capital Declaration. (2012). The Natural Capital Declaration . Oxford: Natural Capital Declaration. Natural Capital Finance Alliance, & PwC. (2018). Integrating natural capital in risk assessments: A step‐by‐step guide for banks . Oxford, Geneva and London: Natural Capital Finance Alliance and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Natural Capital Finance Alliance, & UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre. (2018). Exploring natural capital opportunities, risks and exposure: A practical guide for financial institutions . Oxford, Geneva and Cambridge: Natural Capital Finance Alliance. Pearce, D. (1988). Economics, equity and sustainable development. Futures, 20 (6), 598-605. PwC. (2015). Valuing corporate environmental impacts: PwC methodology document. London: PricewaterhouseCoopers. Schumacher, E. F. (1973). Small is Beautiful: a Study of Economics As If People Mattered .New York: Harper & Row. Searchinger, T., Heimlich, R., Houghton, R. A., Dong, F., Elobeid, A., Fabiosa, J., . . . Yu, T.-H. J. S. (2008). Use of U.S. croplands for biofuels increases greenhouse gases through emissions from land-use change. Science, 319 (5867), 1238-1240. Thompson, P., & Cowton, C. J. (2004). Bringing the environment into bank lending: implications for environmental reporting. The British Accounting Review, 36 (2), 197-218. Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., & Befort, B. L. (2011). Global food demand and the sustainable intensification of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 (5), 20260–20264. UNEP. (2015). The financial system we need: Aligning the financial system with sustainable development. The UNEP Inquiry Report. United Nations Environment Programme .Geneva: United Nations Environment Programme. van den Belt, M., & Blake, D. (2015). Investing in natural capital and getting returns: an ecosystem service approach. Business Strategy and the Environment, 24 (7), 667-677. Weber, O. (2012). Environmental credit risk management in banks and financial service institutions. Business Strategy and the Environment, 21 (4), 248-263. Weber, O., Fenchel, M., & Scholz, R. W. (2008). Empirical analysis of the integration of environmental risks into the credit risk management process of European banks. 

Business Strategy and the Environment, 17 (3), 149-159. Weber, O., Scholz, R., & G, M. (2010). Incorporating sustainability criteria into credit risk management Business Strategy and the Environment, 19 (1), 39-50. Wheatbelt NRM. (2013). Soil Acidity. Northam, Western Australia: Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management. https://www.wheatbeltnrm.org.au/sites/default/files/basic_page/files/Acidsoils.pdf A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

145 

# A Model to Integrate Water Stress into 

# Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 1,2

by 

Henrik Ohlsen and Michael Ridley 

# Abstract 

Water stress is perhaps the most tangible aspect of climate change and involved in almost all 

companies ’ production processes. Companies that depend on water and operate where water 

withdrawals are high relative to available supply are exposed to water risk. The costs for a firm 

to obtain water needed to sustain its operations may rise abruptly or gradually, impacting its 

profitability, competitiveness and the ability to repay debt. Combining data on the corporate 

water usage per production location with costs based on site -specific water supply and 

demand conditions, our tool for integrating water stress into corporate bond credit - risk 

analysis (Corporate Bonds Water Credit Risk Tool) allows financial analysts to q uantify 

corporate water risk, assess the potential impact of water stress on a company ’s credit ratios 

and conduct company -specific scenario analysis. Fixed -income analysts and portfolio 

managers can further use his tool to benchmark companies and assets i n water - intensive 

industries, such as mining, power and beverage, on exposures to water stress. In a 2015 study, 

we applied the model across 24 companies in three sectors and found: 1) water stress levels 

in many regions are high and increasing; 2) compan ies will face pressure to internalize costs; 

3) financial ratios of companies in some sectors or regions may be negatively impacted; 4) 

financial institutions face potential risks from companies receiving their funding while having 

production in water -stre ssed areas. 

Keyword s: shadow water price , water stress, additional OPEX, additional CAPEX, physical risk, 

credit risk 

# 1 Introduction 

Water Stress and Financial Analyses 

For many companies, the access to enough water for operations is becoming increasingly 

costly, especially in water -stressed regions. On the supply side, the continuous overuse of 

water sources, ecosystem degradation and changing climate patterns with more frequent and 

severe droughts are making water an increasingly scarce resource. On the de mand side, 

population growth is contributing to rising demand from households and agriculture, and 

competition for water resources is growing within and between water - dependent economic 

sectors. As a result of these growing supply and demand pressure, wat er -related capital          

> 1This chapter was re -written and edited by Henrik Ohlsen ,Managing Director of VfU, email: ohlsen@vfu.de and Michael
> Ridley, Director, Senior Responsible Investment Specialist, HSBC GAM, email :michael.a.ridley@hsbc.com .
> 2It is a short version of the 2015 final project report ´Integrating Water Stress into C orporate Bond Credit Analysis´,
> authored by Michael Ridley and David Boland and edited by Liesel van Ast, Simone Dettling, Anders Nordheim, and Henrik
> Ohlsen. The project was commissioned by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Developm ent (BMZ)
> in 2014 and jointly led by Global Canopy Programme; UN Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP FI); and
> German Association for Environmental Management and Sustainability in Financial Institutions (VfU). Chapter 9

146 

expenditure is rising amongst companies that directly withdraw water in catchments with 

scarce or over -allocated resources. Water tariffs are increasing as utilities attempt to recover 

higher expenditure to secure supplies. Water shortag es have prompted authorities in 

economies including the U.S. state of California and the Brazilian state of São Paulo to 

introduce demand management and restrictions, which can limit production. Increasingly 

uncertain water supply and rising water costs a ffect the financials of companies, e.g., in mining, 

power and beverage industries. Additional capital expenditures to secure water supply (e.g., 

through investment in desalination), higher operating expenditures due to increasing water 

prices, production l osses resulting from restricted access to water or the loss of a company ’s

social license to operate as it competes for scarce water resources with the local community, 

can lead to lower -than -expected earnings, restricted growth, and unfavorable financial ratios 

impacting credit analysis. 

# 2 General Principle of the Water Credit Risk Tool 

This tool incorporates openly available data from the World Resources Institute on water stress 

at any location into a traditional financial model, thereby enabling users t o integrate a 

company ’s exposure to water stress into credit risk analysis. 

To achieve this purpose, the model uses a shadow price for water as a proxy for exposure to 

potentially increasing costs for water resulting from water stress. Our analysis, as described in 

the next section, found no statistical correlation between urban w ater tariffs and water 

scarcity. In the absence of market prices that reflect resource constraints, shadow prices 

provide a proxy for the magnitude of exposure to water stress. 

The calculation of these shadow prices is based on a total economic value (TEV ) concept – a

concept taken from environmental economics. Shadow water prices are calculated by 

considering the value of the alternative uses of the water were it not used by the companies 

analyzed (opportunity costs). Where location -specific water use dat a are unavailable for a 

company, shadow water prices across a company ’s assets are weighted by production or assets 

in each location in order to derive a company -weighted shadow water price to reflect its 

overall risk profile. A higher company -specific sha dow price indicates higher potential 

exposure to water stress across its operations. By using the shadow price to calculate a 

company ’s potential water use costs, water risk is introduced into the company ’s financial 

model via operating expenditures. This allows the user to measure the potential impact of 

increasing water costs on key financial ratios used in credit assessments. 

The TEV concept is used to estimate the shadow water price to provide an ‘upper bound ’ with 

which the model is able to gauge the magnitude of direct potential exposure for a company, 

and to test the company ’s financials against this exposure. The market price of water may not 

reach the shadow price, however the costs of water constraints can be internalized through 

both market and n on -market mechanisms, including capital expenditure (capex), physical 

shortages leading to lower production, and asset stranding caused by loss of water rights. A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

147 

Figure 9-1 Shadow price increases with water stress 

When the model introduces water as a factor into the credit analysis of companies, the two 

parameters that determine estimates of how a firm ’s credit is impacted are the amount of 

water the firm uses and the sha dow water prices that the firm faces depending on the 

locations where it produces. These two factors, coupled with the financial strength and 

business risk profile of each company, determine the extent to which firms are impacted by 

water stress in the mod el. 

To illustrate the efficacy of the model, the full report of the project 3 also presents analysis 

undertaken on 24 companies, eight each from mining, power and beverage industries. We 

apply the Excel -based model 4 to investigate how these firms ’ credit r atios could be impacted 

by water stress, based on the potential costs associated with their water use under current 

and projected water supply conditions. 

The model calculates company credit ratios before and after integrating the shadow price of 

the wate r used at their production locations. For some firms, using the full value of water use 

accounting for scarcity and population factors could significantly impact their credit ratios, 

which could lead to a rating downgrade and an adjustment in the value of their bonds. 

# 3 Methodology 

Estimating shadow water price 

The financial model provided is an open -source Microsoft Excel -based tool. It extends 

traditional credit analysis, which evaluates firms ’ business and financial risks, to include water 

stress. Our mod el calculates five credit ratios for companies, but unlike traditional credit 

analysis tools, the Corporate Bonds Water Credit Risk Tool (CBWCR Tool) can also model firms       

> 3See the report (GIZ/NCD/VfU, 2016 ) at http://vfu -mediathek.de/mediathek/entry/2492/#gv -entry -reviews .
> 4See the excel -based model (GIZ/NCD/VfU, 2016) at http://vfu -mediathek.de/mediathek/entry/3527/#gv -entry -reviews .Chapter 9

148 

being impacted by TEV associated with the water used for business operations, defined in this 

case as the ‘shadow price ’. 

Water prices are a lagging indicator of water risk. Water governance is highly politicized and 

current water tariffs are not a reliable indicator for local supply -demand dynamics. The price 

of municipal water for 355 c ities around the world ranged from US$0.0/m 3 to US$4.5/ m 3 in 

2014, according to a Water Tariff Survey published by Global Water Intelligence (2014) . Our 

analysis found no statistical correlation between these urban water tariffs and water scarcity 

levels at the 355 locations, based on data from the World Resources Institute. Current water 

costs are inadequate as indicators of exposure s to water risk. The location -specific shadow 

water price provides an appropriate proxy for water stress, as depicted in  Figure 9-2.

Figure 9-2 Estimated shadow prices of water in global cities providing a proxy for 

water stress across geographies 

Source 

：WRI Aqueduct. Shadow water prices from DBRM Associates. 

Our model aims to overcome this by using the TEV concept to capture the full economic value 

of water to reflect supply constraints and demand pressures. The evaluat ion of alternative 

allocations of water among competing users requires costs and benefits to be expressed in 

monetary terms, using prices and quantities. The TEV concept covers the external benefits 

that water provides to society and ecology, in addition t o the private benefits enjoyed by water 

consumers. Since observed prices for water often fail to reflect actual economic values, for 

example , due to government regulations and subsidies, observed market prices need to be 

adjusted to accommodate distortions .5 In some cases, there may be no market price, so the 

value must be estimated. 

The TEV concept 6 attempts to capture the benefits that water provides, in addition to the 

private benefits enjoyed directly by water consumers. We estimate the use value of fo ur 

different “services ” provided by water, namely water ’s value for agriculture, domestic supply, 

human health and environmental services 

Figure 9-3 sh ows how we capture the total economic value. The four services agricultural 

values, domestic supply values, human health impacts and environmental impacts are the four       

> 5UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division, System of Environmental -Economic Accounting for
> Water ,2012.
> 6See Appendix A in the full report (Ridley & Boland, 2015 ).Copenhagen $ 7.38/m ³
> (TEV: $3.99) Mumbai $ 0.22/m ³
> (TEV: $13.58) Mexico-City $ 0.95/m ³
> (TEV: $8.66) Vancouver $ 2.22/m ³
> (TEV: $2.01) Sao Paulo $ 1.28/m ³
> (TEV: $5.33)

A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

149 

dependent variables in the TEV equation ( Table 9-1). The values for domestic supply are 

calculated on a simple assumption that value increases with water scarcity. The two 

independent variables of the TEV are water stress and population. 

Figure 9-3 Components of the shadow Water Price 

Source: Ridley, M. and D. Boland (2015) 

The model sums these four values to arrive at an overall shadow water price: 

Shadow Water Price = (2W/5) + P(4/5(W + 1)) + PD((2 x 10↑ - 8W ↑ 2 + 10↑ - 8W + 10 ↑ - 7)) 

+ P(W/10) x (0.031W ↑2 + 0.015W) 7’8

The population weighting and average value of a DALY are in the model itself and can be 

adjusted by the user as required.        

> 7Abbreviations: W= baseline water stress score ,PD = population density, P = population weight, D = value of DALY
> (diseas e-adjusted life years)
> 8For more details of how this formula is derived, please refer to the full report (Ridley & Boland, 2015 ).

Water Stress 

# Agricultural 

# values 

# Domestic supply 

# values 

# Human health 

# impacts 

# Environmental 

# impacts 

# Population weighting Chapter 9

150 

Table 9-1 Explanation of the dependent variables in our TEV calculation 

Depend ent 

variable s

Types of 

water use  Equation 

Independent 

variables impacting 

dependent variable 

Method for calculating 

Agricultural 

value  Consumptive  (2W/5)  Baseline water stress 

Meta -analysis based on estimates of 

value of agricultural water use from 

study sites in published research, to 

infer values for agricultural water use 

at new locations (“benefits transfer”). 

To minimise variation ac ross methods 

and significant uncertainty in values 

normalized across years for inflation 

and pricing parity, the re search was 

restricted to studies published from 

2000 to 2015. 

Domestic 

supply price 

Non -

consumptive  P (4/5(W+1))  Baseline water 

stress, population 

The values of domestic supply are 

calculated on an assumption that value 

increases with water scarcity, with 

values ranging from US$0/m3 to 

US$5/m3. Values are based on the 

range of urban prices in the Global 

Water Intelligence 2014 tariff surve y

data 

Human health  Non -

consumptive 

PD (2x10 -8

xW2 + 10 -8 x 

W+ 10 -7) 

Baseline water 

stress, population 

Calculated using life -cycle analysis 

impact factors developed by Pfister et 

al (2009). Includes a value for 

‘disability adjusted life years’ (DALY), 

per m3 of water consumption. 

Environmenta 

l impact 

Non -

consumptive 

P (W/10) x 

(0.031W2 + 

0.015W) 

Baseline water 

stress, population 

Calculated using life cycle analysis 

impact factors developed by Pfister et 

al (2009). 

Water stress, the “W” in the equation, is one of the two independent variables in our 

calculation of shadow water price. The second independent variable is population size within 

a 50 -kilometer (km) radius. Areas that have high levels of water stress and are densely 

populated will have relatively high shadow water prices, reflecting expectations of increased 

costs to secure supplies and greater competition for resources. 

Using the TEV concept to calculate the US$/m 3 shadow water price, indexed to water stress, 

is a systematic appr oach to integrating water risk into financial analysis (Equarius Risk Analytics, 

2015) .

The model includes the shadow water price to estimate the potential scale of the financial 

impact of water constraints on companies with operations in water -stressed ca tchments. 

Integrating shadow prices of water in CBWCR tool 

The CBWCR tool calculates company credit ratios before and after integrating the shadow price 

of the water used at production locations. A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

151 

In a 2015 study, we analyzed 24 companies from three different industries – eight each from 

the mining, power and beverage. Each company analyzed in the model is shown on a separate 

sheet in the  Excel file . The top half of each Excel sheet is a standard credit analyst ’s company 

model. The model contains Profit and Loss, Cash Flow and Balance Sheet information for each 

company for 2013 -2017. These three interlinked statements generate five key credit ratios 

used to estimate the credit strength of the company. 9 Calculating these adjusted credit ratios, 

on the assumption that the firms were being asked to pay a higher price for wa ter in line with 

the shadow price at their main locations, allowed credit analysts to see by how much the firms ’

credit ratios might deteriorate over 2013 -2017. This allowed analysts to consider whether this 

might lead the rating agencies to downgrade the companies ’ credit ratings, or lead to a fall in 

the value of the firms ’ bonds. 

What is novel about this model is the inclusion of location -specific information about the firms ’

operations and water use. This is found in the lower part of each company sheet . The model 

pulls in data on water stress held by the World Resources Institute (WRI) and applies a formula 

to calculate shadow prices at different locations around the world, in the years 2010, 2020, 

2030 and 2040. The tool enables users to calculate the shadow water price at all land -based 

locations for these years. 

With the mining companies, we ascertain the location of all their main mines, while for the 

power industry we identify the location of power generation plants. Based on the longitude 

and latit ude of each site, the model identifies the level of water stress at that location using 

WRI data, and then calculates the shadow water price to identify the value of water linked to 

water stress at that specific location. 

The shadow water price at all of a firm ’s main locations is then weighted by the amount of 

water each company uses at each location, so that the model calculates a blended or average 

shadow water price for each company. Suppose a mining company uses 60 percent of its water 

at mine A (where the shadow price is US$10.00/m 3) and 40 percent of its water at mine B 

(where the shadow price is US$2.00/m 3), the company ’s blended shadow price would be 

(US$10 x 0.6) + (US$2 x 0.4) = US$6.80. 

Most firms only discloses information about their overall a ggregate water use per annum: 

most do not break down water use by location. So, for many companies we use proxies such 

as reserves for mining, installed capacity for power utilities and production data for beverages 

to estimate the blended shadow water pri ces relevant to the companies ’ operations (for 

further details on this see Appendix B of the  full report ). Users of the tool may wish to use 

alternative produ ction -related proxies to estimate the breakdown of water use by location. 

The blended shadow price for each company is then multiplied by the amount of water that 

the company uses in a year. This calculates each company ’s total shadow water costs to reflect 

both its exposure to water -stressed areas and its dependence on access t o water resources. 

This shadow water cost appears as a new “water OPEX line ” on the company ’s Profit and Loss 

account and thus affects the credit ratios. The overall process is sketched out in  Figure 9-4.     

> 9For a full description see Appendix B of the full report (Ridley & Boland, 2015). Chapter 9

152 

Figure 9-4 Three sources of data to introduce TEV of water into corporate bond 

credit analysis 

Location -level vs . country -level water price 

The model uses a slightly different methodology for beverage companies, largely because they 

operate so many production sites, bottling plants, distilleries and breweries around the world. 

So rather than accounting for the exact locations of all these ope rations, their blended shadow 

water price is calculated at a country level. Analysts assess the proportion of their operations 

in different countries, then assign a country -specific shadow price (as opposed to a locational 

price to the site). This approach reflects the time constraints that analysts are likely to face, 

but the model could be adjusted to create a more granular, site -specific evaluation in countries 

with significant production sites and areas under water stress. 

This shadow price is then wei ghted according to one of the following criteria, based on a 

hierarchy of information: 

• How much product, in terms of hectolitres, does the company produce per country? 

• If the above information is not available, the weighting is based on the number of 

fac tories or distilleries or breweries operated per country. 

• If neither piece of information is provided, the weighting is based on the breakdown 

of annual revenues by country. 

This simplified approach enables a high -level benchmarking on exposure to water stress. 

Further sub -national research could then be conducted where a company is identified as at 

risk from water stress. Of the eight beverage companies analyzed, two firms, namely A -Busch 

and Heineken, specify the amount of product they produce by countr y in terms of hectolitres. 

One firm, namely Nestlé, specifies the number of production sites it operates in each country. 

The remaining five firms break down their sales by country. For further guidance on how to 

use the model, see Appendix B in the  full report .A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

153 

# 4 Case studies 

Assessment of exposure to water stress 

For the 24 companies in mining, power and beverage industries analyzed in our project, we 

found t hat there was a large difference in how exposed they might be to water stress. Many 

of the firms operate in regions of water stress. Results of the model ’s application do not 

provide a forecast of actual impacts on the financials of specific companies or t imings of costs 

being internalized. They provide a proxy to benchmark companies on their exposure to 

localized water stress across their operations worldwide, with risk aggregated at a company 

level so that it can be integrated into credit analysis. 

The m odel increases the operating expenditure ( OPEX ) that each firm faces annually, on the 

assumption that the firm must pay to access water at all of its main operating sites, at a cost 

in line with our estimate of the shadow water price at these locations. Gi ven this assumption, 

the firm face s higher OPEX costs every year; this reduces their free cash flows and their key 

credit ratios like Net debt/EBITDA can deteriorate. 

Six of the mining companies analyzed are investment -grade and two are non -investment -grad e

– Fortescue and Vedanta. Six of the power companies are investment -grade, while two, Consol 

Energy and Eskom, are non -investment -grade. All the beverage companies were investment -

grade. 10 

> 10 Based on data as of June 2015.

Chapter 9

154 

Table 9-2 Ratings of 24 companies from three industrial sectors, as at 17 July 2015 

Sector  Company  B'berg Equity (Ticker ) HQ  Market  Moody ’s

(Cap. Billion ) S&P 

Mining  Anglo 

American  AAL_LN Equity  London, UK  £12.4  Baa2 Neg  BBB -

Mining  Barrick Gold  ABX_US Equity  Toronto, Canada  $10.7  Baa2 Neg  BBB -

Mining  BHP Billiton  BHP_US Equity  Melbourne, 

Australia  £67.3  A1  A+ Neg 

Mining  Fortescue 

Metals  FMG_AU Equity  Perth, Australia  AUD 5.3  Ba2 Neg  BB Neg 

Mining  Glencore  GLEN_LN Equity  Zug, Switzerland  £31.9  NR  BBB 

Mining  Rio Tinto  RIO_LN Equity  London, UK  £47.4  A3  A-

Mining  Vale  VALE_US Equity  Rio de Janeiro, 

Brazil  $27.4  Baa2 Neg  BBB 

Neg 

Mining  Vedanta  VED_LN Equity  Mumbai, India  £1.3  Ba3 Neg  BB - Neg 

Power  Consol Energy  CNX_US Equity  Canonsburg, PA, 

USA  $4.2  B1  BB 

Power  EdF  EDF_FP Equity  Paris, France  £40.2  A1 Neg  A+ Neg 

Power  Eskom  1001Z_SJ Equity  South Africa  Not listed  Ba1  BB+ 

Neg 

Power  GdF  GSZ_FP Equity  Paris, France  £43.2  A1 Neg  A

Power  RWE  RWE_GY Equity  Dusseldorf, 

Germany  £12.1  Baa1 Neg  BBB+ 

Neg 

Power  Sempra 

Energy  SRE_US Equity  San Diego, USA  $25.7  Baa1  BBB+ 

Power  Southern 

Company  SO_US Equity  Atlanta, GA, USA  $39.9  Baa1  A Cwn 

Power  Vattenfall  VATT_SS Equity  Stockholm, 

Sweden  Not listed  A3  A-

Beverages  Anheuser -

Busch  ABI_BB Equity  Leuven, Belgium  £190.5  A2 Pos  A

Beverages  Carlsberg  CARLB_DC Equity  Copenhagen, 

Denmark  DKK 96.8  Baa2 Neg  NR 

Beverages  Diageo  DGE_LN Equity  London, UK  £48.7  A3  A-

Beverages  FEMSA  FEMSAUBD_MM Equity  Monterrey, 

Mexico 

MXN 

512.9  NR  A-

Beverages  Heineken  HEIA_NA Equity  Amsterdam, 

Netherlands  £42.2  Baa1  BBB+ 

Beverages  Nestl é NESN_VX Equity  Vevey, 

Switzerland  CHF 232  Aa2  AA 

Beverages  Pernod Ricard  RI_FP Equity  Paris, France  £29.2  Baa3 Pos  BBB -

Beverages  SAB Miller  SAB_LN Equity  London, UK  £56.8  A3  A-

Source: Company Reports, Bloomberg 

When we introduce water as a factor into the credit analysis of companies, the two parameters 

that determine how a firm ’s credit is impacted are the amount of water the firm uses, and the 

overall blended shadow water pri ce that applies to the water used across the firm ’s sites. A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

155 

Table 9-3 Data on the 24 firms’ water use in 2013 and the changes of blended 

shadow prices betwe en 2010 and 2040 

Source: Company Reports, Bloomberg, GIZ/NCD/VfU/DBRM Associates 

Table 9-3 sets out the amount of water the firms used in thousand cubic metres, in 2013 

(column 3) and the blended shadow water prices using 2010 and 2040 scarcities for each 

company in 2013 (columns 4 and 5). 

The companies in  Table 9-3 are ranked in terms of the sizes of their annual 2013 water 

consumption. This shows a wide range in the amount of wa ter used by the 24 companies, from 

Glencore, which used 969 million cubic meters (m 3) in 2013, to Pernod Ricard, which used 2.4 

million m 3. Two other companies used 500 million m 3 or more in 2013 – Rio Tinto and EDF. 

Fifteen of the 24 firms used more than 100 million m 3 of water in 2013. Together, the 24 

companies use more than 5.3 billion cubic meters of water annually, almost as much as the 

annual freshwater withdrawals of a country such as Norway (6.4 billion m3/annum) ( Bank, 

2020 ). 

EDF is one of the top three companies in water consumption. This is significant because the 

model only considers consumptive water use, while many utilities including EDF also use a 

great deal of water in a non -consumptive way. For example, for cooling pow er plants, where 

water is extracted from rivers or seas, run over power plants and pipes, and then returned to 

water courses. The model only applies shadow prices to consumptive water use, meaning 

water that is not returned to the rivers or seas. None of t he beverage firms directly used more 

than 65 million cubic meters in 2013. 

Since the majority of the beverage firms ’ water use is through their supply chains, they may 

be indirectly exposed to water stress through the products that they buy (e.g., sugar, fruit, 

barley, packaging) ( Water Footprint Network, 2019 ). The model only integrates annual direct 

water use by companies themselves, as reported by the companies ( Ethical Consumer, 2013 ). Company Sector Water Use 2013 TEV 2010 TEV 2040 %age Change Between Thousand Cubic Metres $/m 3 $/m3 2010 and 2040 TEVs                                                                                                                          

> Glencore Mining 939,000 4.33 5.41 24.9% Rio Tinto Mining 731,000 8.67 8.70 0.3% EdF Power 500,000 4.10 4.38 6.8% Southern Power 388,269 2.62 2.73 4.2% Vale Mining 373,800 1.08 1.13 4.6% BHP Billiton Mining 347,500 6.41 6.44 0.5% Vedanta Mining 344,849 2.46 3.76 52.8% Eskom Power 334,275 4.61 5.25 13.9% RWE Power 314,900 3.55 3.84 8.2% Anglo American Mining 201,490 1.41 1.89 34.0% Vattenfall Power 162,000 4.30 4.28 -0.5% Fortescue Mining 139,420 0.66 0.66 0.0% GdF Power 132,600 5.80 6.39 10.2% Sempra Power 120,760 8.81 8.62 -2.2% Barrick Gold Mining 100,909 4.16 4.55 9.4% SAB Beverages 62,100 3.24 3.68 13.6% Nestle Beverages 61,065 4.44 4.82 8.6% A Busch Beverages 39,447 4.15 4.46 7.5% Heineken Beverages 27,670 3.42 3.79 10.8% Consol Power 16,473 3.67 4.03 9.8% Femsa Beverages 14,950 4.67 5.38 15.2% Carlsberg Beverages 14,300 4.23 4.58 8.3% Diageo Beverages 5,581 4.56 4.95 8.6% Pernod Ricard Beverages 2,406 4.40 4.66 5.9% Chapter 9

156 

Whereas most of the water used by mining and power companies is di rectly consumed in 

operations, direct water use may represent just 1 percent of total water use by beverage 

companies. Since beverage companies do not disclose the volumes of water used by their 

suppliers, we have not included this in the analysis. The mod el excludes indirect water use 

because this would need to use modelled estimates based on industry averages. The analysis 

may therefore underestimate the level of water risk in the beverage industry. 

Co mpany -wide shadow prices calculated for the firms in 2010 range from US$0.66/m 3 for 

Fortescue Metals to US$8.81/m 3 for Sempra Energy. Thirteen of the companies face weighted 

average shadow prices above US$4.00/m 3. The distribution of the 2010 shadow prices within 

the mining industry is wide. Large mining com panies such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton face 

high estimated shadow prices of US$8.67/m 3 and US$6.41/m 3 respectively, while the 2010 

shadow price for Anglo American is estimated at US$1.41/m 3.

Beverage companies ’ 2010 shadow prices are found in the middl e or towards the top of Table 

3. The 2010 shadow price ranges narrowly from US$4.67/m 3 for Femsa to US$3.24/ m 3 for SAB 

Miller. Given the large number of sites operated by beverage companies, the blended shadow 

prices in this industry are based on average country -level water stress data, which may mask 

variations in site -specific water stress within countries. 

For 22 of the companies analyzed, the blended shadow water price rises between 2010 and 

2040. The shadow prices tend to be higher in 2040 than in 20 10, because water stress and 

population are projected over time to rise in many locations. Water stress may be exacerbated 

in some regions as climate change leads to changes in rainfall patterns and more frequent and 

severe droughts. However, water availab ility is projected to increase in some locations as 

rainfall patterns change over time. 

Scenario analysis to model current and future risks 

In our study , we model the potential implications of three scenarios for the 24 companies: 

1. Exposure to current wat er stress: firms pay the 2010 shadow prices in 2014, 2015, 

2016 and 2017; 

2. Exposure to future water stress: firms pay the 2040 shadow prices in 2014, 2015, 2016 

and 2017; 

3. Business as usual (BAU) without water stress: companies do not face the shadow 

prices of water. 

In all three scenarios, we assume all of the companies see their annual revenues grow by 3 

percent per year, and their general annual COGS (cost of goods sold) rise by 2 percent per 

annum. We also assume that water use grows at 2 percent per annum and water prices grow 

at 3 percent per annum. 11 

Scenarios 1 and 2 model the impacts of shadow prices of water on the financial ratio 

projections for these firms, compared to Scenario 3. The firms ’ Net Debt/EBITDA ratios have 

increased (deteriora ted), as they bec ome more leveraged; their EBITDA/Revenue ratios have 

fallen (deteriorated) as their margins shr in k.  

> 11 These assumptions are made for all the three scenarios in case business grows as business as usual. A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis

157 

Net Debt/EBITDA ratios estimated to be significantly exposed to the internalization of shadow 

prices for water include four mining compani es: Barrick Gold, Vedanta, Rio Tinto and Glencore, 

and four power companies namely Eskom, RWE, Sempra and Southern. 

Although credit ratios are important, there is no direct or one -to -one relationship between 

credit ratios and credit ratings. Credit ratios are only one part of the way in which credit 

analysts rate companies. Credit analysis involves financial risk analysis, looking at credit ratios, 

as well as business risk analysis, which involves looking at the competitiveness of an industry 

in which a fi rm operates. How strong a company ’s credit ratios need to be to achieve a 

particular credit rating depends in part on the business risks that it faces; this in turn is largely 

shaped by the industrial sector in which a firm operates. 

How do the mining, po wer and beverage industries compare on business risks? Mining is 

viewed as moderately high -risk, given the industry ’s high cyclicality and the fairly intense level 

of competition. By contrast, utilities tend to be low - risk, due to their industry ’s low cyc licality 

and their natural monopoly status. The beverage industry lies between mining and utilities in 

terms of business risk, given its low cyclicality and low competition. 

Because mining firms face greater business risks than both beverage firms and uti lities, mining 

firms need to have strong credit ratios to earn the same credit rating as either a beverage firm 

or a utility. In the mining space, companies probably need to have a Net Debt/EBITDA ratio of 

below 4.0x to be rated investment -grade. A mining company would probably need a Net 

Debt/EBITDA ratio of below 2.0x to be rated in the Single A rating category. 

In contrast, it can be assumed that power companies with Net Debt/EBITDA above 5.5x, are 

not likely to be investment -grade, and that utilities w ith Net Debt/EBITDA above 3.5x are likely 

to be rated below the Single A rating category. Chapter 9

158 

Table 9-4 Estimation of the firms´net debt/EBITDA in 2017 in three scenarios 

Source: GIZ/NCD/VfU Corporate Bonds Wa ter Credit Risk Tool 

# 5 Conclusion 

Applications 

The CBWCR tool is applicable to both credit analysts and portfolio managers in the bond 

markets on both buy and sell sides. 

Credit analysts can use the tool to cover mining, power and beverage companies or other 

industries heavily dependent on water with outstanding bonds. Analysts can source corporate 

location -specific water data and apply the tool to analyze specific companies, potentially 

extending or adjusting quantitative analysis. Results can be used f or selecting companies or 

issues for engagement, or to follow up with further research on the company ’s water 

management. 

Other bond professionals in origination and syndication could use the tool to analyze the 

potential impact of water scarcity on the is suers. Rating agencies may use the tool to consider A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

159 

the potential impact of water stress on credit ratings, while credit risk managers can apply it 

to analyzing whole portfolios of bonds. 

Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) analysts can use the too l to identify and engage 

firms “at risk ” from water stress by encouraging more disclosures and management practices 

on water. The model could provoke research into regulatory frameworks, water policies and 

infrastructure relevant to preparedness for water scarcity. 

Companies themselves could use the tool to consider the potential impact of water stress on 

their own credit ratings. They should be able to source good data on water usage, the location 

of their operations, water prices, and data about capex re sponses to higher water prices. 

Limitations and outlook 

There are three basic limitations in the model ’s current form. First, it only considers direct 

water usage. Because firms in the mining and power industries are heavy users of water, the 

model works well when analyzing these firms. But in other sector like retail, where direct water 

use levels are low, there is a significant reliance on water usage higher up the supply chain. 

Currently the model does not take this type of indirect water usage into acc ount. 

A second limitation is that the model relies on firm providing information on the geographic 

locations of their main operating sites, and their annual water consumption. This information 

is difficult to find in some industries, such as data centers. Data centers can use significant 

power and water, but information on their location and water use can be difficult to obtain. 

The third shortfall is that it only assumes firms are impacted by having to pay a higher price 

for water over time. However, in so me extreme circumstances , firms could be denied access 

to water completely if there was a falling -out with the population around an operating site, or 

if water reserves became unavailable. 

As the investment community becomes more aware of water as an issue of stewardship, 12 

there are more areas and aspects in which the methodology discussed in this article can be 

applied and improved.     

> 12 A new investor initiative, named “Valuing Water Finance Task Force”, online at https://www.ceres.org/valuing -water -
> finance -task -force , was founded in early 2020 with the goal to engage with corporate leaders on sustainable water
> practices. Chapter 9

160 

# Bibliography 

Equarius Risk Analytics,  http://www.equariusrisk.com/2015/01/24/business -water -risk -can -

shadow -risk -pricing -inform -capital -markets/  accessed 23 June 2015. 

Ethical Consumer, The water footprint of soft drinks, Sector Report on the Soft Drinks 

Industry, 2013 - Economic Accounting f or Water 

GIZ/NCD/VfU (2016) Integrating Water Stress in Corporate Bond Analysis, full report, 

available online at  http://vfu -mediathek.de/mediathek/entry/2492/#gv -entry -

re views 

GIZ/NCD/VfU (2016) Integrating Water Stress in Corporate Bond Analysis, full report, 

available online at  http://vfu -mediathek.de/mediathek/entry/3527/#gv -entry -

revie ws 

Ridley, M. and D. Boland (2015). "Integrating water stress into corporate bond credit 

analysis." German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development 

(BMZ).  https://vfu . de/ressourcen/publikationen/integrating -water -stress -report -

summary_final.pdf 

Global Water Intelligence (2014), Water for Mining in Latin America. 

Water Footprint Network,  http://temp.wa terfootprint.org/?page=files/Softdrinks , accessed 

23 June, 2020. 

Water Valuing Finance Task Force,  https://www.ceres.org/valuing -water -finance -task -force ,

accessed 23 June, 2020. 

The Wo rld Bank Data Bank, online at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ER.H2O.FWTL.K3 

Water Footprint Network,  http://temp.waterfootprint.org/?page=files/Softdrinks  accessed 

23 June, 2020. 

UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division (2012), System of 

Environmental -Economic Accounting for Water. A Model to Integrate Water Stress into Corporate Bond Credit Analysis 

161 

# Disclaimer 

The authors, editors and affiliates will not accept any liability for damage arising from the use 

of the report or Corporate Bonds Water Credit Risk Tool, and make no representation regarding 

the advisability or suitability of specific investment decisions . A decision to invest in any 

company or vehicle should not be made in reliance on any of the statements set forth in this 

article or the original report. The contents of this report do not constitute recommendations 

to buy, sell, or hold such security, no r are they considered to be investment advice. All market 

data included in this report are derived from third parties as at 1 July 2015. Chapter 10 

162 

# Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF 

# and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models 

by 

Ba nca Intesa Sanpaolo 1

# Abstract 

With rising awareness o f how climate change and related risks affect financial stability ,

financial institutions and firms are integrating climate change risks into their risk appetite 

framework (RAF) and process of decision -making as well. To help build a climate -conscious 

culture , Banca Intesa Sanpaolo as a leading bank group in Italy, has been following the 

guidance by organizations like the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) 

and working on developing approaches to minimize the impact of such risks. These 

approaches are developed through the streams of Management of Intesa Sanpaolo ’s direct 

exposure to ESG risks , identification and evaluation of business related ESG risks , and 

evaluation of E SG linked business opportunities. 

Keyword s: climate change risk, risk appetite framework, ESG assessment, credit risk model 

# 1 Environmental risk analysis in Banca Intesa Sanpaolo: recent 

# developments 

Background 

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change, togethe r with the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development , have laid the foundations for a more sustainable future. Sustainability and 

transition to a low -carbon economy, which are more efficient in terms of resources and 

circularity, are key elements of a spe cific action plan for ensuring the long -term 

competitiveness of the European Union. 

Governments, firms and financial institutions are facing the catastrophic and unpredictable 

consequences of climate change and resource depletion. In particular, the financ ial system has 

already undergone several reforms during the past years to integrate the lessons learnt from 

the recent financial crisis, but it is ready to contribute to a greener and more sustainable 

economy. In this context, the European Union is committ ed to promoting more sustainable 

economic growth, to ensure the stability of the financial system and to promote greater 

transparency with a long -term view of the economy. In January 2018, the High -Level Expert 

Group (HLEG) on Sustainable Finance appointed by the European Commission in 2016 

published a final report with a series of recommendations on key priority actions to develop 

an EU sustainable financial strategy. Some of the priorities highlighted by the HLEG have been                

> 1This chapter is written by Fiorella Salvucci, Head of Credit Risk -Corporate, Sovereign and Financial Institutions portfolio
> at Intesa Sanpaolo, email: fiorella.salvucci@intesasanpaolo.com ; Fabio Garzaniti, Head of Internal Model Development Unit
> -Corporate, Sovereign and Financial Institutions portfolios at Intesa Sanpaolo, email: fabio.garzaniti@intesasanpaolo.com ;
> Andrey Karpov, Credit Risk Model Developer –Credit Risk Department at Intesa Sanpaolo; Fabio Verachi, Enterprise Risk
> Manager –Enterprise Risk Department at Intesa Sanpaolo. Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models

163 

included in the 2018 European Co mmission ’s Action Plan for Financing Sustainable Growth, 

which was launched in March 2018. 

With reference to financial markets, the European Commission aims at improving financial 

stability by integrating environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors into the investment 

decision -making process. The environmental aspects, such as the mitigation of climate change 

and adaptation solutions in response to global warming are specially taken into consideration 

by the EU. In fact, the inclusion of ESG factors in the decision -making process of public and 

private institutions play a fundamental role in European Commission ’s Action Plan. 2 The EU 

Action Plan for Financing Sustainable Growth aims at: 

1. Redirecting capital flows towards sustainable investments, to achi eve sustainable and 

inclusive growth; 

2. Managing financial risks deriving from climate change, resource depletion, 

environmental degradation and social issues; 

3. Promoting transparency and long -term vision in economic and financial activities. 

ESG factors and governance improvements in the banking sector 

The contribution of the banking sector to sustainable economic growth will depend on the 

ability of banking institutions to adapt their business models to the new needs emerging from 

environmental transformatio ns. Banca Intesa Sanpaolo, in order to assess its ability to 

compete on the market and to develop in balanced conditions its economic -financial assets, 

is trying to integrate the results of the financial statements with an articulated and complex 

series of qualitative information, such as the products and services offered, the markets of 

reference, the sector structure, the degree of competition, the trend in demand, the 

technology used, the corporate governance and the quality of management. 

The Board of Directors (BoD) and top management of Banca Intesa Sanpaolo take 

responsibility for promoting the risk culture and its inclusion in the strategy. Middle 

management is required to supervise the development of an adequate risk culture and create 

mechanisms fo r implementing the risk appetite. Following these principles, Intesa Sanpaolo is 

developing internal skills and a framework that would allow for the recognition of the ESG risks, 

thus adopting the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financ ial Disclosure 

(TCFD) as well as other provisions on sustainable finance (ESG, SDGs, EU Action Plan, etc.). The 

new competitive scenario, where the Bank operates, is generating a twofold effect: 

• On the one hand, regulation is becoming more intrusive (e.g. , through the possible 

introduction of a capital requirement for the risks associated with climate and other 

environmental factors); 

• On the other hand, for some time now, the regulator has started to directly monitor 

the quality (viability and sustainabilit y) of the banks ’ business models (conduct, 

compliance, enterprise risk management models, corporate governance, etc.).   

> 2As an example, managers ’remuneration or the various incentives to protect stakeholder ’s rights are tools aimed at
> guaranteeing the equality among the various interested parts of a company.

Chapter 10 

164 

The TCFD and its main implications on the Group Risk Appetite Framework 

In June 2017, following the publication of the final report of th e TCFD recommendations, some 

gaps emerged that had to be filled in the context of the management of ESG risks. Regarding 

climate risks, the analysis showed that the BoD should define and describe the governance 

and culture of ESG risks. Furthermore, the go vernance of financial intermediaries should 

define the roles and responsibilities regarding the purpose of its monitoring and evaluation. 3

Intesa Sanpaolo is implementing this kind of guidelines. Indeed, the management 

responsibilities include the definiti on, approval and implementation of the overall business 

strategy and the related overall risk strategy. The Institution ’s key policies, within the 

applicable legal and regulatory framework, include the risk appetite that must consider the 

benefits in the m edium term and the solvency. 4

The BoD maintains direct responsibility of this topic. The information related to climate change 

is provided to the BoD at least once a year and it is considered in defining the strategy, risk 

management, business objectives a nd investment policies. In light of this analysis, Intesa 

Sanpaolo has created a task force focused on corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the 

integration of ESG risks in the risk management framework, supporting the Risk Committee 

and the top manage ment in its supervisory functions related to the monitoring of current and 

future overall risk strategy of the Bank. 

The intensification of these discussions requires an improvement in the relationship with other 

internal risk processes, especially with th e risk appetite framework (RAF), Internal Capital 

Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP), stress test and strategic planning. In fact, it is well 

known that risk and capital planning are an indispensable and integral component of strategic 

planning and the re lated documentary outputs merge with the business plan. 5

Following the June 2017 TCFD recommendations, the key activities of the risk management 

department concern: 

• Identification, assessment and measurement of climatic risks (transition risk and 

physical risk) of the Bank; 

• Implementation, development and monitoring of a corporate -level risk governance 

framework, including risk culture, risk appetite and bank risk limits. 

Moreover, the Chief Risk Officer Area, has the new task of identifying, assessing, mea suring, 

monitoring and adequately managing all the risks related to climate risk (both transition and 

physical risk), guaranteeing that the identification and evaluation are not based solely on 

qualitative information but also take into account quantitativ e aspects and results of internal 

models. 6       

> 3
> The climate risk for finance in Italy, Report of the Working Group 3 of the Italian Obs ervatory on sustainable finance, 4
> March 2019.
> 4This approach is described in the report of the CoSo Framework: Enterprise Risk Management, Applying enterprise risk
> management to environmental, social and governance -related risks in CoSo, February 2018. I n addition, the functioning
> of the board in the management of ESG risks is also in line with the CONSOB Report "Non -Financial Information as a driver
> of transformation", published on 25 March 2018.
> 5
> See M. Baravelli, Sapienza University of Rome, M. Di Ant onio, University of Genoa -The new regulatory model: how
> strategic planning changes in banks, Bancaria (2018).
> 6In the credit risk internal rating model, with reference to climate risk, the Bank utilizes a qualitative questionnaire to as sess
> the exposure of socio -environmental risks as well as environmental certifications are taken into consideration. Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models

165 

Within the Chief Risk Officer Area, the Enterprise Risk Management Head Office Department 

is becoming more and more involved in the ESG risk management process. These recent 

evolutions envisage that ESG risks shou ld be identified, analyzed and managed in an integrated 

and cross -view way, involving all corporate functions, and that risk logics also become part of 

strategic decision -making processes. Although there is a regulatory pressure for improving 

internal gove rnance to oversight these risks, the integration process is slightly slow compared 

to what is expected by regulators, because of the poor data quality and of difficulties in 

modeling the scenarios and adopt changes in the risk models. 

In September 2019, th e European Supervisory Authorities (European Banking Authority, EBA; 

European Securities and Markets Authority, ESMA; European Insurance and Occupational 

Pensions Authority, EIOPA) stressed in a joint report on “Risks and vulnerabilities in the EU 

financia l system ” that financial intermediaries should incorporate ESG risks and, in particular, 

climate risks in the risk governance framework. 

As a consequence, the Bank is even more committed to identifying, monitoring and 

incorporating these risks within its RAF. For instance, the calibration of the RAF metrics, the 

risk appetite, risk tolerance and risk capacity calibration activities are mainly addressed by the 

Enterprise Risk Management department which considers the analysis of the evolution of the 

busines s strategy, the prudential regulation and the stress scenarios, formulate the proposals 

to be submitted to the Board. In this context, particular attention is dedicated to 

methodologies and tools to model the Most Significant Transactions (MST): the priori ty is to 

evaluate ex ante the impact at least on the main RAF indicators of big tickets and to check, by 

using what if analysis, what risk position the Bank would put in place in case the transaction is 

actually implemented (compared to the RAF thresholds in force). Shortcomings in this sense 

can compromise the ability to critically evaluate the risk/return profile and understand the 

main profits drivers. 

The RAF is approved by the BoD and reviewed, for possible modifications, at least once a year. 

The Ente rprise Risk Management function is strongly involved in its formulation as well as in 

the other already mentioned cross -functional processes (ICAAP and stress test). Furthermore, 

recent developments show that EU supervisors aim to review the Capital Requir ements 

Regulation and Directive framework through a potential inclusion of ESG risks in the 

Supervisory Review Evaluation Process, including wider considerations on the second pillar 

such as risk management activities and stress tests. 

Regulators are encou raging financial institutions to take ESG factors into consideration in their 

analyses. In fact, the speed at which these changes are taking place (just think of the European 

Commission activism in giving substance to its Action Plan for Sustainable Financ e) could 

underestimate the fact that the financial sector cannot yet fully guarantee an effective and 

appropriate climate risk management. These difficulties derive above all from the already 

mentioned lack of hypotheses, models and scenarios capable of ge nerating a large number of 

detailed information to be summarized in significant key performance indicators and/or key 

risk indicators. 

# 2 Environmental Risk Analysis in a commercial bank: Intesa 

# Sanpaolo’s approach 

Intesa Sanpaolo , a leading banking group in Italy in all the market segments, is aware of its 

significant impact on the social and environmental context, thus choosing to act not only on 

the basis of profit, but also with the aim of creating long -term value not only for the Bank ’sChapter 10 

166 

shareholder, but a lso for its employees, customers, the community as a whole and last but not 

least, the environment. 

Given both the macroeconomic scenario and the Group ’s risk profile, the Intesa Sanpaolo risk 

management framework aims to achieve a complete and consistent overview of risks, by 

continuously improving the assessment and representation of the risk level of the Group ’s

activities and fostering a culture of risk -awareness. Proper risk management and control are 

essential conditions to ensure reliable and sustain able creation of value and protect the 

Group ’s financial soundness and reputation. Therefore, with specific reference to the 

management of ESG risks, the Bank ’s approach has been developed within the following 

streams: 

• Management of Intesa Sanpaolo ’s direc t exposure to ESG risks; 

• Identification and evaluation of business related ESG risks; 

• Evaluation of ESG linked business opportunities. 

Intesa Sanpaolo considers environment and, more specifically, climate change as a

fundamental part of a wider management model of social and environmental strategy. To this 

end the Bank has joined important international initiatives and standards such as the United 

Nations Global Compact, the Principles on Responsible Banking of the United Nations 

Environment Finance Initiat ive (UNEP FI), the TCFD recommendations and CDP, aimed at 

promoting dialogue among firms, international organizations and society in general and to 

pursue with respect for the environment. Moreover, the Bank has developed and issued 

specific internal polic ies in this area (Group ’s “Rules for the environmental and energy policy ”). 

To address more specifically the management of its direct exposure and reduce its direct 

ecological footprint, Intesa Sanpaolo has developed a Climate Change Action Plan, applied 

technological innovations for the modernization of its buildings and introduced more energy -

efficient systems, promoted the purchase of electricity from renewable sources and has 

developed mobility management initiatives that reduce emissions due to commuti ng and 

business meetings. 

The identification and evaluation of business -related environmental risks at present is 

performed mainly through: 

• Risk clearing activities established within Intesa Sanpaolo ’s Risk Management 

Framework aimed at granting a qualitat ive evaluation of ESG risks related to 

transactions, loans and counterparties belonging to sensitive sectors (e.g. mining, 

power & utilities); 

• The adoption of Equator Principles (EP) guidelines for the assessment of social and 

environmental risks for proje ct finance; 

• Credit risk models that include “social ” and “environmental ” information in the 

qualitative and quantitative components of the corporate rating model (as discussed 

in the following sections). 

Risk clearing activities have a strong focus on eval uating environmental risks, currently dealing 

with: Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models 

167 

• MSTs, as defined in the internal Guidelines for the Governance of the Group ’s Most 

Significant Transactions; 

• Credit transactions with corporate clients, within the decision -making autonomy of 

the parent c ompany; 

• New partnerships related to financial and non -financial initiatives; 

• Suppliers selections. 

The risk clearing activity includes the evaluation, in line with the EP guidelines, of the technical 

forms of project finance from US$ 10 million and project -related corporate loans from US$ 100 

million. 

The risk assessment is performed through a qualitative analysis of the operation and the 

counterparty, taking under considerations relevant items of the reputational dimensions. 

Special attention is given to th e evaluation of the counterparty ’s ESG risk profiles. The analysis 

is carried out by means of specialized info providers, public data, information gathered by the 

business functions that eventually propose further insights. The methodology (qualitative 

met rics) is tailored on the type of operation (e.g. , credit transactions vs suppliers ’ selection). 

The risk clearing structure issues an advisory opinion resulting from the risk assessment, which 

assigns to the operation/counterparty a risk class and contribu tes to the decision -making 

process, empowering the appropriate evaluation of this type of risks. The risk clearing activity 

is supported by the ongoing implementation of self -regulated policies for the assessment and 

management of the social and environmen tal risks in sensitive sectors. 

In order to strengthen its management of ESG risks and to ensure a constant and precautionary 

monitoring of possible changes to national and European regulations, Intesa Sanpaolo is 

presently involved in a number of internat ional industry working groups on climate change 

issues. Furthermore, international studies show that climate change may also be a business 

opportunity. As an example, in order to achieve the EU ’s climate and energy targets for 2030, 

the European Commission ’s Action Plan on Sustainable Finance estimates supplementary 

investment of 180 billion euro s per year. To this end, Intesa Sanpaolo is active in assisting its 

customers committed to reducing their environmental impact with green products and 

services. 

In light of the above, Intesa Sanpaolo issued its first Green Bond for 500 million euros in 2017 

and among the objectives of the 2018 -2021 Business Plan, it included the support to the 

production system with an environmental perspective, with a specific plaf ond of up to 5 billion 

euro s, aimed at companies which adopt a circular economy model. 

Finally, the current framework for the governance of ESG risks and opportunities will be further 

developed in line with Intesa Sanpaolo ’s adhesion to TCFD and the ongoin g EU regulatory 

developments in the field of sustainable finance and climate change risk. Key enhancements 

to be implemented will therefore include: 

• Consolidation and mapping of ESG risks to properly enrich ESG information available 

on counterparties/trans actions and development of a common infrastructure (data 

and tools), thus enabling and supporting reporting, strategic planning and decision -

making processes; Chapter 10 

168 

• Widening of the scope of the ESG risk clearing activities and strengthening of climate 

change ris k evaluation within the decision -making process; 

• Further enhancement of the ESG governance framework (e.g. RAF, roles and 

responsibilities). 

# 3 ESG assessment in credit risk models 

Internal ratings for the corporate portfolio 

The analysis of ESG risk factors in credit risk models is an important element in the overall risk 

management framework and their relevance is bound to assume an increasing importance in 

the years to come. At the beginning of 2009 , with the introduction of the first foundation 

int ernal ratings -based approach (FIRB) corporate rating models, the evaluation of ESG risk 

factors was incorporated by Intesa Sanpaolo in the “qualitative ” component of the PD models. 

Given the absence of readily available ESG data at the time (both at counte rparty and 

aggregated level) that could be used to statistically analyze the robustness of correlation with 

credit risk, the ESG risks were incorporated in the rating models through a set of specific 

questions to be answered in the qualitative assessment s ection. Rating analysts had to fill the 

questionnaire during the rating attribution process, based on expert judgment and specific 

guidelines. The latter were necessary in order to render the answers based on specialist 

evaluation homogeneous across differ ent assessments. 

A practical consequence of this choice was that all the answers provided by the rating analysts 

could be stored in order to accumulate a sufficiently long time series of ESG risk factors 

assessments . Indeed, as mentioned before, one of the major challenges in ESG risks analysis 

is data availability : it could be difficult to observe an actual correlation with the corporate 

defaults in the past and the available data could be insufficient to produce robust conclusions. 

Unexpectedly, it is pos sible that the most environmentally unsustainable corporates, from the 

environmental point of view, have always been the best payers, given their high profitability. 

Among the other sources of uncertainty was the absence of a clear and uniformly 

acknowled ged taxonomy to identify which corporates can be defined “green ” and which are 

certainly “environmentally unsustainable ”, as well as to the level with respect to which the 

ESG risks should be assessed (e.g. , counterparty vs. asset/loan level). Moreover, so me ESG 

risks could be more relevant for large corporates with sophisticated business structure 

covering multiple economic sectors and industries. Therefore, the same counterparty could 

be simultaneously considered “green ” and “environmentally unsustainable ”, depending on 

the branch of business under evaluation. At the same time, the corporate credit risk models 

are usually developed at counterparty level. As a consequence, the statistical analysis based 

on historical perspective could be potentially biased and not representative of the future 

dynamics However, the analysis of default rates behavior for each answer to the relevant 

question could give a first insight on the correlation of the ESG risks with the credit risk of a 

certain counterparty. 

Even thoug h the qualitative questionnaire is considered to be an auxiliary element in the 

overall evaluation of the creditworthiness of corporate obligors (the main sources of credit 

risk assessment is balance sheet and internal/external behavioral information), it is essential 

for a correct and comprehensive analysis of all the characteristics of a certain counterparty 

that cannot be deduced from financial data and other traditionally used information. Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models 

169 

One of such examples is the exposure to ESG risk factors that co uld influence in a relevant way 

the capability of a certain obligor to pay his debt in a duly manner: 

• Environmental credit issues: 7 (i) transition risks can impact, for example, the utilities, 

carbon -intensive industries and transportation sectors, as they could be affected by 

tightening emissions regulation; (ii) physical risks, such as damage to hydroelectric 

power stations and gas pipelines, as well as oil spills and disruptions from extreme 

weather events, are more common for the sectors dependent on na tural resources, 

including land and water, and the industries with a high level of fixed assets (e.g. 

energy generation, materials and buildings, agriculture and forestry enterprises); 

• Social credit issues : demographic and health -related shifts in consumer preferences 

and regulation could affect the performance of the food, beverage and tobacco 

sectors, while the tightening of the healthcare regulation could affect the drug pricing 

in the pharmaceuticals industry; 

• Governance credit issues : risks deriving fr om lawsuits, tax litigations, social security 

and environmental disputes, incidents of alleged corruption, fraud and other 

violations, management structure stability and general governance issues. 

In order to evaluate the correlation between a given risk f actor and the risk of default, a time 

series of historically registered data is needed. When available, a traditional estimation 

approach can be applied to study the discriminatory power of ESG risk factors. This means that 

you should analyze different set s of information collected at a given point in time (T) and 

connect them to the observed default frequency over the next period (usually equal to 12 

months, between T and T+1). The data collected by mean of qualitative questionnaire can be 

used for this pu rpose. 

An example of the application of the above approach with respect to the answers to the 

question about the exposure of corporate counterparties to social and environmental is shown 

in  Table 10 -1. Notice, that the answers “b” and “c” (there exists a certain exposure to 

social/environmental risks in terms of harmful substances emission, negative environmental 

impact, job safety issues, respect of human rights etc.) show a higher riskiness, as the default 

rates observed for these answers are higher than the portfolio average.     

> 7For additional reference, see “Implementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financial
> Disclosures” by TCFD, June 2017. Chapter 10

170 

Table 10 -1 Question about the exposure to social/environmental risks – Default 

rat es distribution 

Question - Exposure to social/environmental risks  % Population 

distribution 

% Index of 

riskiness 8

a) No exposure  59%  96% 

b) Yes, but the company operates in compliance 

with the regulations by adopting forms of 

protection 

39%  104% 

c) Yes, potential social/environmental risks  2%  132% 

Total  100%  100% 

Environmental certifications and implications on riskiness 

The subsequent corporate rating models releases occurred in 2010 (transition to AIRB 

approach) and in 2014 , highlighted a satisfactory predictive ability of the risk drivers aimed at 

assessing ESG risks: all the previous qualitative questions were confirmed in terms of their 

statistical significance, based on the time series of observed default rates. 

Given the ever -rising wo rldwide awareness of the importance of ESG risks evaluation in 

general and climate change risks analysis in particular, the last change of the corporate rating 

models in April 2017 was accompanied with further enhancement of the above risks 

evaluation. In addition to some new questions added to the qualitative questionnaire, the 

social and environmental information analysis was included for the first time into the 

quantitative section of the model .

Regarding the new questions, the presence of business inte rruption or credit payment 

insurance against negative events, that could hinder the obligor ’s solvency and the continuity 

of business activity enriche s the qualitative questionnaire to be compiled by a rating analyst. 

In particular, the presence of an insu rance against catastrophic events (wildfire, earthquakes, 

floods etc.) could be considered as a mitigating factor protecting the obligor against physical 

risks. 

As for the quantitative section, the presence/absence of certain certificates (quality, 

environ mental, occupational health, information security etc.) was included as an 

independent risk driver into the regression model, aimed at predicting the default target 

variable. The regression parameters were then estimated on the time series of annual data, 

where at each reference date T the presence of certificates was indicated at counterparty level. 

Table 10 -2 shows the default rates distribution observe d during the model estimation sample. 

Note that the presence of each type of certification is associated to a lower riskiness.    

> 8The obse rved level of risk is expressed in terms of an index number with respect to the 100% base set equal to the average
> portfolio default rate.

Integration of Climate Change Risk within RAF and ESG Assessment in Credit Risk Models 

171 

Table 10 -2 Presence of environmental certificates – default rates distribution 

Certification ISO 14000 9 % Population distribution  % Index of riskiness 

No  97%  101% 

Yes  3%  62% 

Total  100%  100% 

EMAS 10  Distribution %  % Index of riskiness 

No  99.7%  100% 

Yes  0.3%  71% 

Total  100%  100% 

FSC 11  Distribution %  % Index of riskiness 

No  99%  100% 

Yes  1%  64% 

Total  100%  100% 

Organic Certification 12  Distribution %  % Index of riskiness 

No  98%  101% 

Yes  2%  63% 

Total  100%  100% 

Finally, it ’s worth to underline that in general the possibility to include some risk factors into 

the rating model through a quantitative approach is highly dependent on the availability of 

data and of a representative sample: these are essential for the estimation of the relationship 

of hypothetical risk drivers with a given target variable, as well as fo r the analysis of the 

correlation intensity in terms of discriminatory power. A qualitative approach can be used 

instead as a data collection instrument, which is fundamental during the transition towards 

the quantitative approach. Moreover, the collected data can be also used for an ex -post 

validation of the judgmentally assigned factor weights, eventually adjusting the initial 

assumptions. 

As for the future developments, the Intesa Sanpaolo Group is going to further reinforce the 

risk management practices on ESG and climate related issues, in line with the European 

Commission ’s Action Plan on Financing Sustainable Growth, as well as with EBA ’s initial policy 

recommendations that are currently under development. Using the accumulated historical 

experience, the Group is committed to enhance climate risk awareness and to guarantee 

sound risk management practices on climate related issues in order to reduce the potential 

impact of climate change implications and to protect its reputation, its business and its 

investors. The climate change risk analysis is being incorporated in its risk management 

framework, with particular reference to credit risk and reputational risk, while the climate 

change sensitive exposures monitoring of credit portfolio is being included in the RAF             

> 9
> Certification ISO 14001 is a certification of a family of standards related to environmental management that exists to help
> organizations minimize how their operations negatively affect the environment (energy efficiency, efficiency in the use of
> materials and water, correct manageme nt of waste, emissions etc.) .
> 10 EMAS is the EU’s Eco -Management and Audit Scheme . It is similar to ISO 14001, but considered by some analysts to be
> more rigorous.
> 11
> FSC (Forest Stewardship Council): certification concerning the purchase of forest products of which we know the origin
> and good management on an environmental level. It is used by companies in the wood / paper / furniture industry.
> 12 Organic certification: specific certifications on cultivation methods (in the case of farms) or the origin of the raw material
> (in the case of food companies). Chapter 10

172 

framework, in order to integrate the long -term time horizon dimension and ESG analysis in the 

business relationships with corporates. 

This would also allow to play an important role to raise awareness amongst corporates about 

long -term challeng es and incentivize them to increase the shift towards sustainable business 

models. 

In order to guarantee a prudent management of risks and opportunities connected to climate 

change, the introduction of elements connected to climate change within the RFA is being 

analyzed. 

With regard to the credit risk models, a set of new ESG risk drivers (suggested by the ever -

enriching methodological literature and the industry best practices) will be tested in a 

regression analysis framework in order to study their corr elation with the default event in 

terms of discriminatory power. Based on statistical evidence, the introduction of a stand -alone 

ESG scorecard within the rating model will be considered. 

# 4 Conclusion 

As described in this chapter, Intesa Sanpaolo aims at cre ating a climate -conscious culture to 

minimize the potential impact of climate change. To guarantee a healthy and prudent 

management of risks and opportunities connected to this topic, we are integrating climate 

change risk considerations into the RAF. 

The perimeter definition of the ESG area relevant sectors must also be accompanied by a 

coherent integration of the information set available, especially with regards to counterparties 

subject to evaluation and monitoring. Therefore, a specific analysis aimed at classifying 

corporate counterparties in terms of belonging to some specific sectors should be carried out. 

This assessment of reputational/ESG/climate change risks is particularly useful in order to: 

• Allow monitoring of exposure to these sectors; 

• Integr ate the counterparty reputational, ESG and climate change risk estimation 

activities in the cross -functional internal processes. 

These short considerations highlight the importance of these first piloting evaluations, which 

must be followed by other releva nt developments, especially in terms of external disclosure 

and in the context of the adoption and application of ESG policies. With this aim, the Bank 

launched an inter -functional working group that is in charge for the design of the reference 

framework a nd the information/process solution to be implemented. 173 

# Part II ERA f or Institutional Investors and 

# Insurers Chapter 11 

174 

# Quantifying Value Impairment through 

# Transition Risk Analysis 

By 

Vivid Economics 1

# Abstract 

Vivid ’s Climate Risk Toolkit uses climate scenario analysis to quantify the transition risks 

associated with different climate policy pathways, in line with TCFD recommendations. These 

estimates can inform financial institutions ’ investment decision making and he lp align strategic 

decisions with the expected state of climate policy. As climate risks become increasingly 

apparent, the use of climate scenario analysis in supporting investors ’ decisions will become 

more valuable. By quantifying the impacts associated with climate change transition risk, our 

methodology can guide investment decisions in the coming period of uncertainty. 

Keywords: scenario analysis, transition risk, financial value impairment, TCFD 

recommendations, asset -level modelling, quantitative analysis, climate change 

# 1 Introduction 

In holding large portfolios, most institutional investors face exposure to climate -related ris k

across sectors, geographies and financial instruments, while at the same time financing the 

development of the real economy. The longer time horizons of their asset and liability 

management, as well as their exposure to equity and debt, further highlight the importance 

of considering climate change in strategic decisions. However, the extent of investors ’

exposure to climate change can be particularly difficult to assess given the size and 

diversification of their portfolios. 

Vivid ’s methodology quantifie s the value impairment and risk impacts of different climate 

scenarios on a range of financial assets. The climate risk toolkit can quantify impacts on 

financial assets under different climate scenarios and provides a clear narrative as to the 

drivers of t hese impacts. This information can inform investors and regulators of the exposure 

of various portfolios and individual assets to the transition risk associated with these climate 

scenarios. 

# 2 Methodology 

Our climate risk toolkit consists of four key modell ing components, as detailed in  Figure 11 -1:

1) Scenario pathway The scenario modelling component produces the transition risk 

narrative to be explored and t ranslates this into scenario outputs through modelling.      

> 1This chapter is written by a uthors: Josh Cowley, Economist, email: josh.cowley@vivideconomics.com ; Jason Eis,
> Executive Director, email: jason.eis@vivideconomics.com ; Thomas Nielsen, Engagement Manager , email:
> thomas.nielsen@vivideconomics.com .Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis

175 

2) Economic shocks The economic shock modelling component translates outputs from 

the scenario modelling stage into real economic shocks, the impact of which can then 

be quantified in the asset modellin g component. Shocks are divided into two types: 

direct and indirect. Direct shocks are those that inflict immediate costs on companies, 

while indirect shocks affect companies streams through secondary channels, such as 

changes in demand for a company ’s pro ducts. 

3) Asset value streams The asset value streams component quantifies the annual value 

stream impacts of identified shocks on financial assets. It does so by first examining 

financial asset exposure to shocks, for example, through the markets in which 

co mpanies are currently active. The next step is then to model company actions in 

response to shocks, such as implementation of abatement opportunities. Finally, 

competition dynamics such as exit, or costs pass through to consumers is modelled 

by considering relative exposure and action across the market. 

4) Financial impacts This final modelling component consolidates annual impacts from 

the asset -level modelling into valuation impacts. The asset -level modelling is 

consistent across all asset classes, but there are differences in financial modelling 

across asset classes. Financial modelling generally follows a discounted cash flow 

approach with additional elements for some asset classes. 

This chapter describes the four modelling components and is structured acco rdingly. 

Figure 11 -1 The Net -Zero Toolkit consists of four modelling components 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Scenario pathways 

Climate scenarios are plausible, distinctive, consistent, challenging and relevant descriptions 

of future outcomes that should enable investors to better understand how investments might 

perform under different climate policy pathways. Thus, scenarios need to present a range of Chapter 11 

176 

possible outcomes across key risk and opportunity factors, covering a variety of alternative 

plausible future states under a given set of assumptions and constraints. 

To ensure comparability across scenarios, they depend on a consis tent set of inputs to convert 

to outputs ( Table 11 -1). Climate risk scenarios must define inputs such as climate policy 

stringency and timing, and the po tential for abatement associated with various low -carbon 

technologies in a consistent way. In addition, parameters which are consistent across scenarios 

such as GDP projections, population growth and current policies will affect scenario outputs. 

Table 11 -1 Key inputs required for transition risk scenario modelling 

Inputs  Description 

Climate policy stringency  Regional carbon budgets over time 

Policy timing  Year of climate policy introduction and rate of 

increase in stringency 

Changes in relative technology costs  Changes in abatement costs based on feasible 

technological improvements 

Behavioural change parameters  Changes in demand for existing goods and ease 

of adoption for key goods such as heating and 

beef 

Baseline economic parameters (constant 

across scenarios) 

GDP, population, current CO2 emissions and 

climate policies 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Vivid ’s methodology can incorporate a wide range of publicly available scenarios. Any 

publicly available scenario providing the scenario outputs listed in  Table 11 -2 can be used. For 

example, these include the 1.5°C scenarios underpin ning the IPCC ’s Special Report on Global 

Warming of 1.5°C hosted by the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) .2

The scenarios in this database cover some of the key dimensions of uncertainty, including level 

of warming, emissions over shoot, and socioeconomic assumptions through different Shared 

Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP). 

At the same time, Vivid ’s ability to design and incorporate bespoke scenarios can be useful for 

generating valuation impacts that are transparent and aligned with investors ’ own views on 

transition risk. Publicly available scenarios may require taking on assumptions that may be 

unclear or at odds with investors ’ views of climate action. Bespoke scenario design allows 

control over the underlying assumptions and full alignment between an internal view of 

climate risks and the scenario modelled. For example, Vivid constructed the Forecast Policy 

Scenario (FPS) under the IPR project, which aligned with a disorderly transition of climate 

policy – this is detailed further in Section  0.

Vivid Economics ’ scenario design starts with a set of core factors underpinning each climate 

change scenario, which our scenario modell ing then uses to estimate key economic and energy  

> 2IAMC 1.5°C Scenario Explorer hosted by IIASA (release 2.0)
> https://vivideconomics.sharepoint.com/:p:/s/projects/190703C PP/ESW_9U3EzLVPoiG8VKXlw0QBzt7LoqPcHXE -
> P4srZC9oyQ?e=vkgBwh Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis

177 

system variables. To describe plausible future pathways, scenarios are consistently based on 

the set of inputs outlined in  Table 11 -1 that can be translated into the outputs required to 

conduct asset -level analysis. 

Transition risk scenario modelling estimates key economic and energy system variables across 

each scenario, through energy systems modelling. A high -level summary of the scenario 

modelling approach is shown in  Figure 11 -2 below. Vivid Economics uses integrated 

assessment modelling (IAM) – incorporating both energy and land -use systems – to translate 

the assumptions under each low -carbon transition scenari o into key economic variables. 

Figure 11 -2 Overview of the scenario modelling process 

Source: Vivid Economics 

The integrated assessment modelling produces a series of outputs which are used in the 

econo mic shocks component. The scenario outputs used to assess firm level outcomes in the 

asset value stream methodology are detailed in  Table 11 -2.

Table 11 -2 Example outputs required from transition risk scenario modelling 

Output  Example 

Implicit carbon price pathways  Carbon price values implied by climate policy 

action (annual, to 2050) 

Gross power capacity additions and 

total generation and storage 

Deployment of renewable energy by technology 

(annual, to 2050) 

Fossil fuel and other commodities 

demand 

Demand for oil, gas and coal (annual, to 2050) 

Demand for energy and land -related 

end -use technologies 

Cap acity additions (new sales) of all major road 

transport vehicles by type (annual, to 2050) 

Source: Vivid Economics Chapter 11 

178 

Economic shocks 

The economic shock modelling component translates scenario outputs into shocks on the real 

economy, the impact of which can then be quantified in the asset value streams modelling 

component. Shocks are divided into two types: direct, which affect asset value streams 

through a company ’s operations or costs, and indirect, which affect asset value streams 

through changes in de mand for a company ’s products. 

The primary direct shock to assets from transition risk is implicit carbon pricing. Implicit 

carbon prices – which include carbon taxes, market -based carbon prices or the cost of 

complying with other climate change regulation s – represent a significant cost shock for 

emissions intensive companies. Whether prices are imposed through carbon taxes, ETS, clean 

technology subsidies, or other policy mechanisms, they can be summari zed by a single carbon 

price signal. This price then assigns a cost to the company ’s emissions and to its carbon -

intensive inputs. 

Low carbon transition scenarios also produce indirect shocks through changes in demand for 

a company ’s products and resulting changes in commodity prices. Climate policy pricing 

emissions and technology shifts make low carbon products less costly for consumers 

compared to products with high emissions intensities, affecting demand in both types of 

markets. As a result, while demand for fossil fuels, which are emissions intensive in use, is 

expected to decline, demand for clean technology alternatives (like renewables) or green 

commodities (like lithium) is expected to grow. These changes in demand will affect prices for 

products in these markets. 

Vivid ’s methodology supplements scen ario outputs on demand contractions with modelling 

of commodity price changes, as these will determine which assets different companies 

continue to operate. For example, climate policies such as implicit carbon pricing raise the 

costs associated with consu ming a barrel of oil, tonne of coal or cubic metre of natural gas. 

Vivid ’s methodology finds the new global price faced by suppliers using the global supply curve 

for each fossil fuel, mineral, manufacturing and downstream sectors, such as vehicle 

producti on or petroleum refining. 

# 3 Asset value streams 

The asset -level modelling component calculates the impacts of the economic shocks on 

assets. This component identifies asset exposure to each of the direct and indirect shocks, and 

then assesses what actions c ompanies will take to mitigate exposure. Exposure depends on 

what markets a company is active in, as well as company emissions intensity, while response 

depends on available abatement options. Finally, dynamic competition takes the exposure and 

response mo dules as inputs and calculates the equilibrium outcome on firms within each 

market. 

Company exposure 

The exposure of financial assets to market level risks is identified through financial data on 

revenue flows. Asset -level modelling is implemented at the business segment level, based on 

individual markets. Companies in the model can operate in several markets, with exposure 

estimated based on company segmentation. 

Carbon cost exposure is calculated using asset -level emissions data. The direct cost burden 

fr om transition risk can be quantified for individual assets using scope 1, while scope 2 and 3 

emissions capture indirect cost burdens. Scope 1 emissions are direct emissions from owned Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis 

179 

or operationally controlled sources, while scope 2 & scope 3 emissions are supply chain 

emissions, including purchased energy and materials. 

In addition, demand -side impacts for transition -sensitive sectors are modelled in additional 

detail. Transition -sensitive sectors are those which are expected to experience significant 

indirect impacts from transition risk. For example, demand destruction in the oil sector 

associated with climate policy, and demand creation for low -carbon markets such as EV 

production is calculated based on scenario modelling outputs. 

Company action 

The action component models company response to risk exposure that is independent of 

their competitors ’ actions. Vivid ’s ‘action ’ modelling component focuses on company 

respo nses that are independent of competitors ’ actions. Independently of competitors, 

companies can realise effective abatement opportunities to reduce emissions and exposure 

to direct carbon costs. 

The direct carbon pricing impact of transition risk will lead firms to consider which abatement 

options are available to reduce the cost burden. Vivid ’s abatement cost database is sufficiently 

granular to differentiate between abatement potential and cost. 

Vivid ’s competition modelling component examines the interp lay between exposure and 

action in the context of the market. This involves aggregating direct and indirect impacts on 

each company and examining what costs companies can pass through to consumers. 

The combination of cost estimates from transition risk mo delling and cost pass -through rates 

is used to estimate secondary changes in market demand and firm -level profit margin changes. 

These results are then used to estimate the final impacts on firm -level profits. Market share 

across firms will adjust, and com pany revenues, profits and emissions are estimated after such 

adjustments. 

# 4 Financial impacts 

Cashflow estimates from asset modelling are discounted to net present value (NPV) terms to 

estimate financial valuation impacts as illustrated in  Figure 11 -3. This fundamental approach 

forms the basis of valuation calculations for each asset class, which ensures comparability 

across results by asset class. There ar e some additional asset class specific modelling steps 

required for fixed income and real assets. This section outlines the specific approaches for 

equities, fixed income assets, and real estate and infrastructure, while the case study details 

some results from the Inevitable Policy Response (IPR) project which followed this 

methodology. Chapter 11 

180 

Figure 11 -3 Discounted Cash Flow modelling is used to translate annual profit 

impacts into changes in current valuation 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Equities 

The net present value (NPV) of firm profits is used to measure value impairment for equities. 

The asset -level modelling produces annual cashflow estimates under each climate scenario. 

These cash flows are then aggregated t o the company level and discounted back to net present 

value (NPV) terms. The model uses company -level discount rates if available, or standard 

discount rates otherwise. Value impairment for an equity under each scenario is defined as 

the percentage of cha nge in NPV profits compared to the chosen reference scenario which is 

assumed to be ‘priced in ’ to the current valuation of the equity. 

Corporate debt 

Corporate debt impacts are estimated by translating changes in equity valuations to changes 

in fixed inc ome instrument default risk. Historical data on expected mortality loss rates by 

credit rating through time is combined with changes in credit ratings under each transition 

scenario compared to the reference scenario. Results can be calculated for all publ icly listed 

bond instruments currently outstanding (data permitting). 

The corporate debt modelling approach is summari zed in  Figure 11 -4. Changes in futu re cash 

flows calculated from the value stream modelling are converted into estimates on default risks, 

which are considered through the lens of credit rating changes. The impact on default risk are 

translated into a new security valuation through the stan dard bond valuation model. Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis 

181 

Figure 11 -4 Corporate debt modelling summary 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Real estate and infrastructure 

Value impairment for real estate and infrastructure is assessed using a common methodology. 

This section sets out the approach based on real estate, with key differences for infrastructure 

outlined where relevant. The approach for real assets is also based on a discounted cash flow 

approach, with some conceptual adjustments. The relevant asset -level modelling elements for 

real estate and infrastructure are exposure to direct carbon costs, as well as the owners ’

response in terms of abatement. Vivid ’s modell ing is flexible to incorporating more asset -level 

data where available in specific markets or for specific portfolios. 

The competition modelling for real assets determines the share of total costs that can be 

abated or passed through to tenants or consume rs. The share of costs from direct transition 

risk impacts that is passed through to tenants is modelled using the cost pass through 

modelling described above. Infrastructure cost pass through rates vary by sector and region, 

depending on the availability of alternative assets. For some large infrastructure assets with 

clearly identifiable sources of demand, changes in demand are estimated based on changes in 

underlying gas demand and increases in pipeline costs. 

The real estate modelling approach is summar ized in  Figure 11 -5. Value impairment for real 

estate under each scenario is defined as the % change in NPV of scenario rental profits 

compared to the reference scenario, which is assumed to be ‘priced in ’ to the current valuation. 

The approach for infrastructure is the same, except with cost pass through based on the 

dynamic between infrastructure owners and consumers rather than owners and tenants in 

real estate. Chapter 11 

182 

Figure 11 -5 Real estate modelling summary 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Case study – Inevitable Policy Response (IPR) 

The IPR project defined a Forecast Policy Scenario (FPS) which is consistent wit h a disorderly 

transition. 3 The FPS defines a series of policy actions that are likely to occur in the period to 

2050 as the realities of climate change become clear, and pressure on governments from all 

angles increase. The disorderly nature of the scenar io means that the macro and sector level 

impacts of policy forecasts take effect around the time of a 2025 ‘ratchet ’ on policy stringency. 

While the impact on current value is modest in percentage terms, it implies that $1.6 trillion 

(over half of UK GDP) would be wiped off the MSCI ACWI ( Figure 11 -6). The total negative 

impact of the FPS is 3.1% of the current index value. Broken out by value stream, demand 

destruction for transition -sensitive sectors such fossil fuels and ICEs reduce index value by 

2.8%. This is offset somewhat by growth in demand for renewables, EVs and other cleantech, 

which increases index value by 1%. The remaining 1.2% reduction is attributed to costs from 

carbon pricing and associated competition impacts.   

> 3For more information on the design of the IPR scenario, see https://www.unpri .org/inevitable -policy -response/what -is -
> the -inevitable -policy -response/4787.article Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis

183 

Figure 11 -6 A revaluation of the MSCI ACWI in line with the FPS today would 

remove $1.6trn from the index 

Source: Vivid Econom ics; *carbon revenues from the World Bank’s State and Trends 

of Carbon Pricing 2019 

Note: Asset impacts assume an immediate revaluation based on the FPS. 

The bottom 10% of companies suffer from carbon costs and experience demand destruction 

under the FPS, while top companies experience demand creation and benefit from a carbon 

cost advantage. Poor performers tend to have high emissions intensity relative to the markets 

they are active in, increasing their direct carbon costs. In addition, many poor perform ers have 

substantial fossil fuel revenues which are impacted by demand reductions and price impacts 

under the FPS. Conversely, top performers have limited exposure to fossil fuels, and benefit 

from demand creation in markets such as EVs. These companies al so gain an advantage under 

carbon costs due to their low emissions intensities, which means the benefits of higher market 

prices outweigh the carbon costs they are exposed to. 

Figure 11 -7 Impacts for the top and bottom performers within the index are driven 

by different value s treams 

Source: Vivid Economics 

At a sectoral level, there is significant variation both across groups and within them, 

highlighting the range of potential winners and losers under the FPS ( Figure 11 -8). Some 

primary sectors such as energy are overwhelmingly negatively affected, with mean company 

valuations in the sector falling 33%. Other sectors face wider variation. For example, electric Chapter 11 

184 

utilities with the strongest renewables strategy could see valuation double (104 percent), 

while laggards could see valuations fall by two -thirds ( -66 percent). 

Figure 11 -8 Within -sector variation can be significant, particularly for the most 

impacted sectors in the index 

Source: Vivid Economics 

Note: Error bars indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles of companies in each sector. 

Detailed results on the IPR asset impacts are available on the Principles for 

Responsible Investment website. 

# 5 Limitations & areas for development 

While the Climate risk toolkit can be used to assess risk for a wide range of asset classes and 

at a high level of granularity, there remains some outstanding developments that will improve 

the level of analysis offered in the future. Some limitations of t he current approach to scenario 

analysis are outlined below. 

• The baseline scenario selected directly impacts the magnitude of results under the 

policy scenario. Selecting a baseline scenario requires an implicit assumption on the 

current level of policy an d technical developments, which directly affects results. 

While our approach offers the choice between a BAU scenario that reflects current 

policy announcements or a scenario which continues historical trends, there is 

currently no widely accepted baseline scenario. 

• The methodology limits interactions between physical and transition risks. The 

climate risk toolkit has developed to be capable of analy zing physical risks alongside 

transition risks since the IPR project. However, there could be further interac tion 

between the physical and transition effects in future renditions of the climate risk 

toolkit. 

• A focus on listed equities means some sectors and regions are underrepresented 

in results. Analysis focuses on listed equities and the sectors and regions th ese 

represent. This means not all risks are captured as many fossil fuel producers are not 

listed, such as Middle Eastern national oil companies. In addition, while Europe and Quantifying Value Impairment Through Transition Risk Analysis 

185 

the US are well represented due to a high level of listed equities, there are fe wer 

Chinese equities listed for example. This can be overcome if private equity 

information is incorporated for a desired region or sector. 

# 6 Conclusion 

Climate scenario analysis can inform financial institutions ’ investment decisions and help align 

strategic decisions with the expected state of climate policy. As climate risks become 

increasingly apparent, the use of climate scenario analysis in supporting inves tors ’ decisions 

will become ever more valuable. By quantifying the impacts associated with climate change 

transitio n risk, our methodology can guide investment decisions in the coming period of 

uncertainty. Chapter 12 

186 

# Financial Climate -related Transition Risks: 

# Integ rated Assessment Across the Finance and 

# Investment Universe 

By 

Dr. Nicole Röttmer 1

PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft, Germany 

# Abstract 

Financial institutions are facing a potentially significant disruption in the real economy, 

reflecting on their balance sheets, business models, and portfolios. Quickly understanding and 

integrating this understanding of potential regulatory, market, and t echnology dynamics into 

standard operating procedures is key for smoothly managing potential risks and capturing the 

arising opportunities. This chapter outlines a pathway for capturing the key risk and 

opportunity drivers at the right level of detail, and for integrating them across institution types, 

functions and in specific roles. 

Keyword s: transition, risk, opportunity, climate excellence, investment, banking, insurance, 

real estate, project finance, risk management, analyst, portfolio management 

# 1 Purp ose and approach 

Why to leverage scenario analysis? 

The climate transition the world might undergo to limit global warming will test the resilience 

of business models, while at the same time creating significant potential for value. Increasing 

awareness of the potential impact of the transition is fostering regulator, supervisor and 

stakeholder attention, and insufficient action and communication by financial institutions 

might reflect on their license to operate. 

Scenario analysis is a method of choice when historical trends and datasets can no longer be 

used to accurately forecast the future (e.g. in the case of accelerating or disruptive change, as 

in a climate transformation), and effects are likely to play out over the medium to long term. 

Scenario analysis is a powerful tool, enabling users to directly understand the impact of climate 

change on sectors, specific companies, or even entire portfolios. Per scenario, it allows for the 

modelling of a variety of impacts that can be interrelated and interact positively or negatively 

with one another. For examp le, it not only connects changes in oil demand from the 

automotive industry (resulting from the introduction of more electric vehicles) with impacts 

on oil prices and refinery performance, but also with the impact on demand for renewable    

> 1This chapter is written by Dr. Nicole Röttmer, Partner, PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft
> GmbH Germany ,email: Nicole.Roettmer@pwc.com.

Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

187 

power generation a nd the potential for alternative fuels to boost financial performance in 

other sectors. 

Infobox Scenario: "A scenario describes a development path that leads to a specific result. 

[...] It should be noted that scenarios are hypothetical constructs; they a re not forecasts or 

predictions, nor are they sensitivity analyses "( TCFD, 2017d ). Scenarios describe 

conceivable, inherently consistent future worlds instead of, for example, a change in 

individual parameters such as an interest rate. In simple terms, a s cenario is a consistent 

series of "what -if" questions. 

Due to these characteristics, scenario analysis can deliver valuable insights to any user 

interested in learning about the potential impact of climate -related risks and opportunities on 

their own per formance, from an investor curious about how a portfolio of investments would 

perform under the assumptions of climate change, to an insurance company striving to 

understand the impact of climate -related risks on their policies and their business. Its insi ghts 

inform risk management and link well with upcoming supervisory stress -tests, as 

demonstrated for example by the launch of market -wide insurance climate stress tests in early 

2019 by the Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA) in the United Kingdom. 2

An example by The CO -Firm and Kepler Cheuvreux illustrates, why this scenario view might 

extend our current understanding of risks and opportunities. Their research shows that under 

the 2°C and 2.7°C climate pathways (scenarios, for the sake of easy understa nding) by the 

International Energy Agency (IEA) 3 , companies today might be significantly over - or 

undervalued ( Figure 12 -1). 4 Capital markets thus might not fully account for them yet( The CO -

Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018c, p. 36 ).                       

> 2Bank ofEngland, Prudential Regulatory Authority (2019) Insurance Stress Test 2019, 18.06.2019. See
> https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ -/media/boe/files/prudential -regulation/letter/2019/insurance -stress -test -
> 2019.pdf?la=en&hash=2F9F25800465DFF2AFA24C5C230D8ADCE6BA5810
> 3The Scenarios that form the basis for the assessment of climate -related risks build on 1) the International Energy Agency
> (IEA) Energy Technology Perspectives (ETP) and 2) the IEA World Energy Outlook (WEO). The ETP 2017 2°C Scenario (2DS)
> and the WEO 201 6 450 Scenario form the basis for the 2°C scenario. The ETP 2017 R eference Technology Scenario (RTS)
> and the WEO 2018 New Policies Scenario (NPS) –once available –form the basis for the 2.7°C Scenario.
> 4For an analysis of the automotive, steel and electric utility sectors, please refer to publications of the CO -firm. (The CO -
> Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018b, 2018c, 2018 ).Chapter 12

188 

Figure 12 -1 Illustrative steel compa ny valuation impact in a 2°C and a 2.7°C 

scenario, assuming an average adaptation (Market) as well as “beating the 

marking” (Beat -the -market) relative to a consensus baseline( The CO -Firm & Kepler 

Cheuvreux, 2018 d)

Thus, scenario analyses can support exi sting risk, financing, investment, or underwriting 

processes by answering the following questions: 

• How material are climate -related risks, i.e., to what extent do they affect the financial 

performance of investments, products, companies, sectors and countr ies? 

• What drives climate -related risks and opportunities, i.e., changing energy prices, 

competitive new technologies, changing demand patterns? 

• What do I need to believe for these risks and opportunities to materialize? I.e., will 

oil heating be prohibite d, do synthetic fuels enter the market at reasonable cost, or 

will the renewable build -out take place? 

• How resilient is my portfolio, and potentially the companies ’ business lines and 

projects, given the potential to strategically adapt (technology investm ents, product 

or value chain changes)? 

Such findings can be used by different groups of actors within financial institutions, for a 

variety of purposes. Some examples are to support the selection of financing or investment 

objects, to validate risk paramet ers and modelling, to adjust portfolio or fund allocation, to 

focus exposure to companies according to their risk, and to support reporting (Röttmer, 2018, 

pp. 269 -282 ).

Why think about a fundamental modelling logic for climate transition risks? 

Scenarios allow for capturing interdependent sector dynamics, such as the impact of an 

electrification of cars on electricity demand, housing infrastructure, the oil market, input 

prices for the chemical industry and so on. Only a fundamental analysis allo ws for capturing 

these effects, as the following example illustrates: 0       

> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Indexed sum of cumulative discounted
> cash flows (Baseline = 100)
> "Consensus"
> baseline
> 2.7 C Beat -
> the -Market
> 2.7 C
> Market
> 2C Beat -
> the -Market
> 2C Market
> Perpetuity First 5 years Years 2023 -2050 Financial Climate -related Transition Risks :Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe

189 

There is a widespread belief that the climate transition risks and opportunities can largely be 

described through carbon prices. However, this is not reflecting the fundamental changes in 

the economy that will – in an interdependent manner – influence demand, technology cost 

curves, resource availability, etc.  Figure 12 -2 provides an ex ample, illustrating the global 

revenue of three large electric utility companies under a under possible 2.0°C climate scenario. 

Despite their comparable size in terms of power generation capacity, the three companies 

have significantly different carbon foo tprints. The company with the lowest footprint shows 

the lowest revenue growth potential in the scenario and is outperformed by the company with 

the biggest carbon footprint over time. 

Figure 12 -2 Global rev enue development for power generation of three large 

electric utility companies in a 2.0°C scenario 

Source: The CO -Firm and Kepler Cheuvreux (2018b) 

Another fundamental belief relates to the assumption that sector dynamics are indicative of 

company dyna mics (the same holds true for specific physical assets, such as real estate). 

Research by The CO -Firm ( The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018c ) shows that average 

financial effects on sectors are barely indicative of individual company ’s performance. Rather, 

for example, companies within the automotive sector, exhibit significantly different financial 

impacts (positive and negative), based on specific company characteristics and geographic 

footprints. In the automotive sector, for example, regional demand tre nds (e.g. vehicle fleet 

growth driven by developing markets) and technological diversity (plug -in hybrid, electric or 

conventional vehicles) drive company EBITDA performance: “The main differentiators 

between winners and losers are regional and technologic al exposure, and diversity, relative to 

the peer group ” (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018c ), as can be seen in  Figure 12 -3 below. Chapter 12 

190 

Figure 12 -3 EBITDA impact on individual companies in an exemplary 2.0°C IEA -

based climate scenario analysis. 

Source: The CO -Firm and Kepler Cheuvreux (2018c) 

These dynamics require an increasingly thorough unders tanding of drivers of direct and 

indirect climate -related risks and opportunities as well as the ability to quantify and manage 

their potential financial impact. This can be achieved by treating this type of risk and 

opportunity along the existing mechanis ms, from sector outlooks to risk models. 

Purpose of the fundamental Climate Excellence methodology 

In this context, the purpose of the Climate Excellence methodology and tool is to financially 

assess climate -related transition risks and opportunities. It quantifies the risks and 

opportunities arising from the transition towards a lower carbon economy using scenario 

analysis. It builds on a bottom -up approach, focusing on the drivers of financial performance 

for plants, products, projects and technologies un der a changing market, price, technology 

and regulatory environment, thus lending itself to the analysis for the real economy and the 

financial sector. For the financial sector, it can be conducted across a multitude of use cases 

with a defined real asset underlying the financial instrument, such as bank portfolios and 

individual loans, equity portfolios/funds, bonds, real estate, infrastructure and other project 

financing mechanisms, and insurance premium impact calculations. 

Transition risks could alter the risk -return profile of financial assets. Climate Excellence 

leverages different publicly available, scientific and integrated future climate pathways and 

energy system models. It leverages their assumptions on technology, market (demand, price), 

and re gulatory changes in a fundamental model, translating them into specific impacts on 

physical assets such as products and technologies, plants, real estate and infrastructure, 

companies, and sectors in their relevant geographies. It derives country -level imp acts on that 

basis. 

This approach mirrors the work typically performed by chief economists, sector analysts, and 

financial analysts (e.g. research analysts, equity/ credit analysts or actuaries) and supplements 

it with specific climate -related, financial ly relevant insights. Given the fundamental approach, 

it can provide all types of metrics for integration into standard modelling approaches (e.g. for 

asset management, discounted cash flow (DCF) or multiples models). Its bottom -up approach 

provides one pa thway for integrating climate -related risks (and opportunities) into the 

standard risk categories used by regulators. -100     

> -50
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> EBITDA (change % vs. 2016)
> 2020 2030 2040 2050
> Individual companies*
> Individual companies‘ performance Financial Climate -related Transition Risks :Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe

191 

Chapter approach 

This chapter illustrates how fundamental scenario analysis can be used as a practical tool for 

analyzing transition ris ks and opportunities. Using the example of asset management and the 

scenarios provided by the International Energy Agency, this paper presents the methodology 

and demonstrates the application of scenario analysis with a real -life case study. 

Three key cha racteristics describe the methodology embedded in the Climate Excellence tool: 

- Extending the current financial sector view on risk and opportunity, with a forward -

looking, materiality -based financial assessment of climate -related risks and opportunities: 

- Scenarios describe plausible development paths towards a lower carbon economy 

(without providing any probability), leading to a specific global warming target or 

carbon particle concentration. The methodology is inherently forward -looking due 

to the applic ation of scenarios, and allows for a materiality -based, quantitative 

financial assessment of climate -related risks and opportunities. 

- Comprehensive coverage of scenario impacts, due to fundamental analysis and market -

based assessment: 

- The analysis enables an integrated understanding across scenario -specific climate 

risk drivers, addressing the suggestion of the TCFD (2017b ). It thus reflects the full 

potential financial impact from changing demand, competitive environments, input 

prices and new technologie s, as well as regulation, and not only single factors. 

- It is based on the underlying, sector -specific market dynamics, enabling the 

integration of climate analyses into existing risk, valuation, credit or underwriting 

processes, as well as internal macroec onomic outlooks and microeconomic views. 

- It allows for a consistent assessment of risks and opportunities across financial 

instruments and underlying assets (e.g. real estate, infrastructure, projects, 

companies, plants or products, countries) 

- Reflective o f strategic choices of companies (adaptive capacity), providing a more true 

and fair view on the specific risk position of the real economy counterpart: 

- “Financial modelling of climate risk must consider companies ’ ability to anticipate 

transition risks an d develop mitigation strategies, as it impacts future asset 

development and companies ’ financial performance. Adaptive capacity allows a true 

and fair view of risks and opportunities to be presented. Not considering it might 

lead to the overestimation of c limate risks ” (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018a, 

p. 33 ).

# 2 Which questions does transition scenario analysis answer for 

# financial institutions? 

For financial institutions, there are various use cases for the results and learnings from 

scenario analysis. Three broad distinctions can be made: Use cases by institution, by function 

within an organization, and within functions, such as equity analysis, building on the specific 

methodologies and proxies used. Chapter 12 

192 

Questions answered for asset managers/owners, for banks and insurance 

companies 

Different financial institutions ’ characteristics require different foci when performing scenario 

analyses, as the TC FD illustrates in their supplemental disclosure guidance for asset owners 

and asset managers, banks, and insurance companies (TCFD, 2017a ).

Scenario analysis provides different financial institutions with a common foundation of 

insights on overall material ity, risk (opportunity) drivers, changing macroeconomic and sector 

environment. These are: 

1. Order of magnitude financial impacts within and across scenarios; 

2. Sector - and scenario - or even geography -specific risk drivers with significant financial 

impacts ba sed on changes to revenues, cost, and capex; 

3. Understanding of the company -, project -, plant - or product -specific characteristics that 

imply vulnerability relative to the risk drivers; 

4. An interpretation of the changes described by the scenario that imply th e change in the 

risk profile; 

5. Potentially a range of KPIs for approximating the potential risk position. 

Institutions tend to have different approaches to integrating scenario learnings into their 

operations. 

Asset Manager/Asset Owner 

Key Question: Could climate change have a material impact on my investment analysis? 

While the TCFD distinguishes between asset managers and asset owners, both have the same 

goal: to optimize value (risk return) for their investors and stakeholders. Given their role in the 

financial system, they strive to outperform the market, identify new and attractive financing 

opportunities, and, depending on the institution, potentially guide the energy transition. 

Relevant insights extend across the five points illustrated above, depe nding on the respective 

audience within the institution. A relevant cross -check consists of extending the frame of the 

analysis to longer timeframes, checking whether any risks (opportunities) occurring after ten 

years might already impact the performance of assets currently invested in. One example is 

the real estate sector, where an intention to sell in 10 years ’ time might meet a demand which 

then already incorporates a view to the next 10 years – thus, 20 years would be the appropriate 

timeline for asse ssing risks. In the risk integration, the focus is on the key risk drivers. 

Banks 

Key question: Could climate change impact my counterparties ’ probability of default? 

While banks tend to leverage the same underlying basis and findings of scenario analysis, they 

tend to apply a higher materiality threshold (apart from for distressed entities). Also, when 

integrating the learnings in the standard processes, they tend to leverage the few key risk 

drivers per sector and geography. Standard portfolio indicators are of less relevance currently. 

In risk integration, the focus is on the key risk drivers. Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

193 

Insurance companies 

Key question: How does climate change affect my underwriting and investment activities 

across business lines? 

Scenario analysis allows for a for ward -looking integration of climate -related risks into 

investment and underwriting activities, complementing traditional stress testing. On the 

underwriting side, scenario analysis supports a better understanding of climate -related 

impacts on claims and pr emiums. Insurance premiums, for example, could be affected by 

climate -related transitions risk due to changes in the amount of insurance policies sold. There 

could be different potential implications. A reduction in premium revenues could impact 

overall pr ofitability and, in turn, also impact capital requirements. Scenario analysis provides 

insights into which sectors within the underwriting portfolio across different business lines 

could be most affected. 

Questions answered by function of a financial inst itution 

A number of needs by different functions can be addressed by scenario analysis, for example 

within asset management. Some of the objectives of scenario analysis by user group were 

derived from the TCFD ‘s supplementary notes for the financial sector (TCFD, 2017a ). 

Table 12 -1 Objectives of scenario analysis for the asset manager user group 5

User 

groups  User  Questions that can be answered with Scenario Analysis 

> Market

Equity Analyst 

(PRI, 2018 )

● Who could be winners and losers - structurally, including adaptive 

capacity? 

● What are the material impacts of climate change on existing risk 

factors? Have new risk factors been identified? 

Product 

development 

(PRI, 2018, p. 37 )

● Where do new investment needs arise (and existing needs 

diminish)? 

● How can this be reflected in new products or during the transition 

of existing products? 

Portfolio 

Manager 

● How could climate change affect the relative risk -return profile of 

specific sectors? 

● To what extent can security selection influence the average sector 

risk? 

● Can the sector actively manage its risks and opportunities? 

● What are the material impacts of climate change on existing risk 

factors? Have new risk factors been identified?  

> Risk
> controlling

Risk Manage r ● Would new risk factors or a change in the materiality of risk factors 

imply a need for reflection in general risk management?  

> Sustainability
> Department

CSR Manager 

● Which metrics should be retrieved from the specialist 

departments for the disclosure of climate risks? 

● Qualitative vs. quantitative: Which financial indicators should be 

mapped?      

> 5Adapted from PwC (2019) in TCFD Think Tank (2019, pp. 14 -15) .The criteria considered here are followed by
> presentations and discussions in the TCFD Think Tank in Q1 and Q2 2019. For further criteria and parameters see Technical
> Supplement publications of TCFD (2017c, p. 9).

Chapter 12 

194 

Integration example: Asset owner analyst 

While the second line of defense is regulated in its risk modelling, there is flexibility in 

investment analysis with regard to model used. While some analysts use multiple -based 

models, others build on, for example, discounted cash flow models. Some analysts build 

distinct models per company, reflecting corporate assets and investment plans, while others 

work primarily with fi nancial reporting and derive additional insights qualitatively. 

Once the potential financial materiality of climate -related risks and opportunities and their 

timing has been analyzed and an analyst chooses to integrate these findings, the analyst has 

diff erent pathways for doing so. Using the example of a discounted cash flow model, climate -

related insights might find reflection in the growth potential or risk profile of specific securities. 

If changes in cash flows are to be reflected, the results will de pend on whether the analyst is 

interested in the business impacts at a specific point in time or in a trend. Results from the 

analysis of a specific time frame can be used to extend the forecasting horizon of specific cash 

flows. If the analysis shows busi ness impact changes in a trend, the terminal growth rate can 

be adjusted. Also, the specific short -term calculation could integrate climate -related impacts 

on cash flows (the same holds true for capex). 

Similar degrees of freedom exist for the reflection o f risk. An illustrative issue tree is shown 

below ( Figure 12 -4). 

Figure 12 -4 How to integrate scenario a nalysis into company valuations 

Source: The CO -Firm and Kepler Cheuvreux (2018a) 

# 3 Methodology & data 

This chapter outlines the method and data used to assess climate -related risks & opportunities 

with Climate Excellence, using the example of individual co mpanies. Our method for modelling 

is unique in that it: 

• provides forward -looking and financial impacts; 

• builds on fundamental analysis, enabling the assessment of risks from market and 

competitive dynamics, and enabling an easy integration into existing an alysis 

practices; Do you want to integrate these    

> results of scenario analysis into
> financial modelling?
> Use the results in multi -criteria or
> other type of analysis
> Do you want to reflect changes in
> cash flows or changes in the risk
> profile?
> Do you want to be able to reflect the
> business impact of transition risks at
> a specific point in time or are you
> more interested in the trend?
> Do you want to understand the
> potential risks in specific scenarios
> or integrate scenario risk into the
> central valuation model?
> Extend the forecasting
> horizon or specific cash
> flows (option 1)
> Adjust the terminal
> growth rate (option 2)
> Calculate the implied risk
> premium and its variance under
> different adaptive capacity
> scenarios (option 3)
> Adjust the discount rate to
> reflect the required rate of
> return to take up additional
> transition risk
> (option 4)
> No Yes
> Growth profile Risk profile
> Risk to baseline scenario Trend Point in Time Risk within transition scenario

Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

195 

• includes adaptive capacity , i.e., the capacity of companies to adjust their strategies 

if financially relevant ;

• builds on bottom -up asset -level modelling , allowing integrated insights on a plant, 

technology, company, country and sector level; 

• builds on geographic granularity corresponding to specific sector characteristics; 

The approach has been co -developed with leading financial institutions, inputs/ modelling 

been academically validated and tested with companies over several years. 6

Two approaches are most discussed in modelling climate -related financial impacts: top -down 

and bottom -up modelling. We have chosen the bottom -up approach for the quantitative 

assessment of climate -related financial risks and opportunities, as we have seen that 

corporate characteristics within a sector lead to significantly different financial impacts. 

Understanding the financial implications of climate scenarios 

We calculate the financial impact (FI) for an individual company i for a given year t>0 under a 

given climate scenario SC as follows. 

Formula 12 -1 Financial impact calculation, example: Company 

𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 >0 = (∑ 𝐶𝐴𝐵 𝑖 ,𝑡 ,𝑗 ,𝑘 × 𝐵𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 ,𝑗 ,𝑘 

> 𝑗 ,𝑘

) × (∑ 𝐶𝐴𝐵 𝑖 ,𝑡 =0,𝑗 ,𝑘 × 𝐵𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 =0,𝑗 ,𝑘 

> 𝑗 ,𝑘

)

> −1

Where 

𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 >0 is the financial impact in terms of EBITDA, EBIT or sales 

relative to the start year 

𝐶𝐴𝐵 𝑖 ,𝑡 ,,𝑗 ,𝑘  is the company activity breakdown that splits revenue shares 

to the bottom level, summarizing the activity j in a geography 

(e.g. country or region) k 

𝐵𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 ,,𝑗 ,𝑘  is the financial impact in terms of absolute EBITDA, EBIT or 

sales under the scenario SC for the bottom -level activity j in 

geography k for company i 

Formula 12 -1 shows that the breaking down of an individual company ’s economic activity into 

meaningful climate -impact entities (based on industry standard classification systems, such as 

NA CE - as used in the EU Taxonomy - or NAICS) 7 to which we can map a specific climate -related            

> 6See, for example: University of Cambrid ge Institute for Sustainability Leadership (CISL, 2016 )and The Energy Transition
> Risks & Opportunities (ET Risk) research consortium seeks to provide research and tools to assess the financial risks and
> opportunities associated with the transition to a lo w-carbon economy. Please refer to: http://et -risk.eu/ , as well as G20
> Green Finance Study Group (2017) .
> 7NACE -Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community, NACE is derived from the Fre nch
> Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques dans la Communauté européenne; NAICS -North American Industry
> Classification System Chapter 12

196 

financial impact for this individual activity and in its geography. To do this, in a first step, we 

cluster economic activities by profit drivers (is the key determ inant the value chain 

performance, the operations performance, or product differentiation). Then, we break down 

a company segment by key operations from a climate -related view (per geographic region). 

Climate Excellence then uses functional impact relati ons for mapping climate scenario 

parameters such as demand changes, relative price changes, availability of raw materials, etc. 

to the profit and loss divers along the companies ’ structural criteria. This is a materiality -driven 

approach, looking at the ex tent of climate risks and opportunities relative to the average 

margin and margin volatility. This mapping results in individual cost, margin, and/ or volume 

impacts. The overview illustrates that an understanding of the sector and partially geographic 

mar ket dynamics is key in providing a true and fair view of the impacts. 

Fundamental market modelling to calculate the financial impact of climate 

scenarios 

In the previous chapter we broke down company economic activities into climate -impact 

homogeneous entities, based on NACE codes. We analyzed their profit drivers, identified the 

relevant transmission mechanisms that illustrate their impact by climate scenarios, and gained 

an understanding of the competitive situation. 

We now assume that we are looking at a sector in which financial performance is driven by 

operations efficiency, and that operations efficiency is linked to the technology, capacity, and 

efficiency status of specific plants owned by the company. This would, for example, be the case 

for se ctors such as cement, steel, and utilities. In this case,  Figure 12 -5 (subsequent numbering 

is consistent with the chart 8) illustrates our modelling approach: 

Data on current plant ownership by a company (2) in different geographies is mapped with the 

scenario -based, geographic changes to demand, prices, etc. (1), and, reflecting future 

developments, the potential for companies to technologically improve their assets and pass 

through additional cost (3). Building on the investment plans announced by companies, a nd 

the improvement potential, the fundamental market model (5) then dynamically models the 

relative competitive position of plants as it changes due to relative geographic demand trends, 

changing input costs, etc. 

The market model allocates scenario -speci fic relative margin and volume impacts to the 

different plants. This approach is further detailed in the subsequent paragraphs and described 

in detail in the “Investor primer to transition risk analysis ” report by The CO -Firm and Kepler 

Cheuvreux (2018a) .    

> 8For more general information on each of the following steps, please refer to publications of The CO -Firm and Keple r
> Cheuvreux (2018a). Financial Climate -related Transition Risks :Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe

197 

Figure 12 -5 Fundamental market modelling approach to quantify financial impacts 

from climate scenarios 

1. Derive the key risk drivers to translate a scenario into a narrative. First, develop a holistic 

transi tion narrative by extending scenario data with consistent transition drivers. This can 

include a) Breaking down country -specific technology pathways by region and country 

based on scenario data; or b) deriving information on regulatory interventions (e.g. 

quotas and subsidies) by region and by scenario based on current and announced 

regulatory regime, climate targets, envisaged technology pathways. 

2. Build an asset -level database with financial information on individual economic activity 

in geographies. The a nalysis builds on data on corporate assets, such as power generation 

plants (e.g. wind turbines) or steel and cement plants, and technologies, efficiencies, 

production cost of each entity. 

3. Conduct a techno -economic assessment of risk mitigation measures (“adaptive 

capacity ”) . Financial modeling of climate risk must consider companies ’ ability to 

anticipate transition risks and develop mitigation strategies. The potential effectiveness 

of such measures is comprised under adaptive capacity. Analyzing risk mi tigation must 

take into account a variety of aspects such as the scenario applied (e.g. 2.0°C), the current 

technology base of a company, e.g. type, location, and age of technologies, investment 

and CAPEX and the risk -return profile of the market. Measures comprise cost pass -

through, technological upgrades and shifts, etc. 

4. Incorporate three assumptions for companies ’, i.e., asset development. Three potential 

pathways form part of the analysis: FROZEN freezes the current asset portfolio over time. 

This hypot hetical assumption is used to identify the cost of inaction under climate 

scenarios. MAINSTREAM assumes that company changes or adapts its asset portfolio in 

line with the overall market trend under the scenario. BEAT THE MARKET assumes that a 

company take s all financially profitable means to adjust based on its financial prow ess, 

anticipating changes, beating the market. 

5. Develop a fundamental market model based on the demand and supply developments to 

derive prices and asset -specific profit in the scenario s. At the example of an asset -centric 

sector, steps 1. to 4. allow for identifying the production costs per asset and company 

under different scenarios over time, forming a merit order. The intersection of the merit -

order with the demand given by the scena rio indicates the commodity price. The 

difference between this price and the production costs indicates the financial impact: Chapter 12 

198 

𝐵𝐹𝐼 𝑆𝐶 ,𝑖 ,𝑡 ,,𝑗 ,𝑘  is the financial impact in terms of absolute EBITDA, EBIT or 

sales under the scenario SC for the bottom -level activity j in 

geography k for company i

6. Derive financial impacts on companies . Aggregating the resulting absolute profit changes 

results in profit impact on company level. 

Deep dive on data required for climate scenario analysis 

Tran sition scenarios (1) 

While a climate scenario illustrates the carbon (equivalent) emissions still available to sustain 

a certain global warming level with a specific likelihood, transition scenarios that lend 

themselves to scenario modelling tend to provid e insights into potential allocations of carbon 

budgets to, for example industrial sectors, and the choices these sectors need to take to 

achieve such an overarching global warming pathway. Regulation, technology mix, and 

changes in demand and prices can b e drivers. Also transition scenarios can build on the impact 

of, for example, choices already taken, i.e., by regulators. 

Figure 12 -6 Illustrative relationship between climate scenarios, carbon budget and 

se ctor 

Given the fundamental modelling approach, Climate Excellence can operate with a range of 

scenarios. For illustrative purposes, the following case examples build on publications by the 

IEA, and their integrated energy system models. 

Scenarios can provide a set of parameters that describe future world in most cases, covering: 

• Economic activity by sector/ geography 

• Population growth 

• Energy demand 

• Climate policy 

• Fossil fuel generation, renewable share in power generation 

• Carbon capture and storage assumptions, bio -energy shares, syn fuels 

• Oil and gas demand 2.250GtCO 2         

> 1.890 GtCO 2
> 2.950GtCO 2
> Cumulative
> emissions
> already
> released
> 1.5 °
> Remaining
> budget
> 2.0 °
> What is available?
> Source: PwC based on Shell scenario
> Sector impacts
> •Product
> demand
> •Production
> technology
> change
> •Energy use
> and CO2
> emissions
> •Change of
> input -/output
> prices
> Company Impacts
> Product
> portfolio
> Company
> impact
> Financial
> impact
> Strategic
> impact
> Margins Business
> models
> Production
> technologies
> Geographic
> exposure
> Earnings
> Capex
> Business
> segments
> Assets
> The Present The Path The Future Financial Climate -related Transition Risks :Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe

199 

• GHG emissions 

Asset -level data (2) 

Chapter 3 illustrated the value of detailed and complete data on corporate assets in 

adequately assessing climate -related risks and opportunities . Similarly, Caldecott et al. point 

out that analysis using asset -level data is typically 9:

• Bottom -Up: Asset -level exposure is aggregated up to the company level rather than 

inferred from company -level reporting; 

• Fundamental: Fundamental asset attributes ( e.g. , location, technology, and age) 

inform analysis rather than disclosed metrics (for example, carbon intensity), 

enabling more sophisticated and flexible analysis; 

• Comparable: Standardization can ensure accurate company comparisons and avoids 

embedded m ethodological assumptions; 

• Forward -looking: Asset attributes (such as age) can enhance the analysis of future 

company performance and enable validation of company projections. 

• Efficient : It can significantly reduce reporting burdens and reduce time and mon ey 

spent on assuring voluntary disclosures; 

• Timely : Asset -level data can be updated in real time as events occur (like mergers or 

asset commissioning) rather than according to annual reporting cycles; 

• Transparent : Asset attributes are transparent and are b ased on real observational 

data, giving stakeholders access to the same data as company executives; 

• Scalable : The marginal costs of data acquisition and analysis decrease with scale of 

the dataset; 

• Science -driven: Asset -level data unlocks scientific approa ches to analysis which are 

repeatable and testable; 

• Unbiased : Assessments of environmental factors informed by asset -level data do not 

rely on the (non -expert) opinions of corporate boards. 

• Self -improving : Science and technology -driven risk analysis and da ta acquisition 

improve continuously with new generations of technology and research. Costs are 

also reduced over time. 

For Climate Excellence, among others, third -party asset level data used comprises more than 

230,000 physical assets in over 50 countries, providing information such as technologies used, 

capacities, production volumes, location, and other sector -specific information.     

> 9Based on art icle of Caldecott et al. (2018) .Chapter 12

200 

Risk mitigation measures (3) 

As an additional step, the analysis covers ~130 general technical measures for improving 

energy and carbon efficiency, as well as commercial measures companies can take to respond 

to changing input costs, in case taking these measures is business case positive. 

# 4 Impact examples: Climate -related transition risks: 

The following paragraphs illustrate climate -related transition risks for two distinct sectors. This 

assumes that the financial institution has reviewed whether and in which sectors climate -

related risks and opportunities might become financially material i n a first step. In a second 

step, in sectors potentially materially affected, the following analyses can be applied. 

The first example is for power generation, illustrating that climate -related impacts on single 

companies can substantially differ from the respective sector average. The second example 

shows that risk and opportunity drivers impact corporations activities differently, despite them 

operating in the same sector. 

Power generation: Global EBITDA implications and relative company 

performance 

Lo oking at the sub -sector average for power generation, both climate scenarios exhibit 

positive EBITDA developments relative to today (see  Figure 12 -7), in the business line power 

generation. 

Relative to a 2.7°C IEA scenario, IEA ’s 2.0°C scenario reflects higher CO 2 prices, more 

investments in renewable energy sources and power grids, as well as a higher power demand 

in general through electrification (e.g. e -mobility). Thus, globally, the 2.0°C scenario shows 

stronger EBITDA growth until 2030. However, not all power generation companies profit from 

these developments at the same manner. The scatter plot shows a heterogeneous picture with 

some companies outperforming the global average growth trend, while others - under the 

scenario - cannot maintain their current fin ancial performance. 

Performing this type of analysis across sectors can provide material insights for portfolio 

management, as it illustrates the growth implications per (i.e., invested) sector, which might 

differ substantially between sectors. The distri bution of growth potential among the 

companies in the sector can provide guidance to analyst security selection within the limits 

set by portfolio management. Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

201 

Figure 12 -7 The financial impact of climate risks usually affects individual 

companies hete rogeneously, even within the same sector. Both figures show 

MAINSTREAM adaptive capacity 

Source: The CO -Firm and Kepler Cheuvreux (2018b) 

A steel example illustrates the risk and opportunity driver analysis. 

Steel manufacturing: Valuation insights, the cost of inaction, and 

characteristics of successful companies 

The example on power generation showed heterogenous impact on companies, even within 

the same sector.  Figure 12 -8 illustrates the cumulative discounted cash flows of three steel 

companies along three -time horizons, focusing on their steel segments. An analysis by Kepler 

Cheuvreux and The CO -Firm revealed that all three steel companies would lose relative to a 

consensus baseline with a perpetuity view under both a 2.0°C or 2.7°C climate scenario 

compared to baseline evaluation. 10 In particular, steel company B could lose ~ 60% in a 2.7°C 

world, and ~50% in a 2.7°C world, and ~70% in a 2.0°C world, even under the assumption that 

company B invests proactively (in a business case positive manner) and aggressively in those 

technologies and markets with highest EBITDA potential (strategy: “BEAT THE MARKET ”). Steel 

company A and C would be significantly less impacted by the climate scenarios. 

This type of analysis illustrates the potential materiality of climate scenarios relative to a 

baseline as it could currently be applied by analysts a nd illustrates the time horizons in which 

different cash flow assumptions would materialize.             

> 10 With regard to the choice of a baseline for company valuation, the valuation estimates from climate change scenarios
> are compared with a market ‘consensus’ baseline, based on Bloomberg c onsensus data and the terminal growth rate and
> discount rate applied from Kepler Cheuvreux’ own equity analysts (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018d ).Weighted average global power generation
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
> EBITDA (change % vs. today)
> EBITDA (change % vs. today)
> Individual power generation companies in 2 °C scenario
> (100)
> (50)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 2.0 °C
> 2.7 °C
> 2025 2030 2040 2050

Chapter 12 

202 

Figure 12 -8 The discounted cash flow from steel manufacturing would be 

significantly re duced for all three steel c ompanies along a 2.7°C and 2.0°C warming 

pathway 11 

Often, climate -related risks and opportunities are considered a medium - to long -term effect. 

Figure 12 -9 illustrates the impact of companies seizing to invest beyond what they have 

planned for the next three to five years (“ frozen ” strategy). This would already reduce EBITDA 

in the short -term. 

Were the companies to adjust along the scenario -based devel opments in their respective 

geographic markets and in line with their technological experience, and their financial means 

(generated in the steel segment), company A could generate a positive trend. This is even more 

true if the company proactively “beats the market ” (Figure 12 -9).  

> 11

With regard to  the choice of a baseline for company valuation, the valuation estimates from climate change scenarios 

are compared with a market ‘consensus’ baseline, based on Bloomberg consensus data and the terminal growth rate and 

discount rate applied from Kepler Che vreux’ own equity analysts  (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018d ).0       

> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> "Consensus"
> baseline
> Indexed sum of cumulative discounted
> cash flows (Baseline = 100)
> 2.7 C
> Beat -the -
> Market
> 2.0 C
> Beat -the -
> Market
> Perpetuity Years 2023 -2050 First 5 years
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Indexed sum of cumulative discounted
> cash flows (Baseline = 100)
> 2.7 C
> Beat -the -
> Market
> "Consensus"
> baseline
> 2.0 C
> Beat -the -
> Market
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Indexed sum of cumulative discounted
> cash flows (Baseline = 100)
> "Consensus"
> baseline
> 2.7 C
> Beat -the -
> Market
> 2.0 C
> Beat -the -
> Market

Steel Company A Steel Company B Steel Company C Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

203 

Figure 12 -9 EBITDA development of three steel companies with three strategic 

assumptions under a 2.0°C climate scenario 12 

What drives such differences in the financial performance of companies and their ability to 

adapt to climate scenarios? The companies ’ current technol ogy portfolios and geographic 

footprints provide explanations. For a better understanding of the results, it is worthwhile to 

note that there are three main technology routes for steel manufacturing: coal -based (Blast 

Oxygen Furnace (BOF)), electricity -bas ed (Electric Arc Furnace (EAF)), and gas -based (Direct 

Reduced Iron (DRI)). All routes have different characteristics regarding raw materials, 

investments and GHG emissions.  Figure 12 -10  shows the EBITDA breakdown according the 

three technology routes and the geographical footprint for the main regions and countries. 

Company A has a globally and technology diversified portfolio which can level -out climate -

related impacts. Company C has invested in two routes in two regions. Only Company B has 

focused on one route in one country. Company A benefits from its diversified portfolio, which 

levels out climate -related impacts through the different route characteri stics and different 

climate impacts among regions. Additionally, it profits from further investment in the electric -

based and gas -based production routes regions, benefiting from the route ’s inherent 

characteristics (e.g. North America). Steel company C ca n also profit from its early investment 

in the gas -based route in the United States. However, steel company B ’s portfolio focuses on 

the coal -based production route in one country. The costs for the coal -based route to adapt to 

climate -related impacts are significantly higher compared to the other technologies and 

investment only pays off under high CO2 prices which occur in the 2.0°C only after 2030. Until 

then, the competitive disadvantage of coal -based steel production results in decreasing 

financial per formance.               

> 12 With regard to the choice of a baseline for company valuation, the valuation estimates from climate change scenarios
> are compared with a market ‘consensus’ baseline, based on Bloomberg consensus data and the terminal growth rate and
> discount rate applied from Kepler Chevreux’ own equity analysts (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018 ).EBITDA (change % vs. 2016)
> EBITDA (change % vs. 2016)
> EBITDA (change % vs. 2016)
> 2040 2020 2030 2050
> -50%
> 0%
> 50%
> 100%
> -50%
> 2050 2020 2030 2040
> 0%
> 50%
> 100%
> 2020 2030 2040 2050
> -50%
> 0%
> 100%
> 50%
> FROZEN MARKET BEAT THE MARKET
> Steel Company A Steel Company B Steel Company C

Chapter 12 

204 

Figure 12 -10 Today's asset and geographic portfolio and the adaptive strategy 

influence the ability of com panies to succeed under 2.0°C climate scenario 13 

# 5 How to apply scenario analysis 

Scenario analysis of climate -related financial risks and opportunities can integrate smoothly 

into existing processes and practices. Using the example of investment, climate scenarios can 

be mapped against an investor ’s own macroeconomic outlook, in the case of IEA , regarding 

population growth and economic growth. The sector -specific scenario developments can be 

mapped with the institutions ’ own sector -specific outlooks, leading to a delta analysis which 

helps to understand where and how risk and opportunity drivers might change or new ones 

might arise, and allows the internal experts to review the order of magnitude impacts based 

on their experience. The same holds true for the company level, building on the companies ’

structural characteristics ( Figure 12 -11 ).   

> 13 With regard to the choice of a baseline for company valuation, the valuation estimates from climate c hange scenarios
> are compared with a market ‘consensus’ baseline, based on Bloomberg consensus data and the terminal growth rate and
> discount rate applied from Kepler Chevreux’ own equity analysts (The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2018d ).

Financial Climate -related Transition Risks : Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe 

205 

Figure 12 -11 Scenario analysis insights lend themselves to easy integration into 

existing financial ins titut ion practices (example investment) 

Source: PwC (2019) Own elaboration 

For the specific integration into existing valuation approaches,  Figure 12 -11  pr ovides a first 

methodological overview.  Figure 12 -12  provides a schematic example for an integration of 

climate -related factors into real estate valuation, based on an income approach. 

Figure 12 -12 Illustrative approach on how to integrate climate -related risks in real 

estate evaluatio n

Source: Valuation of Carbon Performance Project (2019) 

# 6 Conclusions and outlook 

The purpose of this study is to describe one pathway to analyzing climate -related risks and 

opportunities, based on the Climate Excellence methodology and tool, and using the example 

of asset management and scenarios provided by the International Energy Ag ency (others can 

be applied in a similar fashion). The paper underlined the insights that can be generated by 

using climate scenario analyses, and showcased different use cases for different financial 

institutions and their functions. The underlying modell ing and data needs were explained and 

the application of scenario analysis with a real -life case study was demonstrated. Illustrative picture of value determination with the income approach 

> Multiple

…    

> Annual income
> Av .Rent /m 2
> Annual cost
> Occupancy Rate
> (m 2)

x Maintenance &        

> repair cost
> (Opex )
> Admin cost
> (Opex )
> Int. interest rate/
> risk yield
> Residual life /
> annuity multiple

Potential climate -related value driver                    

> To be paid by
> tenant
> To be paid by
> landlord
> Operating
> licence : EPC
> level
> Exchange duties
> (heating …)
> Energy price
> increase
> Internal CSR/CO 2
> targets /price EE Renew ables
> Future value
> projection :
> adjustment factors
> (+/ -)based on
> comperative data
> Required Invest
> Projected renov .
> cost (Capex)
> Capital cost

- + + x +

+

x

-

%

%

SCHEMATIC                              

> Carbon pricing: Increased energy
> tax /carbon price for Non -ETS
> Ordinance law :define tight EE
> standards for building stock
> Demand side : Market pressure
> increase by tenants /occupiers
> National (sub )sector climate targets
> define max „risk “
> Technologies get cheaper due to
> learning curves and/ or subsidies Chapter 12

206 

There are a few key conclusions that can be derived from this overview: 

• Focusing exclusively on carbon and carbon regulation might ju mp too short in 

providing a true and fair view of potential climate -related risks and opportunities. 

• In line with the recommendations by the ( TCFD, 2017b ), it is valuable to look not only 

into the next couple of years, as investment or product decisions t aken today may 

face significantly negative impacts during their lifetime, creating lock -ins or avoidable 

losses 

• Only focusing on sector -centric analysis means losing out on the potential to improve 

portfolios by active securities selection, as company perf ormance within sectors in 

the same scenario tends to vary significantly. 

• At the same time, scenario analysis allows for deriving clear and distinct risk and 

opportunity drivers on a sector -, and – depending on sector characteristics -

potentially geography -level. They can be mapped to distinct company characteristics. 

This provides ample space for the easy integration of climate -related risk and 

opportunity analyses, all the way to a quantitative integration into valuation, 

probability of default, or premiu m calculations. 

Voluntary disclosure, such as the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) and the Carbon 

Disclosure Project (CDP), as well as regulatory activities connected with the disclosure of 

climate -related risks and opportunities, and superviso ry activities indicate that scenario -based 

climate -related disclosure is there to stay. At the same time, scenario analysis still tends to be 

a weaker point in current disclosure related to the TCFD recommendations 14 , as are the 

integration into strategy and risk management. These points are closely connected – without 

a clear view on underlying dynamics and risk and opportunity drivers, it is hard to formulate a 

strategy or integrate numbers without their underlying rationale into a risk framework. 

With increasing work on and with climate scenarios and by contrasting specific results with 

one another, and increasing disclosure, it can be expected that the dialogue will increasingly 

center on key scenario assumptions, such as on the key decarbonizing engines of the energy 

system (i.e., carbon capture and storage or usage), and the transmission of these assumptions 

to the financial performance of individual business models, products, customers and suppliers, 

etc. The sa me holds true for commercial actors ’ strategic responses and adaptive capacities. 

These dynamics pave the way for a better understanding of the strategic choices we are facing 

regarding climate change, their economic impacts across assets, companies, secto rs, societies, 

a call for meaningful data, and a smarter dialogue between users and preparers.      

> 14 According to the TCFD status report, information related to Strategy c), “describe the resilience of the organization’s
> strategy, taking into consideration different climate -related scenarios, including a 2°C or lower scenario”, had the lowest
> levels of disclosure (TCFD, 2019 ). Financial Climate -related Transition Risks :Integrated Assessment Across the Finance and Investment Universe

207 

# Bibliography 

Caldecott, B., Dericks, G., Bouveret, G., Schumacher, K., Pfeiffer, A., TULLOCH, D., . . . 

MCCARTEN, M. J. U. o. O., Sustainable Finance Programme accessed. (2018). Asset -

Level Data and the Energy Transition: Findings from ET Risk Work Package 2. 19 .

CISL. (2016). Feeling the heat: An investors’ guide to measuring business risk from carbon 

and energy regulation. Cambridge, UK. 

G20 Green Finance Stu dy Group. (2017). G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report 2017 .

PRI. (2018). Implementing the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) 

Recommendations - A guide for Asset Owners, p. 37ff. 

https://www.unpri.org/download?ac=4652 

Röttmer, N. (20 18). Szenarioanalysen und TCFD - ein Beitrag zum Risikomanagement und zur 

Finanzierungs - bzw. Investitionsstrategie? .  In Stapelfeld, M., Granzow, M. and 

Kopp, M.. Greening Finance. Der Weg in eine nachhaltige Finanzwirtschaft .

TCFD. (2017a). Implementin g the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related 

Financial Disclosures .

TCFD. (2017b). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures .

TCFD. (2017c). Technical Supplement: The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -

Related Risks and Opportunities. In: Task Force on Climate -Related Financial 

Disclosures. 

TCFD. (2017d). The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -Related Risks and 

Opportunities 

TCFD. (2019). 2019 Status report, https://www.fsb -tcfd.o rg/wp -

content/uploads/2019/06/2019 -TCFD -Status -Report -FINAL -053119.pdf 

TCFD Think Tank. (2019). User Guidance on TCFD Recommendations. Implementing TCFD 

step by step in your company. https://gsfc -germany.com/wp -

content/uploads/2019/08/190820_TCFD_Handreich ungen_EN -1.pdf 

The CO -Firm, & Kepler Cheuvreux. (2018a). Investor Primer to Transition Risk Analysis, 

http://et -risk.eu/investor -primer -to -transition -risk -analysis/ 

The CO -Firm, & Kepler Cheuvreux. (2018b). Transition risk for electric utilities, http://e t-

risk.eu/electric -utilities/ 

The CO -Firm, & Kepler Cheuvreux. (2018c). Transition risks in the automotive sector. 

http://et -risk.eu/auto_risk/ 

The CO -Firm, & Kepler Cheuvreux. (2018 d). Transition risks in the steel sector, http://et -

risk.eu/wp -content/uploads/2018/07/Transition -risks -for -steel.pdf Chapter 13 

208 

# A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for 

# Banks and Investors 

By 

Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 1

# Abstract 

The Acclimatise -Vivid Economics physical climate risk analytical toolkit offers a joined -up top 

down and bottom up approach to assessing physical risks in financial portfolios. Acclimatise 

draws on extensive experience in interpreting physical climate risk data to provid e detailed 

analysis of how climate hazards can impact clients ’ holdings. Vivid Economics brings 

understanding of state -of -the -art modelling techniques to shed light on the macroeconomic 

climate impacts facing banks and investors. Here we share an overview of the Acclimatise -

Vivid Economics analytical toolkit, which is a suite of integrated tools and services that can be 

customised to clients ’ evolving needs. The analytical toolkit is based on a layered approach, 

which first provides a high -level climate ris k assessment at the portfolio level, followed by deep 

dive analyses where material risks are identified. The toolkit provides qualitative risk scores 

for the portfolio -wide heatmapping, and quantitative financial metrics at the second (‘ deep 

dive ’) stage. 

Keyword s: physical climate risk, natural disasters, changes in asset values, financial impacts 

# 1 Purpose of the analytical toolkit 

Climate change risks have the potential to disrupt financial markets, and are of growing 

importance for the finance sector. Th e Task Force for Climate -related Financial Disclosures 

(TCFD), and the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) have highlighted the 

financial risks from climate change, and called for the integration of climate risk into asset 

management and inves tment practices. Having an investment portfolio which is resilient to 

potential future climate scenarios is of vital importance. 

Acclimatise and Vivid Economics have partnered to develop an analytical toolkit for banks and 

investors, to assess physical cli mate risks and opportunities under future climate scenarios. 

Acclimatise is an advisory and analytics company specialised in physical climate risk 

assessment and climate change adaptation. Vivid Economics is a strategic economics 

consultancy with a focus o n climate change analysis, public and private climate change 

strategies, and the quantification of risks and opportunities. 

Our analytical toolkit assesses the impacts of climate change -related physical risks and 

opportunities on a portfolio by combining climate hazard models with sector and asset -level 

vulnerability data, value stream impact models and financial modelling, to assess impact on                             

> 1This chapter is written by Richenda Connell ,email: r.connell@acclimatise.uk.com, CTO and Co -founder of Acclimatise ;
> Robin Hamaker -Taylor ,email: r.hamaker -taylor@acclimatise.uk.com, Financial services climate risk consultant at
> Acclimatise; Xianfu Lu ,email: xianfu.lu@acclimatise.uk.com, Head of Analytics at Acclimatise; Eis, Jason ,email:
> jason.eis@vivideconomics.com, Executive Director of Vivid Economics. A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for Banks and Investors

209 

key financial metrics. It can serve various business functions within a financial institution 

including strategic portfolio management, informing lending decisions and asset allocation, 

disclosure, and internal or external engagement. It can be delivered with a menu -driven 

interface. 

# 2 Intended users and application 

Our toolkit has been designed for use by banks and inv estors to evaluate forward -looking 

physical climate risks based on scenarios. Within banks, the toolkit caters to a variety of 

functions, including: 

• Risk management teams, 

• Credit risk departments, 

• Investment officers, and 

• Lending officers. 

Within the investment community, the target users are asset managers and investors, also 

across a variety of functions, including: 

• Risk management teams, 

• Investment officers, and 

• Stewardship teams. 

The toolkit has broad applicability as it can be used globally, acros s most sectors. Furthermore, 

it can be applied to most asset classes, and supports analyses for a wide range of acute and 

chronic climate hazards. More detail is provided in Section 3 below. 

# 3 Fundamental components 

Overview 

Our toolkit performs both portfo lio -wide and asset -level assessment of physical risks and 

opportunities with its phased, layered approach. After secure data collection of asset level 

information, (including location, sector and sub -sector information, and details of the 

underlying physic al assets 2), the first phase is a high -level portfolio -wide assessment, resulting 

in a heatmap. The second phase involves quantification for a selection of assets. This involves 

‘deep dive ’ asset -specific analyses for higher risk areas identified from the Phase 1 heatmap. 

See  Figure 14 -1 for an overview of the toolkit ’s fundamental components.       

> 2To the extent this information is available. This includes, for example: constructio n type, number of stories, age of physical
> asset, etc. Chapter 13

210 

Figure 13 -1 Overview of fundamental components of the Acclimatise -Vivid 

Economics analytical toolkit for physical climate risks 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

Coverage 

Our toolkit has global coverage and covers all sectors and sub -sectors which can be vu lnerable 

to physical climate risks. See  Figure 14 -2 for a sample of sectors typically assessed by users of 

the toolkit. 

Figure 13 -2 Non -exhaustive sample of economic sectors covered in the Acclimatise -

Vivid Economics toolkit 

The toolkit draws on the latest climate science on potential changes in key climate hazards, 

both acute and chronic, from a wide range of global and regional climate model outputs. 

Specifically, the toolkit leveraging: 

• The full suite of climate models participating in the World Climate Research 

Programme’s (WCRP) fifth phase of the Climate Model Inter -comparison Project, 

known as ‘CMIP5’; and A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for Banks and Investors 

211 

• Some of the regional climate model outputs from WCRP’s Coordinated Regional 

Climate Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX). 

Figure 13 -3 provides a n overview of the climate science used in the analytical toolkit. 

Figure 13 -3 The toolkit employs robust climate science on potential changes to key 

climate hazards 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

Hazards listed under “chronic ” and “acute ” hazards are variables that are entirely dependent 

on climatic or hydrometeorological conditions (hence can be quantified by either climate 

models directly or by combining more than one variable directly simulated by climate models). 

The “climate -related ” variables/phenomenon are often also dependent on other non -climatic 

parameters (e.g. water stress is dependent on population and economic activities, landslide 

dependent on topography etc.). 

The toolkit covers a r ange of time periods, from the present day up to 2100, with most financial 

institutions applying it on investment timescales up to mid -century. It provides data for a range 

of climate scenarios, though typically the representative concentration pathway (RC P) 

scenarios 2.6 and 8.5 are used to span a range of future physical risks, roughly corresponding 

to 2 oC and 4°C warming by the end of the 21 st century. 3

The financial effects of physical climate risks can be quantified with the toolkit for a full range 

of asset classes and risks. It is designed to assess debt, equity, real estate and infrastructure 

investments. See  Figure 14 -4 for an overview of asset classes covered by the toolkit.      

> 3Source: IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth
> Assessment R eport of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer
> (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp. Table 2.1. Available from:
> https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/05/SYR_AR5 _FINAL_full_wcover.pdf Chapter 13

212 

Figure 13 -4 The financial effects of climate change can be quantified for a full range 

of asset classes and risks with the analytical toolkit 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

# 4 Detailed methodology 

Our toolkit performs both portfolio -wide and asset -level assessment of physical risks and 

opportunities with its phased, layered approach. This draws on good practice in risk 

management, which suggests that a broad screening of risks should be conducted, before 

determining which areas to focus on for in -depth analysis. The heatmapping approach has 

multiple benefits, in that it: 

• Provides an early indication of where higher risks may lie within the portfolio, 

• Is com prehensive in scope, covering all relevant sectors, sub -sectors and geographies, 

• Is undertaken quickly and efficiently, and 

• Highlights ‘hotspots ’ of physical risk in the portfolio, which can then be the focus for 

deep -dive analysis or investor engagement. 

This section reviews the two phases of the analytical toolkit in more detail, highlighting how 

the heatmapping exercise is a first stage that feeds in to the second deep -dive stage. These 

phases are separate, relying on distinct methodologies, as describe d in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. 

Portfolio -wide physical risk heatmapping 

The first phase identifies key areas of physical risk by screening a portfolio for vulnerability to 

a full range of climate impacts. Inputs for this are covered under Section 5.1 of this c hapter, 

but include portfolio composition information on sectors in locations of interest to the client. 

For this phase, spatial data on climate hazards under various scenarios are combined with 

sector vulnerability indicators and applied to the portfolio. This produces a heatmap which 

helps identify priority portfolio segments for deeper analysis. 

This phase assesses the vulnerability of a portfolio – by sector and sub -sector – to climate and 

climate -related hazards. Vulnerability to climate change of eac h sub -sector is assessed using a A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for Banks and Investors 

213 

suite of eight vulnerability indicators covering the whole value chain, including for example, 

reliance on climate -sensitive supplies, transportation route, market demand, etc. 

Each sub -sector is assigned a vulnerability i ndicator weighting score within the toolkit, 

according to the relative importance of the indicator to a particular sub -sector. This score 

represents the extent to which that vulnerability indicator will affect the value of any holding 

in that sub -sector wh en subject to a specific combination of hazards. These vulnerability 

indicators have been developed by Acclimatise over a decade, drawing on a broad base of 

empirical analysis and peer -reviewed literature, as well as Acclimatise ’s work with clients in 

thos e sectors and geographies most prone to climate risk. They capture a wide range of impact 

channels through which climate and climate -related hazards can affect holdings in a sub -sector. 

The indicators are designed to provide comprehensive coverage of poten tial risk areas, and 

enable financial institutions to have a full picture of the factors that might affect the value of 

their portfolios. 

Within the toolkit, the hazard data and vulnerability indicators are combined to assess physical 

risks facing a financ ial institution ’s sub -sectors by geography. Impacts are assessed across all 

vulnerability indicators that are important to a specific sub -sector, and utilising hazard data 

sets that are relevant to the sub -sector. Sets of relevant climate/weather data (e.g .

temperature or precipitation), and climate/weather -related events data (e.g. landslide or 

wildfire risk) are linked to each vulnerability indicator. The underlying hazard data are assigned 

scores, to indicate the presence, absence and severity of individ ual hazards. 

A set of physical risk heatmaps are produced in this phase, per climate scenario and time 

period, providing banks and investors with a picture across the portfolio of which segments 

face higher physical climate risks. The heatmaps can be provi ded based on sector and sub -

sector categories, asset classes and geographies as specified by the client. The heatmaps are 

typically delivered in Excel so they can be readily disseminated. An illustrative heatmap output, 

showing risk scores by sector, sub -sector and geography is provided in the ‘Input and output 

metrics/data ’ section (Section 5). 

Quantification of physical risk in financial metrics 

The second phase takes portfolio segments identified as at high risk in the heatmapping phase 

and employs data on climate hazards (present -day and future), value stream impact models 

and financial modelling to assess impacts on key financial metrics. The analytical approach is 

summari zed in  Figure 14 -5. It applies data analytics to evaluate value stream impacts at two 

levels: 

• Economy and sector -level effects of physical climate change, deploying a

Computation General Equilibrium (CGE) model to estimate the effects of slow -onset 

climate change for a large number of countries and sectors. This models the wider 

demand shifts cause d by physical climate change, and the interdependencies 

between sectors. 

• Company -specific value chain analysis of physical climate risk, applying climate 

hazard data to quantify impacts on the physical assets and supply chains of 

companies in the sector. Chapter 13 

214 

Figure 13 -5 Overview of analytical approach to quantifying the financial effects of 

physical climate risk 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

Economy and sector -level modelling 

We deploy a computational general equilibrium (CGE) model to assess the interactions 

between economic sectors and between countries/regions. It provides an understanding not 

just of ‘first -order ’ climate change impacts but also how climate change shocks fe ed through 

the entire economic system, sector by sector. Compared to other similar models, it provides a 

higher level of geographic and sector disaggregation, and hence a more nuanced view of 

climate change effects than models which are limited to a handfu l of regions and sectors. 

Detailed climate change impact functions are used to model the relationships between 

temperature increases and economic outcomes at sector - and country -levels. Impact functions 

provide a means to translate between physical and ec onomic impacts, providing information 

on the magnitude of economic impact for any given temperature rise. These impact functions 

draw on the latest academic research and cover a range of effects, including impacts of 

increased temperatures on labor product ivity, reductions in availability of land caused by sea 

level rise and changes in the demand for specific sectors. These risks are quantified and used 

as an input into financial asset modelling. 

Modelling impacts on value chains 

We model physical climate r isks to value chains for key impact channels: changes in facility -

level production, physical asset damage, business interruption and supply chain disruption. 

These risks are quantified and used as an input into financial asset modelling.   

> •Facility -level pro duction: Changes in climatic variables can have a direct impact on the
> productive capacity of assets. We maintain an in -house database of sensitivity functions, which
> describe the relationships between climatic factors and production, based on latest acade mic
> literature and empirical evidence. Combining sensitivity functions, asset locations and climate
> models generate estimates of changes in production at the facility level between present day
> and under future climate change scenarios.
> •Facility -level extre me weather damages: We maintain a database of damage functions which
> describe the relationships between hazard intensity and physical damage to assets for many
> major asset classes. Combining these with archetypal asset and hazard intensity data for asset
> locations provides estimates of facility -level losses. A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for Banks and Investors

215  

> •Facility -level business and supply chain interruptions: We maintain a model of business
> downtime caused by extreme climate events. The model combines empirical data on business
> interruptions caused by e xtreme weather events with hazard maps, to evaluate associated
> production losses. In parallel, data on sector supply chains are combined with data on extreme
> events at key supply locations for the sector, to estimate potential supply chain disruption and
> associated lost production across the sector.

Financial modelling 

Discounted cash flow models are used to estimate the combined effects of the above value 

stream impacts on valuations of financial assets. For each financial entity, we aggregate the 

cash fl ow impacts of changes in sector size with facility -level impacts on productivity, damages, 

and business and supply chain interruptions. These cash flows are discounted over time using 

a company -specific discount rate in order to estimate valuation impacts. The same approach 

is used for corporate bonds, factoring in the impacts of cash flow changes on probability of 

default. 

# 5 Input and output metrics/data 

Inputs 

Databases integrated into the toolkit include: 

• Acute and chronic climate and climate -related haza rd data, for present -day and future 

time periods under climate change scenarios, 

• Country economic data, covering a range of social accounting matrices, 

• Input -output data and international trade data, 

• Data on listed companies, including financial metrics, geographic and product 

segmentation, and 

• Sectoral databases. 

Other databases can be integrated into the toolkit depending on client requirements. 

Clients provide portfolio data in a matrix of sub -sec tor and geography for the first phase of 

analysis (portfolio -wide heatmapping). Sub -sector descriptions are mapped onto standard 

industry classifications. For the second phase (quantified deep dives), core financial 

information for counterparties is requir ed, if they are not listed companies or if data are not 

publicly available. 

Outputs 

The toolkit provides qualitative risk scores at the first stage: portfolio -wide heatmapping, and 

quantitative financial metrics at the second stage: ‘deep dive ’ analysis. Providing qualitative 

metrics is a strength of the toolkit, as the heatmapping can be used to facilitate internal 

dialogue around the climate ‘hot spots ’ across a portfolio and help raise awareness. The 

qualitative risk score gives clear direction and focu s for the quantitative assessment, so that 

data - and resource -intensive quantitative analysis is only performed where warranted. 

The first phase produces a heatmap output, as shown in  Figure 13 -6. Outputs can be displayed 

aggregated by asset type, portfolio sub -sectors and geographies. Vulnerability to all hazards Chapter 13 

216 

are shown in outputs, though it is possible to show a more detailed breakdown of which 

hazar ds in particular are driving the aggregated risk score. 

Figure 13 -6 Illustrative physical risk heatmap output 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

The toolkit can also present results as a multi -hazard risk score overlaid with asset value, 

drawing visual attention to vulnerable assets, as shown in  Figure 13 -7.

Figure 13 -7 Illustrative risk scores for a portfolio of hotels and resorts covering 

multiple climate h azards (coastal flooding, river flooding, cyclone risk, extreme 

heat, water stress) 

Source: Acclimatise 

For the quantified ‘deep dive ’ analysis, the toolkit provides outputs expressed in financial 

metrics, including cash flow changes, value corrections (as shown in  Figure 13 -8) and changes 

in probability of default. Each of these value stream impact channels in this figure is discussed 

in Section 4.2. For example, ‘production ’ is related to impacts on the productivi ty and outputs 

(e.g. crop yields may drop as a result of drought, electricity output would decline for a 

powerplant under hotter weather as the generation efficiency decreases). A Physical Climate Risk Analytical Toolkit for Banks and Investors 

217 

Figure 13 -8 Illustrative exa mple of change in asset value, decomposed into value 

stream impact channels 

Source: Acclimatise and Vivid Economics 

# 6 Limitations of the current approach, outlook/future development 

A key feature of the toolkit is its layered approach, which first provides a high -level climate risk 

assessment at the portfolio level, followed by deep dive analyses where material risks are 

identified. The toolkit provides qualitative risk scores for the portfolio -wide heatmapping, and 

quantitative financial metrics at the sec ond (‘ deep dive ’) stage. Providing qualitative metrics 

may be seen by some as a weakness. However, the tool developers perceive this to be a 

strength, as the heatmapping can be used to facilitate internal dialogue around the climate 

‘hot spots ’ across a po rtfolio and help raise awareness. The qualitative risk score gives clear 

direction and focus for the quantitative assessment, so that data - and resource -intensive 

quantitative analysis is only performed where warranted. 

The heatmapping analytics are based on the most recent best -in -class and peer -reviewed 

climate -related data. Many of the climate variables are reliant on the Coupled Modelled 

Intercomparison Project (CMIP) for climate projections data. Phase 5 of Coupled Modelled 

Intercomparison Project, ‘CMIP5 ’ is currently the most recent iteration for which climate 

model output data are fully available, and these data are included in the current version of our 

heatmapping analytics. The next generation, CMIP6, is being carried out by the scientific 

commun ity. CMIP6 data are expected to be made available in 2021, when Acclimatise will 

integrate them into our analytics. 

For other impact data sets (which may continue to use CMIP5 as their data inputs for the near 

future), commercial and research organi zation s release data periodically, which we horizon -

scan for suitability for use in the heatmapping. Our internal refresh plan includes an annual 

review of new/updated datasets that we consider will benefit the heatmapping and 

notification to clients of the time scales for adding the new datasets. After each such data 

refresh, the heatmapping analytics are presented as an updated version to the market. Chapter 14 

218 

# Understanding and Mitigating Risks from a 

# Global Low Carbon Transition: A Micro -Based Approach 

# to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

by 

Climate Policy Initiative Energy Finance 1

# Abstract 

Climate transition risk is an increasingly important object of concer n for central bankers and 

policymakers with financial stability mandates. However, managing the financial stability 

implications of climate transition risk cannot be done using traditional macroeconomic 

modelling tools alone. Micro -level, bottom -up modelli ng is required for effective identification 

of the drivers, timing and magnitude of climate transition risk. An analysis of the potential 

impact of climate transition risk on financial stability also requires a mapping of risk 

transmission channels, includ ing the extent to which risk mitigation activity by companies and 

financial institutions can pass risk to public balance sheets. CPI Energy Finance has developed 

an analytical approach which assesses these issues and calculates climate transition value -at -

risk metrics for physical fossil fuel and industrial assets, companies and tax revenues. This 

chapter explains the analytical approach by reference to our recent case study in South Africa, 

which showed that climate transition risk, if not well managed, co uld pose a threat to South 

Africa ’s sovereign credit rating. While the chapter focuses on the application of this analysis 

by those with financial stability mandates, the modelling also has important applications in 

risk management activities of developmen t financial institutions, fossil fuel and industrial 

companies and financial institutions. 

Keyword s: climate transition risk, financial stability, value -at -risk metrics, contingent liabilities, 

South Africa, sovereign credit rating, modelling, bottom up 

# 1 Introduction 

This chapter sets out the approach that Climate Policy Initiative Energy Finance (CPI EF) 

developed to measure the exposure of countries and their financial systems to low carbon 

“transition risk ” or “climate transition risk ”. Climate transitio n risk, which arises from the 

structural changes to the global economy that will be required in a low carbon transition, could 

result in lower -than -expected corporate profits, financial asset values and tax revenues. The 

material magnitude of these changes and the systemic importance of the industries that they 

will affect mean that if not effectively managed, transition risk could cause economic shocks 

with potential losses falling on workers, investors in the equity and debt of companies and 

ultimately, p ublic balance sheets. There is a growing consensus that climate -related financial 

risk, of which transition risk for most countries is probably the most important part in the short 

term, could pose a material threat to global financial stability (Bank for International 

Settlements, 2020 ).              

> 1The chapter is written by Matthew Huxham, Principal, Climate Policy Initiative Energy Finance, email:
> Matthew.Huxham@cpilondon.org ; David Nelson, Executive Director, Climate Polic y Initiative Energy Finance, email:
> David.Nelson@cpisf.org .

A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

219 

The growth of interest in climate -related financial risk has prompted the development of a 

wide variety of new tools, indicators and scorecards designed to help investors identify 

transition risk. However, there are fewer tools or analyses that translate transition risk into 

changes in valuation of equity and debt securities and even fewer that show the impact of the 

low carbon transition on both investors and government debt levels. CPI EF ’s transition risk 

methodology aim s to fill that gap. 

CPI EF ’s approach draws on detailed asset -level, 2 bottom -up (micro -level) analysis, which we 

argue is necessary to augment “top -down ” macroeconomic models if central bankers, financial 

supervisors and policymakers are to gain an underst anding of the drivers, timing, magnitude 

and distribution and transition risk. In this chapter, we describe our analytical approach, which 

developed over several years 3 and then provide an illustration of the methodology taken from 

our recent case study of South Africa (Huxham et al., 2019 ). The case study was commissioned 

and supported by Agence Française de Développement (AFD). 

The chapter deals with the following topics: 

• How we define climate transition risk and why new analytical tools are required to 

support a comprehensive analysis of this risk; 

• The aims of CPI EF ’s alternative approach and how our insights contribute to a wide 

range of risk mitigation actions from act ors including central bankers, financial 

supervisors, policymakers with economic, industrial and labor -related remits, 

companies, and investors in public and private debt and equity securities; 

• How to construct such an analysis – including, data, scenarios and models; 

• An illustration of this methodology in the context of South Africa; and 

• How we are working to improve the analysis through future case studies. 

# 2 Hypothesis: transition risk is different and so requires new 

# analytical tools 

An effective analysis of the macroeconomic consequences of transition risk (e.g. impacts on 

sovereign credit ratings and the value of currencies) needs to start with an analysis of its 

microeconomic foundations. The risks arising from transition to a low carbon economy –

wheth er driven by policy, taxation, technology, consumer behavior or a combination – will first 

affect the value of specific physical assets (such as oil fields or coal mines) 4 and companies        

> 2The term “asset -level” refers principally to physical assets. CPI EF’s analysis of transition risk starts from the valuation of
> individual coal mines, oil wells, industrial facilities etc. The a nalysis also includes an assessment of the impact of transition
> risk on company valuations and solvency, but it does not assess the change in value of individual securities (e.g. different
> classes of shares, senior vs. subordinated debt).
> 3Relevant papers showing the development of this line of thinking include: Moving to a low carbon economy: the impacts
> of policy pathways on fossil fuel asset values developed for the inaugural New Climate Economy report in 2014
> (https://climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/moving -to -a-low -carbon -economy/ ) and Government assets: risks and
> opportunities in a changing climate policy landscape (2016) prepared for the European Bank for Reconstruction and
> Development in 2016 (https://climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/government -assets -risks -opportunities -changing -
> climate -policy -landscape/).
> 4The value of physical assets will change because of drivers affectin g the amount (or cost) of supply, demand or both.
> Different transition drivers will have different effects –while carbon taxes may increase the cost (and therefore demand for) Chapter 14

220 

before spreading across economies. Central bankers, financial supervis ors and policymakers 

with a financial stability remit need to understand the drivers, timing, magnitude and 

distribution of transition risk starting at the level of physical assets and companies in order to 

mount an effectively and timely response at the l evel of the economy or the financial system. 

Economy -wide general equilibrium models, which tend to have limited intra -sectoral 

granularity, are not always well suited to this task. For example, the impact of the global low 

carbon transition on the value of oil resources and the companies extracting them will depend 

on the relative cost position of the assets and competitive forces. For example, two oil fields 

producing products of a similar chemical composition could experience very different 

outcomes fro m a transition, depending on their position on the cost curve. A relatively 

expensive asset might become too expensive to produce and lose all its value, while an 

inexpensive asset may lose no production but suffer from lower prices and a loss of margin. 

Therefore, to gain an understanding of the impact of a low carbon transition on the oil industry 

in a country which earns a significant proportion of tax revenues from oil, policymakers need 

to understand factors ranging from the position of different resou rces on global or regional 

cost curves; the financial structure and health of the companies extracting the oil; the extent 

to which local municipal finances rely on oil royalties etc. 

While general equilibrium models might have the computational power to assess the impact 

of national or even sectoral carbon prices on variables like interest rates and unemployment, 

by averaging within or across sectors, they are unlikely to identify the context -specific factors 

identified above, which can be the main drivers of transition risk. 

If policymakers and regulators do not add “microeconomic ” analysis into their toolkits, they 

may fail to identify the complex drivers of transition risk which are likely to crystalli ze in a non -

linear fashion (e.g. gradual, sharp, or indeed, gradual then sharp). These drivers are likely to 

be both international and therefore out of a country ’s control (e.g. falls in demand for imports 

of seaborne thermal coal) and domestic (e.g. mandated coal phase -out dates). 

“Microeconomic ” analysis of the sort proposed by CPI EF can help policymakers understand 

the impact of different combinations of transition drivers. It can also help to identify the areas 

where the risk is con centrated today and to predict the risk mitigation activity of private sector 

actors (e.g. companies and financial institutions). Understanding risk concentrations can help 

policymakers design targeted responses which are sensitive both to macroeconomic an d

political economy considerations. 

The methodology and the case study presented in the rest of this chapter shows how CPI EF 

does this microeconomic analysis, starting from an assessment of climate transition “value -at -

risk ” for individual mines, oil wel ls and industrial facilities. We then combine individual asset -

level impacts to understand the impact of transition risk on companies and their investors, 

then the impact on public finances. 

# 3 Intended users of this methodology 

CPI EF ’s granular approach to transition risk measurement means that the results can inform 

the decision -making of actors far beyond the central banks and financial supervisors within 

the NGFS. Potential applications could range from financial sector stress tests, corporate and 

financ ial institution risk management and planning for a “just transition ” for workers and 

communities in areas dependent on businesses likely to decline in a low carbon transition. This 

> carbon -intensive products (for example, coal -fired power generation), technolog ical innovation may reduce the cost of
> low -carbon alternatives (for examples, solar photovoltaic power generation). A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk

221 

detailed modelling can also help public and private sectors alike in unders tanding the 

implication of a potential tightening of global climate mitigation commitments in the run up 

to COP26. 

However, we expect that our analytical approach will be of most interest for those 

with responsibility for maintaining financial stability. 

Public institutions with responsibility for financial stability mandates 

Financial stability mandates are often split between central banks, financial supervisory 

authorities (where separated from central banks) and governments. 5 Policymakers tasked with 

maintaining financial stability tend to have economy -wide remit and tend to have 

responsibility for assessing emerging new risks, of which climate transition risk is one. 

We think the following categories of decision makers would benefit the most from ou r

methodology: 

1. Monetary policymakers, who often have a primary objective to maintain price stability, 

may seek to use CPI EF ’s analysis to incorporate another material source of risk into 

their forecasting, particularly insofar as it impacts the external t rade balance (which 

could affect the valuation of the currency), where transition risk (e.g. falling demand 

for seaborne thermal coal) is largely outside of the control of the country. The analysis 

can also help policymakers to understand the extent to whi ch external shocks could 

affect consumer prices directly (e.g. changes in the prices of imported goods). 

2. Financial supervisory authorities will be able to use the analysis to provide guidance 

to financial institutions on incorporating transition risk into everyday risk management 

practice and disclosure as well as enabling institutions to respond to any transition risk 

stress tests designed by the supervisory body and enabling the supervisory body to 

assess the quality of stress test responses. CPI EF ’s an alysis could be used to help 

design transition risk scenarios taking both external and domestic sources of transition 

risk. It will also help financial supervisors assess the broader effects which could result 

from risk mitigation actions by supervisee fir ms (e.g. divestment could protect 

individual firms, but pass transition risk onto less scrupulous parties). 

3. Finance ministries seeking to calibrate public debt levels, the sovereign credit rating 

and borrowing costs will – in combination with their existi ng general equilibrium 

models – be able to use such analysis to stress -test the public finances to account for 

the impact of an acceleration of international climate policy. 

4. Policymakers with an interest in levels of investment in the economy (both 

macroe conomic policymakers interested in the quality of GDP growth and fiscal 

policymakers designing incentives for new investments) will be able to use CPI EF ’s

analysis to assess the resilience of planned new investments to climate transition risk. 

The channel s through which transition risk might affect a country ’s economy (or financial 

system) are likely to be idiosyncratic and dependent on factors such as whether a given country 

is a net exporter or importer of fossil fuels and the importance to a given count ry of the   

> 5Mandates can vary significantly between central bank institutions, as described in Dikau, S and Volz, U, Central Bank
> Mandates, Sustaina bility Objectives and the Promotion of Green Finance explores the range of variations between central
> bank mandates: https://www.soas.ac.uk/economics/research/workingpap ers/file139494.pdf

Chapter 14 

222 

financial services industry. 6 To use this tool, countries would thus need to complete a detailed 

initial analysis, which would identify current drivers and concentrations of transition risk. 

However, it would also need to be updated regularly to account for changes in global and 

domestic climate policy, technological change and changes in the structure of commodity, 

energy and industrial markets. 

National and multilateral development financial institutions 

The international policy and development community will also likely be interested in the 

results from this analysis when scaled up and made publicly available. 

Without preventative action, information asymmetry in relation to transition risk could allow 

effective risk mitigation by international ly diversified corporates and financial institutions at 

the expense of increasing concentrations of risk in resource -exporting countries and within 

vulnerable parts of those countries. For example, we found that, in South Africa, the recent 

trend of large internationally diversified coal mining companies to divest coal mines (rather 

than paying to close them down) has pushed transition risk onto smaller, less diversified 

companies, often backed by investment by state -owned financial institutions. 

Internati onal financial organi zations, national and multilateral development banks (MDBs), 

and development finance institutions (DFIs) will be important actors in supporting transition 

planning in developing countries. For these institutions, analysis of the sort p roposed in this 

paper could be used both internally – in their own investment and portfolio management 

processes – and through technical assistance to institutions in their areas of operation. 

National development banks, MDBs and DFIs could also be key con duits in developing new 

types of transition financing in developing countries. Processes to develop and finance 

transition plans for workers and communities, increasingly involving international 

collaboration, would benefit from a detailed analysis of wher e (down to the physical location), 

when and under what scenarios certain mines, oil fields or other industrial assets might 

become economically unviable. 

Private sector and other users of this analysis 

CPI EF ’s transition risk analysis – in particular, the underlying models which estimate the value 

of physical assets and companies in different climate mitigation scenarios – will also have a 

wide range of applications in the private sector. Private lenders, such as sovereign bond 

investors, as well as credit rating agencies, are increasingly likely to incorporate detailed 

information on country transition risk exposure and management strategies into investment 

decisions as they face increasing pressure to demonstrate alignment with international climate 

goals . Credit rating agencies, which have hitherto been reluctant to make fundamental 

changes to their rating methodologies to account for climate -related financial risk, could use 

transition risk analysis of the sort proposed in this chapter to adjust the cred it metrics that 

they use to rate sovereigns today. Examples could include using the additional information   

> 6In many advanced industrial economies (for example, the UK), where the share of the economy from commodity
> extraction and manufacturing has fallen, the size of the financial services industry has risen significantly. London is an
> impor tant hub for the global fi nancial services industry. London -based banks will face some risk from the UK’s planned
> low carbon transition, however, the institutions based in London have significant exposure outside of the UK in jurisdictions
> with less progre ssive and less transparent policy processes than in the UK. Any assessment of the solvency of London -
> based firms in the context of transition risk therefore should arguably include an assessment of transition risk in countries
> where those firms have major exposures. By contrast, transition risk in other countries may be a less material consideration
> for financial supervisory authorities in countries with financial sectors that are smaller in the context of their host
> economies/more domestically focused. A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk

223 

provided by this modelling to adjust projected indicators such as public debt to GDP and public 

sector contingent liabilities. 

Similarly, companies c ommitted to implementing the recommendations of the Taskforce for 

Climate -Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) are starting to consider the implications of 

transition risk for their existing portfolios but may not yet have incorporated a view on how 

change s in country risk in their operational jurisdictions might affect their earnings. 

Financial institutions also are facing increasing pressure to make their portfolios “Paris -

compliant ” and are searching for more analytically rigorous ways to reduce transit ion risk 

(whether arising from structural changes in commodity markets or in changing country risk 

profiles) than divestment, negative screening, scoring, tilting or exclusion. These approaches 

often fail to link climate -related financial risk to changes i n physical asset or company valuation. 

CPI EF ’s analysis has changes in valuation at its heart and therefore allowed corporates and 

financial institutions to develop more tailored transition risk strategies. 

# 4 Methodology 

This section explains the steps invo lved in the CPI EF transition risk methodology, which has 

been developed through a series of studies including for the 2014 New Climate Economy 

project, a conceptual study for the EBRD and our detailed study in South Africa. We assess 

transition risk by ca lculating the difference in value between a baseline scenario (which we 

typically call “business as usual ” or “BAU ”) and one where the world decarboni zes in order to 

keep average global temperature rises well below two degrees above pre -industrial levels 

(2DS). 

The approach includes four main steps: 

• Setting the scope for the analysis, including timeframe, sectors and scenarios; 

• Calculation of the climate transition value -at -risk, starting with physical assets; 

• Assessing the distribution of climate transition value -at -risk, including how this can be 

affected by the risk mitigation action of companies and financial institutions; 

• Design of policy, regulatory and other strategic responses for mitigating external 

transition risks and reallocating risks a round the economy. 

Scope 

The first step in the analytical process is to decide on the sectors that the study will cover. The 

breadth of the study will in part be defined by the time or budget available but should cover 

at least the sectors likely to be aff ected most materially by the transition. This should, at a 

minimum, include: 

• Exports and imports of resources and products, for which demand is very likely to fall 

in a 2DS scenario, for example, thermal coal and crude oil; 

• Sources of domestic greenhouse g as emissions, which may need either to make 

investments to remain viable in a 2DS scenario (for example, in fuel switching or in 

carbon capture) or where output will need to be curtailed (for example, electricity 

generation, oil production, steel and cemen t production). Chapter 14 

224 

More ambitious studies could also include assessments of the transition risk exposure for 

products where the technological path to decarboni zation remains unclear. For example, 

platinum, which would benefit if the decarboni zation of transpor t involved a large role for 

hydrogen fuel cells but would otherwise see weakening prospects as demand for the metal 

falls as the market share of diesel engines declines. 

Having chosen the scope, we proceed to choose the timeframe for the analysis. Too shor t a 

timeframe (e.g. <10 years) and the analysis would miss important sources of risk. Countries 

might also continue to invest in long -life infrastructure that might face stranding in 20 -30 years ’

time. On the other hand, very long -term projections are ofte n seen as irrelevant given the 

level of uncertainty involved. As an increasing number of countries are now seeking to develop 

deep decarboni zation pathways to 2050, we would suggest conducting an exercise with 

projections at least until 2040. 

Once the scop e and timeframe are decided, we design the scenarios and models required to 

calculate transition risk. We expect that an analysis may include several global and domestic 

scenarios (as well as combinations of the two) to reflect the inherent uncertainty abo ut the 

transition. 7

Calculating climate transition value -at -risk 

CPI EF ’s analysis calculates the value of physical assets and companies as the net present value 

of future cash flows. Climate transition risk is the difference between the value of assets 

(p hysical or financial) in a baseline (or BAU) scenario and in the chosen low carbon scenario 

and is expressed as a monetary value. 

4.2.1 Using models to calculate value -at -risk 

We estimate these valuations using proprietary models 8 of the markets that the a ssets under 

analysis operate in. These markets can either be global, regional or domestic. We tend to build 

detailed models only of the sectors where our initial analysis indicates are likely to have the 

most significant transition risk downside. 

These mo dels include cost data about physical assets; 9 point -to -point shipping or other 

logistics costs; 10 and projections of future demand. 11 These can have different structures, 

depending on the commodity or other product (for example, crude oil trades on a global 

market with relatively few benchmarks, such as Brent. On the other hand, there are many 

prices for seaborne thermal coal, depending on its chemical characteristics and its shipping 

route). Where appropriate, the models will account for constraints, such a s long -term          

> 7More details on our approach to model design for the South Africa work can be found here: https ://medium.com/climate -
> policy -initiative -energy -finance/counting -the -cost -of -climate -transition -risk -an -energy -finance -approach -
> b7355d94f27c
> 8The models referred to in this example can be built in Excel if they are simple, but where the calculation require s multiple
> scenarios or variables, we have built models using programming languages, such as Python.
> 9Typical information required about physical assets, such as coal mines or oil fields, include: lifting or extraction cost (wh ere
> possible, with labour, e lectricity, fuel costs split out); capital expenditure costs (such as maintenance or expansion) and
> information about the resource, including the quality or grade of products produced and the life of the resource. We have
> obtained information about physica l asset costs from third party sources, including Wood Mackenzie and Rystad Energy
> 10 Typical information required about logistics arrangements include information on costs of transport of the product to a
> domestic customer or to port and the nature (terms, length, counterparty) of the logistics contracts. Where a miner has a
> long -term fixed -price logistics contract, it provides the miner with a clearer “route to market” when demand falls, but it
> also limits the ability of the miner to pass on transition ris k to the infrastructure provider.
> 11 It is simplest to undertake this analysis using 3 rd
> party projections of future demand. However, in carrying out this analysis
> in relation to sectors where the decarbonisation pathway is not yet understood (e.g. steel), it is important to know the
> drivers underlying 3 rd party demand projections. This will allow the user of the model to update demand projections (and
> hence model outputs) as circumstances change. A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk

225 

contracted liquefied natural gas sales (which therefore are not available to spot pricing 

mechanisms). However, the models typically use some form of optimi zation function, 

designed to simulate the most economically optimal set of trade flows, which then allows us 

to derive prices and volumes for each export and import node. 

We use these models to derive the price and sales volume that would be achieved by individual 

mines, oil fields or industrial facilities, in different climate mitigation sce narios. As the models 

already contain cost information and project sales prices and volumes, we can estimate 

profitability by asset in different scenarios. 

4.2.2 Scenarios 

The scenarios used in CPI EF ’s transition risk modelling are designed to simulate how the 

supply of and demand for fossil fuels and other assets under review might change in a low 

carbon world. The International Energy Agency (IEA) produces some of the most widely used 

fossil fuel demand scenarios, although they do not provide country -level detail for most 

countries. However, the inherent uncertainty around decarboni zation pathways means that 

an effective analysis of transition risk quickly needs to go beyond static scenarios (see Section 

6.1 for more information on inherent uncertainty around scenarios). 

At a minimum, the transition risk analysis proposed in this chapter requires both global and 

domestic scenarios. The approach addresses risks resulting from “climate action ” outside of 

the country (“ external risks ”) separately from those that are the result of domestic policy. This 

is not only because external risks are subject to different dynamics. We have often found that 

governments underestimate the magnitude of external risks and may not have a detailed 

understanding of their driver s, especially if they are driven by policy decision in other countries 

(e.g. the actions of the Indian and Chinese governments have a significant influence on the 

profits reali zed by thermal coal exporters such as South Africa and Colombia). 

Assessing the distribution of climate transition value -at -risk 

After calculating climate transition value -at -risk at the level of physical assets, our analysis 

assesses the likely distribution of that risk within the economy under study. This is an 

important step, becau se it identifies risk concentrations and sources of potential vulnerability 

– for example, where we project that significant risk would be borne by financially weaker 

parties, such as workers, municipalities or small companies. 

The level of detailed analys is on the distribution of risks will depend on the requirements of 

the users of the analysis but will likely include companies and their investors; national and 

local government; workers and consumers. Local political economy considerations might 

influence the level of analysis (for example, in South Africa, we assessed the exposure of Black 

Economic Empowerment companies specifically). 

We assess the distribution of risk this in three steps: a) mapping “explicit ” exposure to 

transition risk; b) accounting f or likely “implicit ” risk transfers and c) assessing potential 

contingent liabilities after implicit transfers have been accounted for. To do this part of the 

analysis, we build financial statement projection models for companies likely to be most at risk 

from the transition. These models can be at different levels of detail depending on the 

materiality of the companies but need to be sufficiently detailed to allow us to assess the 

impact of transition risk (and efforts to mitigate transition risk) on a giv en company ’s earnings Chapter 14 

226 

and other key credit risk indicators, including net debt, cash flow generation and access to 

liquidity. 12 

4.3.1 Explicit risk 

How transition risk is allocated between companies and their investors will be a function of 

ownership and ca pital structure. Contracts (for example, take -or -pay contracts for 

infrastructure) influence the split of risks between companies. Regulation (for examples, 

royalties and production sharing arrangements) can alter the share of risk exposure between 

compani es and governments. We term risk allocation within a company according to the 

ownership, capital structures, contracts and regulation existing today as “explicit risk ”. The first 

step of our analysis in any country – whether of external or domestic risks – is to assess 

“explicit ” risk allocation. 

Information on ownership and capital structures is usually found in financial statements. For 

publicly listed companies, this information is usually freely available for download from 

company websites. In the case of privately held companies, we typically source the 

information from the local registry of company financial information (e.g. , Companies House 

in the UK). 

4.3.2 Implicit risk transfers 

The analysis of explicit risk allocation does not account for the lik ely responses of companies 

and governments as they seek to mitigate transition risk. Companies facing transition risk 

might seek to protect their shareholders by cutting costs (for example, by making workers 

redundant or by renegotiating infrastructure con tracts) or passing it on to consumers via 

higher prices (although this is not always possible in practice, especially in markets with 

regulated consumer pricing). Governments might seek to protect jobs by reducing taxes. 

Our modelling incorporates an unde rstanding of likely company and government risk 

mitigation strategies. These “implicit ” risk transfers will likely shift more transition risk onto 

financially weaker parties than is explicitly the case. Mapping implicit risk transfers is the 

second step of our analysis. 

4.3.3 Contingent liabilities and sovereign debt 

Companies may still face overwhelming transition risk exposure even after implicit risk 

transfers. This could cause them to default on loans, resulting in losses for loan guarantors 

(which in m any developing countries often includes the state) and loan providers. Financial 

distress and bankruptcies can also result in significant additional costs for the public purse, 

including those relating to “bailouts ”; closure and remediation liabilities for mines; 

unemployment and retraining costs. 

Similarly, if transition risk results in higher -than -expected public debt, it could result in a 

downgrade to the sovereign credit rating with a wide range of consequences for the economy, 

particularly if it leads to a downgrade below investment grade. Integration of the results of 

this “micro ” analysis with “macro ” models would help to estimate the additional costs of these 

impacts.  

> 12 Where appropriate, we also build financial models for fina ncial institutions where we have identified a particular
> concentration risk relating to project, companies, regions and countries exposed to the transition. A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk

227 

4.3.4 Other factors 

In addition to the insight from the quantitative analysis, w e would also seek to review potential 

qualitative factors, which will also be drivers of the transition but do not so easily submit 

themselves to quantitative analysis. These might include: 

• Increasing political pressure on countries who are party to the Pa ris Agreement to 

increase the ambition of their domestic climate plans (for example, which might force 

fossil fuelled power plants to close earlier than expected); and 

• Decreasing international (public and private) appetite to provide finance to coal 

compan ies and projects, which might put pressure on coal mining industries and make 

coal -fired power relatively uncompetitive against “cleaner ” alternatives. 

Outputs – using transition risk analysis to develop risk mitigation strategies 

Once an analysis of a cou ntry ’s exposure to transition risk has been performed, users of this 

information, including policymakers, central bankers and financial regulators can then use it 

to design the appropriate response. Other parties who are exposed to transition risk may also 

find it useful, but policymakers will have the widest possible range of options and so will likely 

be interested in the broader picture, as illustrated in  Figure 14 -1.

Figure 14 -1 Transfers of transition risk between parts of the South African economy 

Source: CPI EF. Figures show transition risk in billions of US dollars 

This chart is an extract of one of the key findings from CPI EF ’s South Africa study, illustrating 

both the “explicit ” distribution of transition risk between parts of the South African economy 

according to today ’s ownership, contracts, regulation and policy and the likely risk transfers 

between parts of the economy that could result from the strategic actions taken by companies 

and financial institutions to mitigate transition risk and from companies falling into financial 

distress. The analysis found that the South African public balanc e was likely to bear more than 

half of the transition risk in coal, oil and related infrastructure sectors even though coal mining 

is substantially privately owned. 

Other responses 

Our analytical approach also indicates benefits from other responses, whic h might include: 

1. Avoiding new investments that would add to transition risk ( i.e., those that might be 

viable in a BAU scenario but lose value in a 2DS scenario). Governments and financial 

supervisors have a range of options for discouraging these investme nts, ranging from Chapter 14 

228 

the direct (e.g. where sectors are publicly owned) to the more indirect (e.g. by 

reducing fiscal incentives; reducing/removing the availability of other forms of state 

support such as loan guarantees and power purchase agreements; or incr easing 

capital charges for investments exposed to transition risk); 

2. Switching investment to sectors likely to benefit from a transition and in so doing, 

diversifying transition risk; 

3. Using information about the timing, drivers and distribution of transitio n risk to plan 

for a “just transition ” for affected workers and communities; 

4. Capturing external benefits from the transition (e.g. lower than expected oil prices) or 

carbon tax revenues to help to compensate parties at risk from a transition or 

proactively incentivi zing investors to shift capital towards sectors that are likely to 

benefit from the transition and where the country has a competitive advantage; 

5. Making the sovereign balance sheet or financial institutions more resilient to 

unmitigated transitio n risk by reducing, encouraging or mandating the reduction of 

leverage in advance of potential transition impacts; and 

6. Engaging with the international climate and development finance community for 

targeted transition risk mitigation support (e.g. financing to pay for the shut -down of 

highly emitting plants, where no cheaper alternative is expected in the short -term). 

# 5 South Africa case study 

This section presents some of the highlights from our South Africa case study as an example 

of how to apply the metho dology outlined in the previous section. 13 The study was 

commissioned and supported by AFD. The analysis also benefited from feedback and debate 

at meetings of the Advisory Finance Group to the World Bank, which included current and 

former government minist ers, including former finance minister of South Africa and chief 

executives of public finance institutions, including AFD and the Development Bank of Southern 

Africa (DBSA). 

Below, we outline the objectives of the sponsors of the study; key findings; our 

recommendations for policymakers; and lessons learned, which have been incorporated into 

planning for our next analyses in different countries. 

Objectives 

The AFD had three main objectives when commissioning this study. Firstly, they hoped to use 

the resul ts to support their engagement in the policy debate on the low carbon transition in 

South Africa. They also hoped to develop strategic insights that would be relevant for their 

partners and clients in South Africa (including financial institutions, municip alities and utilities) 

as to how to measure climate transition risk. AFD also hoped that the study would make a 

contribution to the international debate on the most appropriate methodologies for analy zing 

climate -related financial risk.     

> 13 The full paper Understanding the impact of a low carbon transition on South Africa (2019) is available for free download
> from https://climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/understanding -the -impact -of -a-low -carbon -transition -on -south -
> africa/ .A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk

229 

Similar considerat ions also motivated the DBSA to engage seriously with the team at executive 

level. DBSA occupies a crucial position as a state -owned enterprise with a key role in financing 

infrastructure (such as the utility Eskom and port and freight rail operator Transn et) and 

municipalities, all of whom will face significant transition risk as identified in the report. DBSA 

has since decided to develop a new energy investment framework, which would guide them 

in making future investment decisions both in South Africa an d its wider region of operation 

and explicitly account for considerations around transition risk and the just transition as well 

as more traditional development indicators, such as energy access. 

Scope, data and scenarios 

We restricted the scope to sectors where we could use or devise what we thought were 

defensible low carbon scenarios including coal exports and oil imports, as well as related 

infrastructure, including rail lines, ports, pipelines, oil refineries and synthetic fuel production 

facilities wh ich use gas and coal as feedstock. 

By contrast, our analysis of other sectors, including mining of platinum group metals, 

manganese, iron ore and the automotive assembly industry, was more qualitative, either 

because the outcome for an industry might eith er be net positive or negative (platinum, which 

is used in both diesel engines and hydrogen fuel cells), dependent on intra -technology 

competition (manganese, which is used in some energy storage technologies) or net negative 

but beyond the scope of our pe riod of analysis ( i.e., beyond 2035). 

Our primary 3 rd party sources of data were Wood Mackenzie ’s global coal cost curve and 

Rystad Energy ’s UCube database as well as company -specific information from company 

websites and 3 rd party research. We used adjus ted versions of the IEA ’s 2017 New Policies 

Scenario and Sustainable Development Scenario as the principal drivers of our global scenarios. 

We used current South African domestic policy as the baseline scenario for the domestic 

analysis. 

Key findings 

Our a nalysis produced 5 top -level findings: 

1. South Africa faces material transition risk arising in coal mining, power, refining, ports, 

freight rail and pipeline sectors. We estimate the risk in these sectors at more than 

$124 billion (or more than 1 trillion r and) in 2018 present value terms. 14 This figure 

represents around one third of South Africa ’s 2018 GDP. An impact of this magnitude 

would likely trigger further losses to South African corporates, financial institutions 

and public finances by causing South Africa to lose its investment grade credit rating. 

2. Much of the risk and potential impact (approximately 75%) is due to factors, policies 

and events beyond the control of the South African government, while nearly 50% of 

the risk is due to changes in policy and market expectations – mainly outside of South 

Africa – that have already occurred over the last five years. In other words, South 

Africa and its companies and investors face considerable risk to the extent that they 

have not fully updated their busine ss and investment plans to reflect international 

events of the last five years.    

> 14 In the South Africa study, we calculated transition risk as the difference in the present value o f two sets of projected net
> cash flows over the period 2018 and 2035 between BAU and 2DS scenarios. The BAU scenario included a sharp increase
> in coal exports over the period, as was expected in 2013, a scenario that was still driving investment cases for some new
> infrastructure investments last year. Chapter 14

230 

3. The public balance sheet faces only 16% of the explicit risk, but after risk transfers and 

contingent liabilities, the government would face more than half of the potential ris k

of $124bn. 

4. The current South African system of incentives for capital investment still favors 

existing industries that are exposed to transition risk. We identified $25 billion in 

planned infrastructure investment decisions that would add to South Africa ’s

transition risk exposure, above and beyond the $124bn already identified, including 

coal power plants, coal mines, port and rail infrastructure. 

5. South Africa still has the chance to mitigate much of this risk, provided that it plans in 

advance to develo p the fiscal, financial and policy tools required to shift transition risk 

away from parties without the capacity to bear it. 

Further insight 

Our analysis also produced other, more detailed insights, including: 

5.4.1 Most of the risk lies in export coal a nd related infrastructure 

The largest share of risk (around 75% of the $124bn total) arises from factors beyond the 

control of South Africa, most notably the significant decline in demand for thermal coal traded 

on the seaborne market that would occur in a 2DS scenario. In fact, as illustrated in  Figure 

14 -2, prospects for the seaborne coal market appear already to have fallen significantly over 

the last five years, driven by a range of factors, not all of them related to climate policy. These 

fac tors include technological change (falls in the cost of wind and solar power generation and 

lithium ion batteries), new energy market regulation (incentives for higher penetrations of 

renewables and new power market designs which value energy system flexib ility) and 

geopolitics – all factors beyond the control of South Africa or its government. 

Figure 14 -2 More than half the value of South African coal exports was lost between 

2013 and 2017 measured as million tonnes (mt) and net present value (NPV) 

Sources: International Energy Agency, CPI EF 

We found that, between 2013 and 2017, the future prospects for South African coal exporters 

fell dramatically due to the slowing growth of coal fired power generation capacity countries 

that buy South African coal. When factored into some forecasts, the coal export business for 

the period of our study would be wo rth 65% less ( Figure 14 -2) than it had been in 2013. But A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

231 

investment decisions in South Africa, including in new mines and the extension of freight rail 

capacity, did not reflect this level of lost value. This means that investments are occurring that 

would be stranded in a BAU scenario, not just in a 2DS scenario. 

A further $30bn could be at risk under a 2DS. Much of this risk is concentrated in the mid -

2020s, when our scenarios show a sharp decline in seaborne traded volumes as major coal 

buyers such as India and China ramp up domestic renewables capacity at the same time as 

trying to protect their domestic coal mining industries. 

Lower demand and lower prices for thermal coal would reduce profits for coal mining 

companies as well as lower royalties and tax receipts. However, the effect of lower -than -

expected profits will be much broader. As well as providing shareholders with a return on their 

investment s, profits are also required to pay back the sunk capital investment in mines and 

the rail and port infrastructure that is needed to get the coal to the market. If a global low -

carbon transition prompts a fall in coal export revenues, not only might miner profits and 

government taxes be wiped out, there may not be sufficient cash to pay back original 

investments in mining and infrastructure. Our analysis showed that while state -owned freight 

rail operator Transnet would be protected against the effect of fa lling profits in the early 2020s 

via the “take -or -pay ” terms of its contracts with miners, its coal freight line might flip from a 

major generator of group profits to a loss -making asset by the end of the 2020s. Declining 

earnings at Transnet, one of the f ew South African state -owned enterprises which has retained 

an investment grade rating in recent years, could increasingly restrict the company ’s access to 

debt capital markets without government guarantees, meaning additional contingent 

liabilities for th e public finances. 

5.4.2 Deep domestic decarboni zation could add additional costs, which South 

Africa ’s weakened public finances may increasingly struggle to bear 

At the same time as South Africa faces increasing economic pressure from declines in 

traditio nal sources of exports, international pressure to accelerate its own domestic low 

carbon transition is likely to accelerate. This pressure could manifest itself through 

international climate negotiations (with countries facing pressure to improve their “am bition ”

by the end of 2020) or through the decisions of domestic and international financial 

institutions to restrict financing to carbon -intensive businesses. 15 

We did not attempt to specify an alternative decarboni zation path for the country nor how 

much of the global decarboni zation effort “should ” be borne by South Africa. Instead we 

considered the potential costs and benefits to the country of accelerating decarboni zation in 

the two most highly emitting sectors, electricity generation and synthetic fuel production from 

coal at Secunda (a facility which is among the largest single site sources of CO2 in the world). 

Our analysis showed that while accelerated decarboni zation in the electricity sector could 

have minimal cost or even save money, replacing che ap fuel production from Secunda would 

be much more expensive.  Figure 14 -3 shows the results of our analysis, which considered the 

incremental cost of th ree options for mitigating emissions at Secunda, including retrofitting 

carbon capture technology and closing the refinery and replacing it with a new oil -based 

refinery. The most expensive option – closing the refinery and replacing the production with 

im ports – could cost nearly $30 billion more in present value terms than continuing with the 

existing method of producing fuel from coal.                  

> 15 The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis counts over 100 “globally significant financial institutions” that
> have announced their divestment from coal mining and/or coal -fired power plants an dlists the pledges at
> https://ieefa.org/finance -exiting -coal/ Chapter 14

232 

Figure 14 -3 The cost as net present value (NPV) to South Africa of clos ing Secunda 

early 

Sources: CPI EF estimates and analysis 

Whether the country can afford an accelerated transition or even today ’s climate mitigation 

and adaptation investments will depend on how it reacts to external transition risk. If the 

country does not prepare adequately, it may find itself very constrained in the ability to spend 

on climate mitigation and adaptation activities. This, in turn, could mean it becomes 

increasingly reliant on international climate finance to support climate policy action .

5.4.3 A variety of transmission channels could shift risk from investors to the public 

balance sheet 

How risk is distributed through the South African economy is as important as the absolute 

level of the risk. We found that while the public balance shee t would explicitly face only 16% 

of the downside risk (with investors facing the rest), there are several channels through which 

business strategy, policy and financial distress will further distribute the share initially borne 

by investors back to the pub lic balance sheet. After these risk transfers, the South African 

government would bear more than half of the total risk. 

Until recently, more than half of South African coal export volumes was controlled by 

investment grade, internationally diversified “ma jors ”, such as Anglo American, Glencore and 

South32. Our models showed that if today ’s ownership of coal mines persisted, those parties 

would bear more than a third of the explicit transition risk (as illustrated in Figure 4) and, 

because of their financia l strength, would likely be able to do so without experiencing financial 

distress. A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

233 

Figure 14 -4 The explicit distribution of South Africa’s external transition risk 

Sources: International Energy Agency, CPI EF. The blue section of each bars shows 

the amount of value lost between 2013 and 2017 resulting from changes in the 

baselines or BAU scenarios as at 2013 and 2017. 

NB: The second block of bars (including South 32 etc.) is a breakdown of the 

“International Majors” bar above. The third block is a breakdown of “Other private 

companies” while the Transnet bar corresponds to the “State owned enterprises” 

bar at the top. 

We identified Sasol as the South African company with the most significant transition risk 

exposure relative to its size. The company (whose two largest shareholders are South African 

public institutions) could lose value equating to more than a quarter of today ’s market 

capitali zation through falling profitability of its Secunda plant in the ev ent of lower -than 

expected oil prices. 

However, the allocation of risk in South Africa may change once various parties react to the 

risk of loss to the value of their assets. Sasol is considering options to convert some of Secunda 

to run on natural gas, w hich will reduce the sensitivity of its profits to rises and falls in the oil 

price. In coal, where the risk is not yet priced into listed securities, companies that are alert to 

transition risk may seek to sell them to those who are not yet considering th is risk. Recent 

sales such as that by South32 (to Seriti Resources) might be partly prompted by this. 

For companies remaining in the South African coal market, we would expect them to seek to 

recover some of the shortfall in export revenues by increased sa les to domestic customers 

such as Eskom, although in practice this is likely to be limited as near -bankrupt Eskom has no 

financial capacity to bear further input cost increases without increasing electricity prices to 

consumers, many of whom are already un able to afford tariffs which in some cases have risen 

by 300% over the last 10 years. Instead, workers and key counterparties such as Transnet may 

be forced to bear this risk, with investors bearing the remainder. Some mine owners may Chapter 14 

234 

decide to close asset s before the end of their economic lives. Mine closures will hit 

communities and workers through job losses, reduced economic activity and the loss of 

funding from companies for social infrastructure. Municipalities where assets are located may 

suffer the greatest impact (most of the value at risk lies in just two – Emalahleni and Steve 

Tshwete), but the spread of transition risk will be broader. Lower national taxes will reduce 

national government transfers to municipalities, curtailing their ability to pr ovide services and 

to pay their obligations. 

As with municipalities, many companies (especially some of the highly leveraged Black 

Empowerment Enterprises) will not have strong enough balance sheets and may appeal for 

government assistance. National gover nment could find itself faced by sharply increased costs 

due to either bailouts or decommissioning costs following bankruptcy. 

Government may find itself obliged or expected to absorb the impact of the transition in other 

ways. Government may support work ers who lose their jobs or provide funding for 

unemployment benefits and retraining, or to provide finance and assistance to struggling 

municipalities to attract new job -creating investment. However, its capacity to provide this 

support could be constraine d by lower tax revenues and an increase in non -performing loans 

and an erosion of capital bases at state -owned financial institutions such as the DBSA and the 

Industrial Development Corporation of South Africa (IDC). 

5.4.4 Government still has a range of o ptions for mitigating transition risk, but will 

face political challenges 

Despite this analysis, which shows that most of the transition risk that South Africa faces 

derived from outside of the country, the debate around the energy transition in South Af rica 

continues to revolve around the operational and financial crisis at utility Eskom. On the other 

hand, if the government (as well as state -owned enterprises and state -owned financial 

institutions) starts to incorporate an understanding of external and domestic transition risk 

into planning, it still has a variety of options to mitigate the risks identified in our study 

(summari zed in  Table 14 -1). Many of these findings will apply to a variety of other countries, 

although the specifics and impact of the actions will vary depending on the circumstances of 

a country. A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

235 

Table 14 -1 CPI EF recommendations to the South African for mitigating transition 

risk in the countr y

We recommended that, where it has control over timing (for example through fiscal incentives, 

direct procurement or access to finance from the DBSA and IDC), the country should delay 

major new capital investments until it is satisfied that they will remain economically viable in 

a 2DS scenario. We identified more than $25 billion of new investments that our modelling 

suggested might be viable in a BAU scenario but not in a 2DS scenario, including new mines, 

coal power plants, infrastructure and an oil refinery (as summari zed in  Table 14 -2). Chapter 14 

236 

Table 14 -2 Pending infrastructure investments that could destroy value in a 2DS 

scenario 

During a sustained period of weak economic growth, it may prove challenging politically for 

government to pull back support from new investme nts, especially if they attract capital into 

the country. If this sum was instead invested in industries or assets that are more resilient to 

transition risk, or benefit from a low carbon transition, it could spur a more sustainable source 

of jobs and econ omic growth. 

Beyond the very short -term, the phasing of government action to mitigate transition risk will 

also be critical, especially given the country ’s weakened public finances. Closing power plants 

and fuel production assets too fast and the cost of g enerating or procuring replacement power 

and fuel could limit the government ’s ability to spend on social programs and have a 

significantly negative impact on the workers (our analysis shows job losses of 25,000 -35,000 

between now and 2035) and their commu nities. Act too slowly and the political barriers to 

future accelerated climate action will only rise. For example, if the government sought to 

introduce an accelerated ramp down of the coal mining industry in the mid -2020s in response 

to falling export de mand, it would be challenging to ensure a process where all key 

stakeholders were able to provide input (including trade unions and local government) and 

the pressure for bailouts from coal companies falling into financial distress would become 

difficult t o resist. 

By contrast, a transition plan designed well in advance of the decline in export coal markets 

would enable state -owned financial institutions such as the DBSA to develop new sources of 

transition funding instruments, which could draw in internati onal climate finance to support A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

237 

South Africa ’s low carbon transition. A roadmap, which specified the least -cost means of 

supplying each power plant ’s coal demand (and for what period) would also help the financial 

sector avoid stranded assets while also pr oviding a justification for continuing some of its coal 

funding to keep the lights on for a specific period. 

A government -wide acceptance of coal ’s finite future might open up options for South Africa 

to be proactive in harnessing the potential benefits of the global low -carbon transition. This 

could include reallocating investment incentives within mining from coal to minerals that 

might benefit from a low -carbon transition (including manganese and vanadium) and planning 

to make the most of benefits of low er oil prices that our report identified. 

Lower oil prices could dampen the effect of falling coal exports on the balance of payments. A 

more proactive policy could use the benefit of lower oil prices to offset risks from other sectors 

(see  Figure 14 -5 for an example). For example, national government might choose to increase 

taxes on oil products, diluting the benefit to consumers but reducing its own r isk. Additional 

fuel tax revenues could be redistributed to parties struggling to bear the negative effects of 

the transition and/or retained to offset any pressure on the sovereign credit rating. 

Figure 14 -5 Using micro -level analysis to design targeted mitigation policy – using 

the benefits of a l ower oil price 

Source: CPI EF. Figures show transition risk in billions of US dollars 

Lessons learned our South Africa case study 

We have explained some of the k ey findings from our work in South Africa, which illustrates 

the methodology set out earlier in this chapter. More detail can be found in the full report. 

Although the focus was on South Africa, we believe that versions of the above approach can 

be valuabl e to a wide variety of policymakers in countries with different characteristics. 

However, having access to the relevant data is an important prerequisite to a meaningful 

analysis. In South Africa, we benefited from the fact that most of the companies with exposed 

assets had publicly listed securities. Public institutions in South Africa are also subject to 

rigorous reporting requirements. The extensive disclosure from both sources provided a solid 

basis for drawing conclusions. In jurisdictions where assets are to a greater extent owned by 

private entities, or where there are weaker auditing and disclosure standards, analysis of this 

type will inevitably involve more educated guess work than in the South Africa example. Chapter 14 

238 

# 6 Limitations of the current approach 

Tr ansition risk analysis using macroeconomic modelling tools only would not generate the 

level of insight as we have described here. Macroeconomic modelling provides policymakers, 

central bankers and regulators with only a partial understanding of transition risk. However, at 

the same time, CPI EF ’s analysis on its own will not be sufficient to inform policymakers ’

decisions as it does not provide a full picture of the second and third order effects such as 

impacts on inflation or economy -wide employment leve ls. We continue to work with partners 

to develop approaches to integrate the insights from both “micro ” and “macro ” analyses. 

Similarly, the nature of CPI EF ’s analysis necessarily points to policy responses that are most 

effective in targeted channels. Recent literature has proposed a wider range of potential 

central bank interventions including exclusion of fossil -related assets from central bank 

collateral frameworks and asset purchases; accounting for transition risks in setting 

microprudential capita l requirements; introducing macroprudential capital buffers for coal 

exposure and including stranded asset risk in stress tests. An approach which combines CPI 

EF ’s analysis with macroeconomic modelling would open up a wider range of potential risk 

mitigat ion solutions. 

Inherent uncertainty 

Beyond the limitations discussed above and the need for more work on integrating the insights 

from micro - and macro -level modelling, CPI EF is currently working to understand many other 

inherent uncertainties about trans ition risk. As the global low carbon transition progresses, 

countries are likely to face transition risk to assets in sectors where there is no current 

emissions pricing or obvious transmission mechanism for that risk. Emissions relating to land 

use and de forestation are a clear example of a sector responsible for material emissions but 

with no current method for pricing those emissions. We think that applying a hypothetical 

carbon price is unlikely to provide a meaningful estimate of transition risk as it will not account 

for the multiple different dynamics that may affect land use emissions, including shifts in 

demand for agricultural products; technological and policy changes that improve the 

productivity of land use and new synthetic food production tech niques. CPI EF is working to 

develop a conceptual framework for understanding the potential drivers of transition risk in 

land use. 

Finally, the question of scenario -generation is a key methodological area for further research. 

Given the inherent uncertain ty about the development timeframe of different low carbon 

technologies and their cost, there will be multiple potential pathways to 2DS. Our analysis 

currently uses static scenarios, but in practice, probabilistic scenarios will be required which 

account for a variety of potential transmission pathways. These will be critical not just for 

increasingly useful transition risk analysis, but much more broadly across policymaking, 

strategic and investment decisions. 

Other climate -related financial risks 

Our analysis focused only on climate transition risk. However, countries and regions also face 

significant physical climate risk that would have material effects on economies and financial 

systems if not monitored and managed effectively. While we expect t he majority of physical 

risk on a global basis to crystallise later than transition risk, physical risk shocks, such as 

Hurricane Idai, can negatively affect the capacity of countries to be proactive in managing A Micro -Based Approach to Assessing Climate Transition Risk 

239 

transition risk. 16 Physical risk also interac ts in important ways with the issues we have 

addressed in this work: 

• Rising temperatures will affect the number of hours per day that South African mine 

workers are able to work; in water -stressed regions, the cost of water may rise 

significantly (either b ecause of scarcity or because of the investment in expensive 

technologies such as desalination), further affecting the operating costs of all 

businesses including those exposed to transition risk. 

• Some global warming may already be “locked in ” as a result of historic greenhouse gas 

emissions. However, the incremental amount of warming (and hence, physical 

damage) resulting from future emissions may be higher or lower depending on the 

speed of global climate mitigation action. All else being equal, lower ex pected levels 

of physical damage may mean lower required spending on climate adaptation. 

However, the benefits of lower adaptation costs are likely to be in the longer term. 

Further work is needed to provide policymakers with a broader picture of climate -

related financial risks. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Over the past decade, we have seen how the need for action on climate change has become 

more broadly accepted by governments, corporates and investors. But how urgently global 

action can be implemented over the coming dec ade is difficult to determine. 

At COP26 parties to the Paris agreement will, in theory, be required to submit revised 

Nationally Determined Contributions which raise “ambition ” for climate mitigation action. As 

pressure for more aggressive climate mitigati on continues to grow, particularly in light of the 

IPCC ’s special report on 1.5C warming, we can only anticipate further demand for detailed 

analytical work such as that set out earlier in this chapter. 

We believe that financial shocks triggered by climat e transition risk are not inevitable but will 

be much more likely to pose risk to financial stability if they are not managed in an effective 

way. We think that the analytical approach outlined in this chapter will help regulators and 

policymakers do this. 

If climate -related financial risks are managed more effectively, economies can become more 

resilient, companies can continue to grow, new industries can emerge that are aligned with a 

low carbon economy, and the transition of workers from carbon intensiv e industries can be 

managed more smoothly.   

> 16 Other shocks to economic capacity or the strength of financial systems, such the crisis precipitated by the COVID -19
> pandemic, also sap the capacity of governments to undertake climate mitiga tion action where it requires up -front
> investment or fiscal support. Chapter 14

240 

# Bibliography 

Bank for International Settlements. (2020). The green swan. 

Huxham, M., Anwar, M., & Nelson, D. (2019). Understanding the impact of a low carbon 

transition on South Africa. Climate Policy Initiative Energy Finance .A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks 

241 

# A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing 

# Economy -Wide Transition Risks: The Case of South Africa 

By 

Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 1

# Abstract 

Using a simple macroeconomic approach, this chapter highlights the interconnected nature of 

the production network and shows why this is relevant when assessing transition risks. We 

consider two simplified transition shocks on the coal and automotive exports of South Africa, 

analyze how these propagate in the economy due to reduced demand of these sectors, and 

assess the indirect loss of production, gross operating surplus and employment ensuing the 

original shocks. We then u se financial data and a simple econometric model to quantify the 

evolution of financial fragility within all sectors, and determine which sectors are the most 

exposed and most sensitive to transition risks emerging out of our two scenarios. 

Keywords: macro economics, input -output, transition risks, financial fragility, production 

network, sectorial interconnection 

# 1 Introduction 

Given the ambition of the Paris Agreement to maintain global warming below 2C, a low -carbon 

transition will have to take place, impac ting most, if not all, sectors of the economy and 

creating dynamics similar to Schumpeter ’s creative destruction. To study ways in which 

decarbonisation is prone to hamper the economic and financial system, the notion of stranded 

assets and transition risk s has emerged in the literature, demonstrating possible roots for 

financial instability (Carney, 2015 ; Rozenberg et al., 2018 ). Campiglio et al. (2017) , among 

others, argue that stranded assets could generate broader macroeconomic negative 

consequences through financial repercussions. For financial regulators, central banks, finance 

ministries, and other financial institutions it is thus of the utmost importance to understand 

to what extent their portfolio and the financial system in general is exposed t o these risks. 

As a financial institution exposed to these risks, and more importantly as a development bank 

keen to contribute to the acceleration of smooth low carbon transitions, 2 AFD is engaged in 

research programs and studies in this field. AFD is wor king on a macroeconomic modelling 

effort called GEMMES 3 (Generali zed Multisecorial and Monetary Macrodynamics for the 

Ecological Shift), currently developed in several countries and of high relevance for transition              

> 1This chapter is written by Antoine Godin (corresponding author ), head of the GEMMES macro -modelling team Agence
> Francaise de Developpement and research associate at Centre d’Economie de l’Université de Paris Nord ,email:
> godina@afd.fr ;Paul Hadji -Lazaro, Ph.D. student at Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, and Laurent Bergadaa, Research Officer,
> Agence Française de Développement.
> 2
> As financial institu tions and corporates analyze transition risks they are more likely to hedge themselves against these
> risks by greening their portfolios. This is also true at a sovereign and sub -sovereign level. In addition, transition risk analyses
> allow to identify poten tial “losers” of the transition (companies, sectors, municipalities, communities) and to provide support
> to them in order to maximize social and financial stability, and lessen resistance to policies favorable to the transition.
> 3https://www.afd.fr/en/page -programme -de -recherche/gemmes -new -modelling -tool -incorporates -energy -transition Chapter 15

242 

risk analysis. AFD has also partnered wit h Climate Policy Initiative to develop microeconomic 

analyses of transition risks, the first of which was done on South Africa. The work presented 

in this chapter is a variation of the macroeconomic approach using simple modelling of the 

production structu re on the economy. 

All these studies show that it is useful to perceive the low carbon transition as a transformation 

of the production structure whereby carbon -intensive activities will disappear and be replaced 

by low -carbon -intensive activities, and whe re all sectors in the economy will be impacted, in 

one way or the other. The reason behind this is that our economies comprise highly 

interconnected and specialized production processes where the production of one sector is 

used by other sectors to produce their own goods and services. These value chains require to 

look at more sectors than the usual suspects (carbon -intensive sectors) when trying to asses 

transition risks. 

When assessing transition risks, whether at the level of a single company, financial institution, 

or of a financial system, analysts will typically define a scenario associated with a low carbon 

transition (such as a new carbon tax, or reduced demand for carbon intensive products) and 

apply that scenario through the use of models to the o bject of analysis. As the Climate Policy 

Institute (CPI) study of low carbon transition risks in South Africa shows quite clearly, looking 

at the direct impact of a particular low carbon shock or scenario is not enough to have a sense 

of the overall conseq uences of such a scenario ( Huxham et al., 2019 ). It is also crucial to assess 

how the initial impact is spread throughout the whole economy, by looking at commercial, 

financial and capitalistic relationships. This can be done effectively from a microeconom ic 

approach by building heuristic models and analyzing contracts where appropriate, as CPI have 

done. However, this approach lacks the macroeconomic dimension and thus underestimates 

economy -wide 2 nd round effects. On the other hand, the complete dynamic m acroeconomic 

transition risk stress tests, such as those being developed by a number of NGFS members, 

could be seen by some central banks or finance ministries wanting to start with a bird ’s eye 

view of the issue, as highly technical, labor and data intens ive. 

We present in this paper what could be considered as a simplified macroeconomic approach 

to the issue of transition risk analysis. Using a static Input -Output model of the South African 

economy, we assess the impact on various economic sectors ’ output of a theoretical negative 

shock on South Africa ’s coal and automotive exports. We then use jobs and financial data to 

look at the total impact on employment, and to identify the sectors most at risk of representing 

a burden to financial system through inc reased default probabilities. 

Although we mainly intend to provide an illustration of an interesting and readily usable 

methodological approach to transition risks, the choice of South Africa as a case study is 

pertinent. The country is particularly expose d to transition risks, in particular through its 

export sector. We were also able to build on the work done by CPI in this regard, by using the 

low -carbon scenario on coal that was developed. Last but not least, South Africa ’s statistical 

office, Statistic s South Africa, provides detailed Input -Output (IO) tables as well as financial 

data at the sectorial level, allowing for a connection between impacts at the production level 

and impacts at the financial level. 

Carley et al. (2018) develop a conceptual fr amework where they decompose vulnerability as 

the combination of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity, in the context of the energy 

transition. The higher the exposure and the sensitivity and the lower the adaptive capacity, 

the more vulnerable is a sector. We apply this framework to our results and highlight how 

certain sectors are exposed and sensitive to financial risks emerging out of simplified transition 

scenarios (under the form of two exports shocks to the coal or automotive sectors). More A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks 

243 

pr ecisely, we indicate how indirectly affected sectors see a loss of production and employment 

as well as a worsening of two financial fragility indicators: the net debt to EBITDA ratio and the 

Z-score. We further quantify the magnitude of these worsening an d highlight that the 

transport, and electricity, gas and water (and auxiliary financial services 4 to a lesser extent) 

sectors are particularly exposed to the coal shock, while the metal ores, basic iron and steel, 

glass, auxiliary financial services and ag ain the electricity, gas and water sectors are exposed 

to the automotive shock. 

The data sources and technicalities to assess the impact of a specific transition shock are 

described in Section 2. Section 3 illustrates the methodology with a case study of t ransition 

shocks and stranding implications in South Africa. Section 4 concludes. 

# 2 Methodological overview 

Transition shock 

The low -carbon transition can generate shocks to the production and consumption structure 

by many ways. For example, firms may decide to stop using a specific technology because of a 

carbon tax or due to more stringent regulation. In some cases, this might affect downstream 

firms using these goods because the new technology has changed the characteristics of the 

produced goods. This is what we call a supply shock. A demand shock on the other hand would 

take place where specific policies, technological change or consumer behavior change induce 

a change in consumption behavior, either in the final demand, i.e., households ’ consumption 

pat terns, or in intermediate consumption, i.e., firms ’ decision on their usage of inputs. A 

reduction in demand for a specific sector will also propagate into the rest of the economy, as 

the firms in that sector are very likely to produce their goods and serv ices using goods and 

services produced in other sectors. A demand shock can have a domestic origin, i.e., firms and 

households within the country changing their behaviors, or a foreign origin. 

In a liberal market economy, the vast majority of transition s hocks will materialize in the form 

of demand shocks. It should also be stated that these shocks will materialize in various ways, 

will not be limited to a single event (hence the use of scenarios) and will come in the form of 

both negative and positive imp acts. In this study, we have aimed mainly at exposing a 

particular methodology, and have chosen to concentrate on a specific type of shock, that is an 

external negative demand shocks taking the form of a marked reduction in the exports 

(specifically: coal and automotive). 

This choice of a simplified external shock impacting negatively only one sector is made for 

illustrative purposes only. The methodology can accommodate shocks of any nature: domestic 

or external, demand loss or demand increase, and one or many impacted sectors. 

Input -Output model 

An IO table is a matrix, see  Table 15 -1, representing all the transactions of goods and services 

taking place in the economy, specifying the buying (columns) and selling sectors (rows). The 

transactions are grouped into two categories: intermediate consumption and final demand. 

The top left quadrant in  Table 15 -1 represents intermediate consumption taking place 

between two productive sectors in the production process (e.g. corn supplied by farmers and 

used by restaurants to produce meals). The top right quadrant of  Table 15 -1 represents final   

> 4The Activities auxiliary to financial intermedia tion sector combines activities such as administration of financial markets,
> security dealing activities or activities auxiliary to insurance and pension funds. They are considered as auxiliary because
> these activities do not involve taking the ownership o f the financial assets and liabilities being transacted. Chapter 15

244 

demand taking the form of consumption, government expenditures, investment in capita, 

investment in inventories and exports. An IO table can also contain information regardi ng the 

domestic/imported nature of the goods and services being sold, as shown in  Table 15 -1. Finally, 

the IO table also displays the value added (define d as the difference between sales from a 

sector and its intermediary consumption) distribution between taxes, wages and gross 

operating surplus, this is the bottom part of  Table 15 -1.

Table 15 -1 Structure of an Input -Output table with detailed imports 

Such a table can highlight the interconnectedness of the productive sectors of an economy. It 

indicates how a sector relies on the production of other sectors to produce the goods and 

services it sells. An IO table can be used for numerous applications. A common one is its use 

in a demand -pull model of impact analysis. A demand -pull model is a very simple model based 

on matrix algebra (mostly an inversion). Its purpose is to quantify the effect on all sectors of 

the economy of a specific change (a shock) in demand occurring in one or many sector(s). As 

we will see, because IO tables relate every transaction of in termediate goods in a symmetric 

and consistent manner, they allow grasping the systemic impact of such an exogenous shock. 

Intuitively, the demand -pull model computes how the initial shock first hits the shocked sector 

and then propagates in the economy as sectors (including the shocked sector) producing 

intermediary goods used by the shocked sector reduce their production, and as sectors 

producing the intermediary goods used to produce these intermediary goods also reduce their 

production, and so on. We ca n thus distinguish between the direct effects (the loss of 

production directly due to the shock) and indirect effects (all the rounds of loss of production 

following the shock). It is important to note that the shocked sector can have both direct and 

indir ect effects as it often uses its own production to produce its goods and services. 

Employment and financial impacts 

Once the IO model has shown the final impact of the exogenous shock through multiple 

iterations, we then combine the results (mainly: impact on output for each sector of the IO 

table) with employment and financial data to determine the loss in terms of jobs, or in terms 

of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA). For this, we 

mobilize two concepts: the labor in tensity on the one hand and the EBITDA elasticity on the 

other. 

Labor intensity relates the quantity of jobs, measured in full time equivalent, needed to 

produce one unit of goods and services. Once we know these labor intensities, it is then easy A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks 

245 

to compute the total loss of jobs in the economy due to a demand shock by computing direct 

and indirect job losses across all the affected sectors. 

While the relationship between production and labor is relatively straightforward, it is less so 

for EBITDA . There are indeed non -linearities between output and EBITDA due to the presence 

of fixed costs or non -production costs such as interests ’ payments, marketing costs etc. This is 

why we posit an elasticity of transformation between output and EBITDA at the sectorial level. 

We estimate this elasticity via a log -log econometric regression, using 2006 -2018 time series 

from the financial dataset. The combination of the demand -pull model and this simple 

econometric model allows us to compute the loss of EBITDA in all sectors of the economy due 

to a shock in demand. 

We then use two different financial fragility indicators, namely the Net -Debt to EBITDA ratio 

and a version of Altman ’s Z -score, at an aggregated sectoral level, to identify those sectors that 

are most likely to represent a challenge from a macroeconomic perspective, as well as for the 

financial system, or to individual financial institutions depending on their exposure to these 

sectors. 

Assumptions and limitations 

The IO model and the further development we have described here rely on strong assumptions 

that could be framed as follows: 

• The scenario is a one -time event, and firms do not adapt to the shock by changing 

their production processes (the technical coefficients of the IO matrix are sta tic and 

there is no substitution between inputs). 

• Producers face constant returns to scale (a change in the output level will induce a 

change in the same proportion in the needed inputs for a unitary production). 

• Labor and capital are unlimited and availab le at fixed price (a change in the demand 

for productive factors will not induce a change in their cost). 

• We assume a linear relationship between labor and output and a non -linear 

relationship (in the form of an elasticity) between output and EBITDA. 

Data sources 

We use a 50 sectors IO table published in 2014 by Statistics South Africa. We construct 

employment data combining the 2014 Quarterly Labor Force Survey and the 2014 Quarterly 

Employment Statistics. We decomposed the mining sector into two Gold and Non -Gold sectors, 

using the 2015 report on the Mining Industry ( StatSA, 2015 ).

We use the Annual Financial Statistics for 2014, published by Statistics South Africa. The 

financial dataset does not cover four IO sectors: Agriculture, Financial intermediatio n, 

Insurance and pensions, and Education. Their financial data are arbitrarily set to null .

# 3 Transition shocks and stranding implications in South Africa 

In this chapter, we model transition dynamics as exports shocks. The main shock we simulate 

concerns th e coal sector. With 9.9 billion tons of proven coal reserves at the end of 2017, South 

Africa has 1.0% of the world ’s proven reserves and ranks 12th as such. The coal industry Chapter 15 

246 

represented 1.52% in the GDP in 2014 (the year of our IO table). Over the period 2001 -2017, 

around 28% of extracted tons of coal were exported, with South Africa being the 6th largest 

exporter in 2017. To quantify the shock we study, we follow scenarios by Huxham et al. (2019) ,

who model a decrease of around 70% in South African expor ts value until 2025 under a 

scenario which would limit the rise in global temperature to 2°C (compared to the pre -

industrial period). We model this shock as a single exogenous event, rather than as a times 

series. 

In order to compare and contrast the trans ition risks emerging from a loss in coal exports, we 

also simulate an export loss in the motor vehicles sector. South Africa is indeed well inserted 

within the global value chain of the motor industry (Barnes and Morris 2008), and it is 

reasonable to assum e that a global transition to a low carbon economy will lead to a reduction 

in demand for internal combustion engine vehicles. For illustrative purposes only, we use a 

shock of the same magnitude than in the coal sector (approx. 44bn Rand) to compare the 

results. 

The propagation of an external transition shock 

Figure 15 -1 represents the propagation of the coal shock. Each node is a sector and each vertex 

represent the fact that the upstream sectors demands less goods and services produced in the 

downstream sector. We kept only the most impacted sector, following the methodology 

described in Cahen -Fourot et al. ( 2019 , 2020 ). 

Figure 15 -1 Network of output stranding due to a unitary loss in final demand in the 

coal and lignite sector 

Source: StatSA, 2017 and authors’ computation 

Figure 2-1 illustrates that there can be many different paths of different length by which a 

specific sector is impacted by the loss of final demand in the shocked sector, even if that sector 

seems quite far in the industrial netwo rk from the originating sector. 

We can indeed observe different supply chains, such as the trade industry chain relying on 

telecommunication, real estate activities, and computer activities. Each sector in the chain 

produces output used by sectors higher i n the chain as intermediary inputs for their own 

production. These chains are thus propagation cascades where the loss of production in 

sectors high in the chain leads to loss of production for sector lower in the chain. A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks 

247 

From stranded output to stranded j obs and stranded profits 

Once we determine the quantity of output loss in each sector, it is possible to pursue the 

analysis and compute the quantity of profits, taxes or wages being lost. Importantly, this will 

depend on the nature of the production proce ss in each sector, as different sectors have 

different levels of capital or labor intensity. These characteristics lead to different distributions 

of the added value between labor income (wages) and capital income (profits). The overall 

quantity of lost pr ofits or lost wages in the economy thus depends on which sectors are 

impacted and on their added value distribution among the different factors. 

Figure 15 -2 shows the total relative losses in output, employment and gross operating surplus 

(GO S) in the case of a reduction of export demand in the coal and lignite sector, while  Delving 

deeper on the sectoral impacts of a loss of motor vehicles exports , we can see that while the 

indirect impacts are more than 100 % the direct impacts on output being stranded, the direct 

impacts corresponds to only 25% (resp. 5% ) of the total impact for employment (resp. GOS ).

Sectors indirectly impacted , such as trade, oth er services or transports , even see a larger 

decrease in GOS than the directly impacted motor vehicles sector. 

Figure 15 -3 shows the same indicators for the motor vehicles shock. Each stacked element of 

the bar plot corresponds to the loss of output, employment or GOS in a specific sector. The 

bar plots have been normalized to one, for ea se of reading but the aggregate loss is indicated 

under each bar plot, as a percentage of total output, employment or GOS in the South African 

economy. The direct effect, i.e., the loss due to the original shock, has been highlight ed in blue. Chapter 15 

248 

Figure 15 -2 Sectorial stranding components, i.e., output, employment and GOS, due 

to a loss in demand in the coal sector 

Source: StatSA (2017 5, 2019b 6, 2019c 7) and authors’ computation 

We observe that , in the case of the coal export loss, the original shock (highlighted in blue) 

corresponds to 2/3 of the total impact in terms of total nominal output. This means that for 

every two Rands of lost output in the coal export sector, there will be another Rand of lost 

output distributed in the rest of the economy due to the lost purchases of goods and services 

of the coal sector to the rest of the economy, and to the knock -on effects. The sectors most 

impacted are transport and trade. Th e relative impacts change drastically when looking at the 

two other impacted variables. Coal and lignite being capital intensive, one sees that the 

indirect loss of GOS amount s to only 25% of the total loss 8. On the other hand, as the coal 

sector is relatively less intensive in labor, the direct loss of employment represents roughly 1/3 

of the total loss in employment. This means that for every job at risk in the coal export sector, 

there are actually two other jobs at risk in the rest of the economy. Naturally w e fi nd the same 

impacted sectors when looking at jobs and when looking at output (with transport and trade 

playing a key role), driven by the structure of the supply chain, as highlighted in Figure 1. 

However, the relative sectorial losses differ, reflecting varying sectorial capital or labor intensity .

This indicates that both the structure and the sectorial characteristics of the economy are 

important when trying to evaluate an external transition shock. 

The results are strikingly different in the case of a s hock to the motor vehicles industry, as 

shown in Figure 3. We first see that while the original shock to the two sectors are identical in             

> 5StatSA (2017). Input -output tables for South Africa. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08.
> 6StatSA (2019b). Quarterly employment statistics. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08.
> 7StatSA (2019c). Quarterly labour force survey. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08.
> 8All things being equal, a capital intensive company usually have a higher ratio of GOS to Value added .A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks

249 

magnitude (again - for illustrative purposes), they lead to different total stranding impacts in 

output (0.93% of dome stic output in the case of coal vs. 1.33% in the case of motor vehicles), 

employment (0.42% vs. 0.79%) and GOS (1.57% vs. 0.65%). This illustrates again that the 

structure of the economy is not neutral in driving how different shocks spread through the 

eco nomy and affect different indicators. The total impact on a specific indicator is the sum of 

sectorial impacts, which are themselves a multiplier of the original shock. The sectorial 

multiplier depends on the strength of the connection between the initial sector and the sector 

under scrutiny and on the nature of each sector: more or less labor intensive for employment, 

more or less capital intensive for GOS. The fact that the automotive sector is more integrated 

in the production structure of the South Afri can economy explains why it generates a larger 

total loss of production than the coal sector. The economic characteristics of the directly and 

indirectly impacted sectors explains why the loss in coal exports leads to a larger impact on 

GOS and a smaller i mpact on employment. 

Delving deeper on the sectoral impacts of a loss of motor vehicles exports , we can see that 

while the indirect impacts are more than 100 % the direct impacts on output being stranded, 

the direct impacts corresponds to only 25% (resp. 5% ) of the total impact for employment 

(resp. GOS ). Sectors indirectly impacted , such as trade, oth er services 9 or transports , even see 

a larger decrease in GOS than the directly impacted motor vehicles sector.      

> 9Other services correspond to a combination of services supplied to the household sectors, as well as any
> service provider that does not enter in the otherwise classified service sectors. Th e diffuse nature of the sector
> explains why it is s trongly connected to the industry. Chapter 15

250 

Figure 15 -3 Sectorial stranding components, i.e., output, employment and GOS, due 

to a loss in demand in the motor vehicles sector 

Source: StatSA (2017 10 , 2019b 11 , 2019c 12 ) and authors' computation 

Financial implications 

As interesting the outcome of the stranding analysis in terms of employment or GOS is, it fails 

to assess the impact of the export shock on financial stability. In order to do so, we combine 

the demand -pull model of output stranding with two financial frag ility indicators: the net debt 

to EBITDA ratio and a version of Altman ’s Z -score. 

We use the non -linear relationship described in the methodology section to determine the 

loss of EBITDA due to the two exports shocks. Figure 4 shows the results we obtained . The size 

of the bubbles represent the total amount of debt (both short -term and long -term) per sector, 

while their color represents the shock: red for coal and blue for automotive. The ir position on 

the x-axis indicates the ir ini tial financial fragility , using the net debt to EBITDA ratio , while the ir 

position on the y-axis indicates the increase in fragility following each shock. To facilitate 

reading, we do not display extreme case such as Furniture and Electronic valves sectors which 

have very high net debt to EBITDA ratio (above 20) and a relatively large increase fragility 

(around 2%) for either shock. The same is true for the Basic Iron and steel and leather and 

luggage sectors displaying a very high increase in their net debt to EBITDA (around 10%) in the 

case of the automotive shock, although having a low initial ratio (less than 2). 

In the case of the coal shock (red bubbles), we ob serve that , on top of the the unseen 

electronic valves and furniture, the electricity, gas and water and transport (and auxiliary         

> 10 StatSA (2017). Input -output tables for South Africa. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08.
> 11 StatSA (2019b) . Quarterly employment statistics. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08.
> 12 StatSA (2019c). Quarterly labour force survey. Accessed: 2020 -01 -08. A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks

251 

financial services to a lesser extent) sectors combine a relatively higher net d ebt to EBITDA 

ratio and higher variation in the same ratio. In the case of the motor vehicles shock (blue 

bubbles), we see , on top of the electronic va lves and furniture, electricity, gas and water and 

coal and lignite (and spinning and textiles, glass, nuclear fuel, metal ores 

Figure 15 -4 Stranding E BITDA , financial fragility, and liability sizes 

Source: StatSA (2017 , 2019a) and authors’ computation 

We complement the previous results with an analysis of the evolution of the Z ’’ -score following 

the two exports shocks. The lower the score, the more likely the company is to face bankruptcy 

with a value of z ero being equated to a default (D) rated bond.  Figure 15 -5 plots the same 

bubble representing total sectorial liabilities where their position on the x -axis represents the 

initial sectorial Z -score and their position on the y -axis represents the evolu tion of that 

indicator for the two shocks (red for coal and blue for automotive) . In order to avoid clogging 

the figure, we only show sectors having a Z -score below six. While we find some of the 

previously mentioned sectors standing out again (Basic iron a nd steel, glass, metal ores, 

electricity, gas and water, transport), the others however display a relatively high Z -score. Chapter 15 

252 

Figure 15 -5 Z-scores and variation in Z -score 

Source: StatSA (2017 , 2019a) and auth ors' computation 

# 4 Discussion and conclusion 

Using the South African coal export sector as a case study, we have illustrated how using a 

simple static Input -Output model can yield interesting insights on the importance of indirect 

effects of exogenous low carbon shocks, both on loss of output and job losses. The approach 

can also combined with financial statistical data to help identify those sectors that are most 

likely to contribute to potential financial instability. 

Our main results highlight that while carbon intensive sectors are more likely to be directly 

affected by transition risks, other less carbon intensive sectors might indirectly be impacted 

through the network of supply and use of intermediate inputs. This is highlighted through the 

use of a static Input -Output model of the economy. In a sense, this approach illustrates the 

importance of looking at scope 3 carbon footprints when analyzing transition risks. Indeed ,

the often -used approach of using scope 1 carbon footprints for transition risk mapping misses 

how value chains are a vector o f carbon relationships and carbon -related risk. The Input -

Output models can be considered a way to address the near impossibility of mobilizing scope 

3 carbon footprints at scale. 

With regards to financial vulnerability in the face of climate related risks , it is useful to 

distinguish between exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. We thus use these concepts 

to discuss our results. In the case of the coal export loss, we thus observe that sectors such as 

transport, and electricity, gas and water (and a uxiliary financial to a lesser extent) are 

combining exposure (due to their position in the cascade of production loss) and sensitivity 

(due to their relative financial fragility). In order to determine financial vulnerability, one would 

need to determine the adaptive capacity of each sector, which is beyond the scope of this A Macroeconomic Approach to Assess ing Economy -Wide Transition Risks 

253 

exercise. We nonetheless can assume that the adaptive capacity of the utilities sector is quite 

high, given its strategic position in an economy and its public nature. This however cou ld imply 

a transfer of fragility to the public sector, which would have to recapitalize the sector. 

In the case of the cars export loss, we first observe that the South African economy is more 

exposed in general to production loss. This is because of the s tronger integration of the 

automotive in the production network. We thus find more sectors combining exposure and 

sensitivity: metal ores, basic iron and steel, glass, auxiliary financial services and again the 

electricity, gas and water. 

From a case stud y point of view, the approach developed here shows that scenario building is 

a contextual exercise, which needs to be thought both in terms of reduction in Green House 

Gas emissions and in terms of the production structure of the economy at hand. Concentra ting 

only on carbon intensive sector would be an error as financial vulnerabilities might develop in 

other sectors as well. Of course, the case study developed here only considers negative shocks 

while the transition to a low carbon economy is also a sourc e of opportunities. This does not 

change the nature of our results: grasping the systemic impacts of a transition to a low carbon 

economy is fundamental. 

The advantage of this approach is its ease of implementation, only requiring a few matrix 

calculus op erations, its relative frugality in terms of data (we combined an IO table with 

sectorial employment and financial data) implying that it can easily be implemented in data -

poor countries. The main limitations of the approach are the fact that input -output data are 

sometimes outdated and of irregular quality 13 , the static economy assumption, and the 

absence of an economy -wide multi -sector low -carbon transition scenario. 

While the proposed approach allows us to capture direct and indirect effects of transitio n

shocks, highlighting the systemic nature of the low carbon economy, the analysis done here 

should not be considered as approaching a full macroeconomic model and there are many 

ways in which it could be improved to strengthen the results.     

> 13 In the case of South Africa, we had to use input -output data from 2014 .And although we have no reason to doubt the
> quality of the data, this is however not always the case. Chapter 15

254 

# Bibliography 

Barnes, J., & Morris, M. (2008). Staying alive in the global automotive industry: what can 

developing economies learn from South Africa about linking into global automotive 

value chains? The European journal of development research 20 (1), 31 -55. 

Cahen -Fou rot, L., Campiglio, E., Dawkins, E., Godin, A., & Kemp -Benedict, E. (2019). Capital 

stranding cascades: The impact of decarbonisation on productive asset utilisation. 

Cahen -Fourot, L., Campiglio, E., Dawkins, E., Godin, A., & Kemp -Benedict, E. (2020). Loo king 

for the inverted pyramid: An application using input -output networks. Ecological 

Economics, 169 , 106554. 

Campiglio, E., Godin, A., Kemp -Benedict, E., & Matikainen, S. (2017). The tightening links 

between financial systems and the low -carbon transitio n. In Economic policies since 

the global financial crisis (pp. 313 -356): Springer. 

Carley, S., Evans, T. P., Graff, M., & Konisky, D. M. (2018).  A framework for evaluating 

geographic disparities in energy transition vulnerability. Nature Energy, 3 (8), 621 -

627. 

Carney, M. (2015). Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon –climate change and financial 

stability. Speech given at Lloyd’s of London, 29 , 220 -230. 

Huxham, M., Anwar, M., & Nelson, D. (2019). Understanding the impact of a low carbon 

transition on South A frica. Climate Policy Initiative Energy Finance .

Rozenberg, J., Vogt -Schilb, A., & Hallegatte, S. (2018). Instrument choice and stranded assets 

in the transition to clean capital. Journal of Environmental Economics and 

Management , 102183. 

StatSA. (2015). Mining industry. 

StatSA. (2017). Input -output tables for South Africa. 

StatSA. (2019a). Annual financial statistics. 

StatSA. (2019b). Quarterly employment statistics. 

StatSA. (2019c). Quarterly labour force survey. Environmental Stress Testing for Equity Portfolios 

255 

# Environmental Stress Testing for Equity 

# Portfolios 

By 

Yao Wang and Yi -Chen Shi 1

# Abstract 

China has come under greater environmental and resource p ressure at a time when 

increasingly severe global warming brings climate risks into focus. Assessing the impact of 

climate risks on financial performance, this research conducts climate stress testing on equity 

portfolios. First, it employs the asset -prici ng model to analyze whether the investment 

portfolio of an asset management company is impacted by climatic factors through sensitivity 

analysis. It then simulates changes of share values in the asset portfolio under several climate 

stress scenarios. Lastl y, it calculates the possible maximum value at risk (VaR) of the equity 

portfolio under an extreme climatic risk scenario. The empirical results show that carbon risk 

constitutes a significant impact on the returns and market values of the stocks making up the CSI 

300 Index, and an extreme carbon risk event can cause the market value of the index portfolio to 

drop as much as 10%. Further, this research finds that carbon risk can have a positive effect on the 

returns of green stocks and a significant negati ve impact on brown stocks. 

Keywords: environmental  stress testing, climate risk, equity portfolio, VaR, scenario and 

sensitivity analysis, carbon asset pricing 

# 1 Introduction 

The G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report 2016 points out that a major barrier to the 

development of green finance is the absence of environmental risk analysis tools and capacity. 

Therefore, stakeholders should develop and promote environmental risk analysis tools and 

apply them to the financial indu stry. In April 2019, the NGFS released A call for action Climate 

change as a source of financial risk , and pointed to the need to integrate climate -related risks 

into financial -stability monitoring and regulation. 

The academic community has studied environ mental stress testing of the financial sectors, 

mostly focused on banks (Batten et al., 2016 ; Battiston et al., 201 7; Monasterolo et al., 2017 ;

Zhang et al., 2016 ), but little on the asset management industry. Amongst them, Alessi et al., 

2019 performed a carbon stress test on the actual equity holdings of various institutional 

sectors and presented a tool to assess a portfolio ’s exposure to climate risks. They found that 

even in a benign scenario, losses could be reduced by 30% by halving the exposure to c arbon -

intensive sectors. 

In China, seven ministry -level bodies, including the People ’s Bank of China (PBC), jointly 

launched the Guidelines for Establishing Green Finance System on August 31, 2016. Article 10      

> 1Prof. Yao Wang is the Director General of International Institute of Green Finance (IIGF) at Central University of Finance
> and Economics (CUFE) , email: yaowang2013@163.com . Dr. Yi -Chen Shi is a Deputy Director General, chair professor and
> head of Green Finance Innovation Laboratory of IIGF ,ycshih_cufe@163.com .Chapter 16

256 

and Article 18 of the guidelines explicitly spe cify financial institutions ’ implementation of 

environmental -risk stress testing. The document encourages banks and other financial 

institutions to assess loans and asset risk exposures in the areas with high environmental risks, 

as well as perform quantit ative analysis of potential credit risks and market risks from 

exposures under different scenarios. Furthermore, the Guidelines require institutional 

investors to enhance the ability to assess environmental risks and carbon emissions involved 

in their asse ts and demand institutional investors (particularly insurance companies) to 

conduct stress tests on the impact of environmental and climate factors. 

Based on this, environmental stress testing for the financial sectors has been studied since 

2016 in China . For instance, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) analyzed the 

impact of climate change on the credit risks of commercial banks and conducted 

environmental cost stress tests on thermal power and cement industries (Zhang et al., 2016 ). 

The Inte rnational Institute of Green Finance, CUFE (IIGF), launched the first research 

conducting environmental stress tests for asset -management companies in China. In its report, 

the IIGF describes the methodology and tests on the impact of climate and environme ntal risks 

on stock returns and market values (Wang & Shi, 2017 ). This paper introduces the findings 

published by IIGF in 2017 and discusses their potential applications. 

IIGF ’s research does not limit the methodology to only employing the normal discounte d cash 

flow (DCF) to explore how risk factors affect a company ’s operating profit. Instead, based on 

the characteristics of the asset management companies, this research uses asset -pricing to 

measure market risks and includes environmental factors in the m odel, thereby reflecting the 

risk factor with market prices and influences on the unexpected return of the asset. At the 

same time, this research employs the VaR model to derive quantitative environmental risks, 

namely VaR monetization. On this basis, it p rovides a decision -making basis for industry and 

companies and provides a quantitative reference for the government to establish policies on 

environmental information disclosure and environmental stress -testing. 

This research combines sensitivity and scena rio analyses to explore the impacts of climate risk 

on firms ’ financial performance. Previous researches on environmental stress testing mostly 

adopted scenario analysis methods with few sensitivity analyses performed. This is because 

the DCF method only n eeds to assume discount cash flows under certain future scenarios, 

while the sensitivity analysis incorporates historical data. Few researchers have taken this 

approach, let alone combining sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis. 

The implementation of environmental stress testing helps prompt financial institutions to 

recognize the significance of environmental and climatic risks and further push their corporate 

customers to disclose environmental information. Research and development of related 

methods will also gradually refine the methodology for the environmental stress testing of the 

financial industry, creating a set of public environmental stress testing models for the industry. 

# 2 Research methodology for climate Stress Testing of Equity 

# Portfolios 

Climate stress testing architecture 

The first step of a climate stress test is to identify concrete climate risks, including physical and 

transition risks. After identifying the climate risks, we can perform scenario analysis and 

sensitivity ana lysis pertaining to bonds, equities, real estate and other assets held by an asset 

management company based on these predefined risks. Since carbon pricing is an important Environmental Stress Testing for Equity Portfolios 

257 

tool to mitigate climate change with market mechanisms, and carbon price can reflect some 

of the climate risks, we add it to our model as a climate risk factor. This approach is based on 

an efficient carbon -emissions market. 

Figure 16 -1 Climate stress testing architecture for equity portfoli os 

Sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis 

This research methodology changes from the previous empirical approach of using mainly 

scenario analysis by combining scenario and sensitivity analyses. The sensitivity analysis aims 

to build the model based on historical data, thus informing us of the adjustment of the 

discount rate and the probability of scenario occurrence for the scenario analysis. 

2.2.1 Sensitivity analysis 

A sensitivity analysis uses data to identify the relationship between the cl imate risk and the 

return, meaning the extent to which the rise of the climate risk by one unit affects the return. 

For example, the percentage decrease in return on an asset as the carbon price rises by 1% 

will be the value of the carbon risk coefficient. 

For stocks, we can use a series of models to find their corresponding values of the risk 

coefficient and measure their liquidity risk and market risk in terms of liquidity indicator and 

investment income respectively. Specifically, we add the climate ris k factors into the CAPM 

model to get the Beta of climate risk, using the following: 

𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 ) = 𝑟 𝑓 + 𝛽 𝑖𝑚 (𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 ) − 𝑟 𝑓 ) + 𝛽 𝑖𝐶𝑅 𝑅 𝐶𝑅 

where 𝐸 (𝑟 𝑖 ) is the expected return of investment, 𝑟 𝑓 is the risk -free rate, 𝛽 𝑖𝑚 is the beta of 

investment, 𝐸 (𝑟 𝑚 ) − 𝑟 𝑓 represents market risk premium, 𝑅 𝐶𝑅 is climate risk, and 𝛽 𝑖𝐶𝑅 is the 

beta of climate risk. 

The analysis concept for bonds only differs by having the values of risk coefficient computed 

with the models (KMV model and Creditportfolio view model) meas ure the interest rate risk 

and credit risk of bonds, and these risk indicators and the market risk indicators for stocks 

jointly constitute the investment income risk of the asset management company. (see  Figure 

16 -2)Chapter 16 

258 

2.2.2 Scenario analysis  

> A scenario analysis simulates the possible losses under hypothetical scenarios. For example, we
> can set carbon prices high, medium and low to calculate the subsequent investment loss, then
> obtain the maximum VaR of the investment income and further measure the impact of the
> environmental risk on the investment portfolio.

Figure 16 -2 Analysis methodology for climate stress testing for equity portfolio 

Asset pricing models and VaR 

Another innovation of this methodology is that prior stress tests generally used the DCF 

method, exploring how risk factors affected the unexpected operating profit of a company. 

This research instead uses the asset pricing model to measure the market risk based on the 

conditions of the asset management companies. We seek to reflect the risk factor with the 

market price and influence the unexpected return of the asset. Also, this research employs the 

VaR model to estimate quantitative environmental risk kno wn as VaR monetization. Our 

study ’s goal is to provide a decision -making basis for the asset managers. 

2.3.1 Asset -pricing models integrating environmental risk factors 

This research uses the asset -pricing model to measure the expected returns of individu al 

stocks and integrate climate risk factors into the model. We first use the model to identify the 

impact of climate factors on the portfolio of an asset management company, then we simulate 

value changes of the portfolio ’s components under future environ ment, climate and other 

environmental stress scenarios. Finally, we quantitatively measure the impact of these risks on 

the ROI of the portfolio. 

2.3.2 VaR model 

After computing the expected return and standard deviation of the investment portfolio, we 

use the VaR model to calculate the VaR of the portfolio and discuss the maximum VaR of the 

portfolio under extreme scenarios with the probability of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 

Transmission from carbon price changes to market risks 

For example, if carbon standard gets stricter, carbon prices will rise, forcing an enterprise to 

pay more for the right of carbon emissions, which reduces its profit as it faces higher carbon 

risks. The bigger the carbon risk factor, the higher the carbon price, the higher the risk 

premium on the emission right, which may result in declining share prices and returns. In this 

research, we calculate returns and carbon risk factors of individual stocks, work out the Environmental Stress Testing for Equity Portfolios 

259 

average return, standard deviation and carbo n risk factor of the investment portfolio as well 

as the loss in the value of the portfolio due to the risks of rising carbon prices. 

Figure 16 -3 Analysis flow for carbon price risk 

# 3 Empirical analysis of climate stress testing of equity portfolio – CSI 

# 300 Index 

This research simulates the climate risk of the equity portfolio resulting from the investment 

in the stocks making up the CSI 300 Index, which consists of the 300 largest and most liqu id A -

share stocks and gauges the overall performance of China A -share market. This research 

conducts climate stress testing over the carbon -price risks of listed companies given the 

availability of data, limiting the scope to the sample shares within the C SI 300 Index. It uses 

data on monthly returns from the Wind database, and data on carbon prices from seven local 

carbon trade pilots in China. Chapter 16 

260 

Table 16 -1 Descriptive statistics of carbon price risk of CSI 300 Index in August 2013 

to June 2016 

Carbon price  Rate of Change  Carbon risk factor 

Average value  33.18  0.0529  -0.002 

Median  29.62  -0.0040  -0.0059 

Standard deviation  16.98  0.3978  0.0535 

Minimum  9.33  -0.7099  -0.1403 

Maximum  78.46  1.3675  0.4243 

Number  35  34  281 

Table 16 -2 The impact of rising carbon prices on CSI 300 

Change of average return of CSI 

300 index  Carbon price 

doubled, 5% 

VaR, loss in 

market value 

of CSI 300 (100 

million yuan) 

and 

percentage in 

total market 

capitalization 

Carbon price 

tripled, 5% 

VaR, loss in 

market value 

of CSI 300 (100 

million yuan) 

and 

percentage in 

total market 

capitalization 

Carbon price 

quadrupled, 

5% VaR, loss in 

market value 

of CSI 300 (100 

million yuan) 

and percentage 

in total market 

capitalization 

change 

in 

average 

return 

when 

carbon 

price 

doubled 

change in 

average 

return 

when 

carbon 

price 

tripled 

change in 

average 

return 

when 

carbon 

price 

quadrupled 

-0.88 % -1.76%  -2.53%  26381 

（10.8% ）

28540 

（16.0% ）

30700 

（24.8% ）

Table 16 -3 Impact of a 10 -fold rise in carbon price on CSI 300 

A 10 -fold 

rise in 

carbon price 

and 20% 

VaR, loss in 

market 

value of CSI 

300 (100 

million 

yuan) 

A 10 -fold 

rise in 

carbon price 

and 30% 

VaR, loss in 

market 

value of CSI 

300 (100 

million 

yuan) 

A 10 -fold 

rise in 

carbon price 

and 40% 

VaR, loss in 

market 

value of CSI 

300 (100 

million 

yuan) 

A 10 -fold 

rise in the 

carbon price 

and 20% 

VaR, 

Percentage 

decline in 

CSI 300 

A 10 -fold 

rise in the 

carbo n price 

and 30% 

VaR, 

Percentage 

decline in 

CSI 300 

A 10 -fold 

rise in the 

carbon price 

and 40% 

VaR, 

Percentage 

decline in 

CSI 300 

31228  25467  20544  12.70%  10.35%  8.35% 

Using the Fama -MacBeth regression methodology, the research produced empirical results 

(see  Table 16 -2) showing that an increase in carbon price will reduce the investment ret urn on 

CSI 300 index. If the carbon price doubles, triples and quadruples, the return falls 0.9%, 1.8% 

and 2.5%, respectively. In compliance with the Basel Agreement, we opt for the extreme risk 

scenario of 5% value at risk (VaR). If carbon price doubles, the market value of the CSI 300 Environmental Stress Testing for Equity Portfolios 

261 

index declines by 2.6 trillion yuan (about 10.8% of the current total market value 25 trillion 

yuan). If carbon price triples and quadruples, the market value of the CSI 300 index may drop 

by 2.9 trillion yuan and 3.1 trilli on yuan, respectively. However, even a fourfold rise in carbon 

price may not be enough to meet the Paris Agreement. According to the World Bank, a price 

at USD 80 -120 (approximately 560 -850 Yuan) a tonne in 2030 is needed to meet the Paris 

Agreement target s. Based on this prediction, if the carbon price rises from 20 yuan to 200 yuan 

(approximately USD28), the market value of CSI 300 index has a 40% chance of dropping 8.4%, 

a 30% chance of losing 10.4%, and a 20% chance of falling 12.7%. In short, the carbo n price 

risk can deliver a significant shock on the returns and market values of the CSI 300 Index 

components. 

Furthermore, we compare the impact of carbon price risk on green and carbon -intensive 

(brown ) sectors. Based on the industry classification stand ard set by China ’s securities 

regulator (2012 edition), we take the companies in the industries of health, agriculture, 

ecological protection and environmental management, and water production and distribution 

as green stocks, and select the companies in a ir transport industry, and electricity and heat 

production and distribution as brown stocks. All portfolios are constructed with equal 

weightings. As shown in  Table 16 -4, an increase in carbon price will reduce the investment 

return on brown assets, while increasing the return on green assets. Also, under the scenario 

of 5% VaR, the decline in the market value of green assets is much smaller than that of brown 

assets. The empirical results indicate that carbon risk mainly influences the carbon -intensive 

sectors. 

Table 16 -4 The impact of rising carbon prices on g reen and brown assets 

Type  Industry 

Average return change  carbon 

price rises 

once, VaR 

at 5% (100 

million 

RMB) 

carbon 

price rises 

twice, VaR 

at 5% (100 

million 

RMB) 

carbon 

price rises 

three 

times, VaR 

at 5% (100 

million 

RMB) 

carbon 

price 

rises 

once 

carbon 

price 

rises 

twice 

carbon 

price 

rises 

three 

times 

Green 

assets 

Health  0.02  0.04  0.06  13 

(3.52%) 

6

(1.57%) 

1

(0.38%) 

Agriculture  0.15  0.29  0.44  3

(1.45%) 

29 

(13.06%) 

61 

(27.57%) 

Ecological 

protection and 

environmental 

management 

0.00  0.01  0.01  47 

(13.98%) 

49 

(14.62%) 

51 

(15.26%) 

water 

production and 

distribution 

0.01  0.02  0.03  32 (17.05%)  30 (16.08%)  28 

(15.11%) 

Brown 

assets 

Electricity and 

heat 

production and 

supply 

-0.02  -0.04  -0.06  89 

(23.08%) 

108 

(28.14%) 

128 

(33.20%) 

Air transport  -0.05  -0.10  -0.15  133 

(21.81%) 

169 

(27.77%) 

206 

(33.73%) Chapter 16 

262 

# 4 Conclusion 

This research has built a carbon risk model to explore the relationship between investment 

returns and carbon risk factors. It measures the maximum VaR of the investment portfolio and 

prices the carbon risks based on the market pricing mechanism. The empirical results show 

that: 

Carbon risk does deliver a significant impact on the returns and market values of the CSI 300 

Index components, causing the po rtfolio to lose as much as 10% of its market value under an 

extreme scenario. Further, this research finds that carbon risk can have a positive effect on the 

returns of green stocks and a significant negative impact on brown stocks. 

Our research reveals t hat the market price mechanism can genuinely internalize climate cost. 

This is because climate risk factors will affect returns on assets, boosting returns on green 

stocks while reducing those on brown stocks. Environmental Stress Testing for Equity Portfolios 

263 

# Bibliography 

Alessi, L., Ossola, E., & Panz ica, R. (2019). The Greenium Matters: Evidence on the Pricing of 

Climate Risk. University of Milan Bicocca Department of Economics. Management 

and Statistics Working Paper,(418) .

Batten, S., Sowerbutts, R., & Tanaka, M. (2016).  Let's talk about the weather: the impact of 

climate change on central banks. 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A Climate stress -

test of the financial system. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 283 –288. 

Monasterolo, I., Battiston, S., Janetos, A. C., & Zheng, Z. (2017). Vulnerable yet relevant: the 

two dimensions of climate -related financial disclosure. Climatic Change, 145 (3 -4), 

495 -507. 

Wang, Y., & Shi, Y. -C. (2017). Analysis and management of environmental risk in asset 

management : China Financial Publishing House. 

Zhang, H., Zhou, Y., Ma, J., Yin, H., Yang, X., Le, Y., & Qiu, M. (2016).  Impact of Environmental 

Factors on Credit Risk of Commercial Banks – Based on Stress Testing Research and 

Application of Industri al and Commercial Bank of China. Finance Forum, 2016 (02), 3 -

16. Chapter 17 

264 

# Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment 

# on Investment Portfolios 

By 

Carbone4 1

# Abstract 

The CRIS methodology was created in 2017 to provide climate -related risk metrics at the asset 

and portfolio levels. It enables asset managers and lenders to better report and manage 

climate -related risks, and more effectively engage with stakeholders. It i s based on a 

comprehensive, robust and transparent assessment framework covering acute and chronic 

climate hazards, for different climate scenarios and future time horizons. The method was 

developed to be applied to listed equities and bonds, including gre en bonds, sovereign bonds, 

and real assets (infrastructure, real estate and natural resources). Anticipating data availability 

constraints, CRIS applies a pragmatic tier -based approach in conducting individual analyses. 

The challenges ahead are the lack of asset -specific data and the reliability of damage functions. 

Keywords: climate risk, physical ri sks, TCFD, risk assessment, risk metrics, mainstreaming 

climate risks, portfolio assessment 

# 1 Purpose of the study/methodology 

CRIS – Climate Risk Impact Screeni ng 2 - is an innovative method developed to assess the 

exposure of investment portfolios to physical risks 3 posed by climate change . The method 

was developed by Carbone 4 4 in 2017 with the support of major financial actors (i.e. , AFD, 

Caisse des Depots et Co nsignation, FRR, Mirova -Natixis, CCR, ERAFP, BNP, CDG Capital and EDF) 

and with the help and advice from a scientific council gathering financial and scientific experts. 

CRIS provides risk metrics at the asset and portfolio levels. It enables asset manage rs and 

lenders to report, manage risk and engage with stakeholder s. It is based on a comprehensive, 

robust and transparent assessment framework covering acute and chronic hazards, for 

different climate scenarios and future time horizons. The method was dev eloped so as to be 

applied to listed equities and bonds, including green bonds, sovereign bonds, and real assets 

(infrastructure, real estate and natural resources).  Figure 17 -1 shows the Exposure Map of 

mineral deposits to droughts around the world; this preliminary CRIS analysis aims at 

screening a portfolio to climate hazards only based on asset location. A complete CRIS analysis 

also includes vulnerability information on each asset to create asset -specific risk scoring (see 

following sections). For listed companies, CRIS can be applied to a large universe, based on                    

> 1This chapter is written by Violaine Lepousez, Manager and Climate Risk Expert at Carbone 4,email :
> violaine.lepousez@carbone4.com .
> 2See crisforfinance.com for more information.
> 3Physical risk relates to risks coming from the impacts of a changing climate (increased heat waves or storms for instance),
> as opposed to transition risk that rel ates to risks coming from the increased needs and pressure to reduce the impacts of
> our economy to climate change (see TCFD).
> 4Carbone 4 is a French leading independent consulting firm specialized in low carbon strategy and climate change
> adaptation. Crea ted 12 years ago, Carbone 4 develops methods, tools and data and support economic actors to help them
> integrate climate into their decisions.

Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios 

265 

public financial data. For sovereigns, all countries have already been assessed. For real assets, 

CRIS can be appl ied to several specific portfolios. 

Figure 17 -1 Exposure of mineral deposits to climate change physical risks, run with 

CRIS exposure datasets (multi hazard on left, droughts on right; both based on 

fut ure increases in climate hazards’ intensity and frequency due to climate change) 

Source: Carbone4 

CRIS scorings on physical risks at the portfolio level allow users to understand how much of 

their portfolio is at high risk due to climate change, for three IPCC scenarios. CRIS scorings can 

be incorporated into risk management systems to enhance long -term return at the portfolio 

and asset level. Best -in -class and benchmark analysis makes it possible to identify the riskiest 

assets across a portfolio. More det ailed information enhances dialogue with the underlying 

assets ’ owners. 

CRIS risk metrics are useful to various financial actors: 

- to (re)insurance companies to appreciate the risks on their market (sovereign 

analysis) or on their clients (companies or bui ldings) for instance; 

- to commercial banks to appreciate the risks on their clients and markets, integrate 

the risks on their analytics and to feed their sustainability risk ratings; 

- to asset owners and managers to measure and manage the risks on their port folio 

and assets and to engage with the underlying components. 

Figure 17 -2 shows a real estate portfolio ’s credit risks to heat waves. This information was 

created for several hazards and for several regions. It was used by a bank to understand the 

risks on its curre nt portfolio. Next steps will be to create a tool to assess this risk at an earlier 

stage in their risk assessment procedures. Assets risk scores                                                                                   

> Scoring scale
> 0100
> Assets exposure to droughts
> Scoring scale
> 0100
> Sc orefinal
> Aléa 1
> Aléa 2
> Aléa 3
> Aléa 4
> Aléa 5
> Gorj
> Mahaica -B erbice
> Illinois
> Jamb i
> Tennessee
> Tennessee
> Tennessee
> Tennessee
> Tennessee
> Tennessee
> Si paliwini
> Arka nsas
> Meke s-Tafi lalet
> Hilma nd
> Eski sehir
> Sc orefinal
> Aléa 1
> Aléa 2
> Aléa 3
> Aléa 4
> Aléa 5
> 66 53 92 86 10 3
> 58 38 73 62 71 32
> 58 49 89 63 632
> 57 35 75 51 65 47
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 57 43 89 62 433
> 56 37 71 58 68 31
> 56 45 87 65 2,2 33
> 55 49,6 78,4 32,1 72,4 4,9
> 54 54,9 73,9 17,8 68,5 35,7
> 54 50,1 69,2 42,8 69,2 26,6
> © 2019 Carbone 4 Chapter 17

266 

Figure 17 -2 Exposure of a real estate portfolio’s credit risks to heat waves, fa ced 

with current climate and with 2050 BAU high emission scenario’s climate 

Source: Carbone4 

# 2 Methodology 

The climate -related risk of an asset, such as a corporate stock or bond, infrastructure project, 

or sovereign bond, can be studied with varying degr ees of detail and at various scales. An 

extensive literature and market review revealed in 2017 a lack of comprehensive methodology 

to assess the physical risk exposure of large, multi -asset portfolios spanning the entire globe. 

Most studies carried out by asset owners and managers have centered on a few individual 

assets at the project evaluation or pre -investment stages ( i.e., for project finance), or have 

focused on a specific sector, specific geographic region, or on a handful of extreme climate 

events. However, there is a clear need to measure the risk level of entire portfolios, both to 

guide investment strategy and to meet reporting requirements. The high number of assets 

requires an efficient and comprehensive approach to risk analysis, all while mai ntaining a high 

level of accuracy regarding asset -specific characteristics and location. 

CRIS responded to the need for global coverage, all with a bottom -up, asset -by -asset approach. 

Its main objective is to enable users to assess the exposure of multi -asset portfolios to all main 

physical climate change hazards in all geographical regions. CRIS offers a multi -hazard risk 

screening, based on a multi -scenario climate projections analysis and a value -chain sectoral 

vulnerability assessment. 

CRIS methodologi cal framework is based on the IPCC definition of physical risk: i.e., the 

combination of climate hazard, exposure and vulnerability (see  Figure 17 -3). CRIS quantifies 

climate exposure and provides risks metrics. Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios 

267 

Figure 17 -3 CRIS simplified methodological framework for physical risk assessmen t

Source: Carbone 4 

CRIS ’s bottom -up approach combines the analysis of geographical exposure and sectoral and 

sovereign vulnerability to seven climate hazards (both acute and chronic), see  Figure 17 -4.

Nine indirect climate hazards are also factored in (such as water scarcity, coastal erosion 

wildfires, etc.). Climate data is derived from climate models used by IPCC, for three IPCC 

scenarios and three time horizons. CRIS databases cover all countries, with a 25km average 

resolution (up to 8km in France), and all sectors. CRIS main methodological framework for climate physical risk assessment  

> ©2019 Carbone 4

Adaptabilit y

> (territorial and/or asset-specific)

Vulnerability 

> The vulnerability depends on the object studied and its location

Climate hazard Climate projections 

> Ex : extreme rainfalls
> The climate hazard depends on the location of the object studied
> OPEX CAPEX Sales

Climate Risk Sensitivity profiles by asset typology 

Aggravating context 

> Ex : flood prone zone

Exposure Chapter 17 

268 

Figure 17 -4 CRIS comprehensive scope of analysis 

Source: Carbone4 

Climate vulner ability is based on sectoral vulnerability literature covering 15 factors across 

value chain s, and sovereign vulnerability on 24 thematic indicators covering both 

environmental and socio -economic issues. These vulnerability profiles gather maximum loss 

dam age intensity for each sector and each hazard. The vulnerability profiles are then 

consolidated for each hazard, before being aggregated to climate hazards and exposure. 

• For companies and infrastructure, 15 factors of vulnerability (such as needs for cold 

chain, outdoor workers, etc.) that cover impacts on the entire value chain were used 

to assess vulnerability on CAPEX, OPEX and sales. 

• For real assets, 12 technical blocks (such as roof, AC, etc.) that cover materiality, 

equipment , and comfort were used to assess risks on buildings. 

• For governments, 24 socio -economical and geophysical indicators were assessed to 

cover all impacts (such as freshwater withdrawal/resources, %GDP Agriculture, etc.). 

CRIS classifications are compatible with classic reporting one s: ICB, GICS and NAICS. To date, 

CRIS sectoral/asset classification are: 

• For companies: a 60 -type classification covering all sectors (industries, farming, 

financial, utilities etc.) ;

• For real estate: a 20 -type classification covering residential and tertiary buildings ;Acu te hazards               

> Ch ronichazards
> Directclimatehaza rdsIndirectclimatehaza rds
> Changes in the intensity
> or frequency of storms
> Changes in drought
> extremes Wildfire risks
> Water scarcity risks
> Changes in rainfall
> patterns
> Fl oodrisks(river&groundwaterflood)
> Increase in average
> temperature
> Biodiversity migration and loss risks
> Air q ua lity risks
> Changes in the intensity
> or frequency of
> heatwaves
> Urban heat island risks
> Se alevel rise
> Coastal erosion risks
> Landslide and mass movement risks
> Changes in rainfall
> extremes
> Coastal flood risks
> ©2019 Carbone 4 Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios

269 

• For infrastructure: a 60 -type classification covering all sectors (energy, transportation, 

water, telecom, farming, etc.) .

Exposure is based on asset -level data or financial business data for each of the issuer. It 

captures the sectoral and geographical breakdown of markets and operations. For instance, 

for a listed equity, for sectoral breakdown, CRIS always uses revenue as the major proxy. For 

geographical breakdown, it  depends on the sector and data availability. For capital intensive 

sectors, ideally,  « tangible assets  » or PPE are used to capture geographical 

breakdown.  For  low capital -intensive sector, revenue is used to  capture  both sectoral and 

geographical breakdown. 

When creating the risk metrics , CRIS ’s model is based on geome tric functions used to over -

weight high risk profiles and capture non -linear risk profiles. For instance, CRIS overall multi -

hazard risk score is based on hazard -specific risk score. This aggregation step is based on the 

inversed geometric mean with a weighting system that gives more weight to acute hazard 

compared to chronic ones (Other information can be detailed on request) .

In terms of climate projections, CRIS covers 7 direct climate hazards and 9 indirect hazards. 

The dataset captures future chang es in climate compared to the current reference period. For 

each hazard, a selection of climate models was used (from CMIP3 or CMIP5) to create a median 

signal and information on uncertainty. For sea level rise and storm hazard , aggregated 

projections from IPCC were used. CRIS is based on multi -model ensemble, and multiple IPCC 

scenarios experiences. Most studies include: 

• climate scenarios from the IPCC: RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 . These scenarios cover 

respectively optimistic and business -as -usual visions of the ev olution of GHG 

emissions world wide .

• For each of these scenarios, several climate models (3 to 10) are used to capture 

uncertainty and minimize the dispersion of values related to the models. 

Climate data are available for several future time horizons. Most studies include: 

• 1 historic reference period ;

• future time horizons: 2035, 2050 and 2100. 

Climate signal captures the future anomalies compared to the historical reference period 

(+2°C in 2035 for instance), see  Figure 17 -5 for mean temperature maps. CRIS thus captures 

the risks coming from a changing climate, and not the absolute weather -related risks. 

For acute hazards such as heat waves, climate scores are created based on 2 climate 

indicators: one that describes the intensity (e.g. max temperature), and another one that 

describes the frequency (e.g. number of hots days). 

CRIS methodology can be applied to assess physical risks for all countries. Climat e projections 

are at a resolution of 25x25km to 100x100km , depending on the region and/or the hazard 

studied (up to 8km in France). Environmental aggravating factors (such as flood prone areas) 

are site -specific for real assets. Chapter 17 

270 

Figure 17 -5 Example of hazard exposure scores for the reference period and 2 future 

time horizons, used in CRIS assessments run at infra -national spatial resolution 

Source: Carbone4 

# 3 Input and output metrics/data 

For one particular asset with very few specific information available, risk depends mostly on 

its location and on its sectoral activity. Climate risk is a function of location -specific climate 

hazards and industry -specific vulnerability . It is a combination of climate projec tions for 

specific geographic locations (such as higher temperatures, more intense heat waves, etc.) and 

an issuer's sector -based vulnerability. 

Therefore, CRIS combines for each issuer ( i.e., company, infrastructure etc.), see  Figure 17 -6:

1. Descriptive financial data on the issuer's activity that are issuer -specific, to capture 

the geographic and sectoral breakdown of its activities (fixed assets or reven ues 

depending on the sectoral capital intensity); 

2. Scientific data on climate hazards and sectoral and sovereign vulnerability, that are 

respectively location -specific and sectoral specific, to assess the climate evolutions 

and the gross vulnerability of e ach sector to each hazard. 

These scientific databases have been built using a rigorous and transparent approach. For 

instance , climate data was extracted and statistically processed from multi -model ensemble 

and scenarios used by IPCC for each hazard. Median signal and uncertainties coming from the 

models are captured, for each scenario and time horizon. Original data are sourced and all 

processing steps are described. § 207 countries covered      

> §The hazard rating is based on relative changes of one climate variable: Mean of annual temperatures
> Key characteristics
> Projected changes in 2046-2065 relative to 1961-1990 under the medium scenario
> Future Projected changes in 2080-2100 relative to 1961-1990 under the high-emission scenario
> Future
> Historical mean temperature (historical averages 1961-1990)
> Past
> In the past: 0 is reached for -16 °C in Greeland, 99 is reached for +29 °C in UAE In the future: 1 is reached for +0,76 °C in Tonga, 99 is reached for +6,42 °C in Canada
> 099

Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios 

271 

Figure 17 -6 CRIS functioning principles 

Source: Carbone4 

CRIS combines thematic proprietary or public databases (climate, sector vulnerability, 

environmental of other related issues) with asset -level information to calculate risk metrics. 

Furthermore, CRIS methodology follows a bottom -up approach. Anticipating data availability 

constraints, CRIS applies a pragmatic tier -based approach in conducting individual analyses: 

the most precise and relevant data are used where available, with progressively less precise 

data, even averages, being used if necessary. In this way, CRIS is operational even in the 

absence of the m ost precise data, and easily accommodates updated and higher quality data 

as they are published. 

For instance, at the company level, for each climate hazard, risk is a combination of the risks 

of each country -sector coupling composing its business, weighte d by the breakdown of its 

activity in each of these couples. The indicator used to understand the geographic breakdown 

depends on the capital intensity of the sector (CAPEX to revenue ratio): fixed assets for high 

capital intensity sectors, and revenue for low capital intensity sectors. 

For real assets, more detailed asset -specific information is used as the location is known. 

CRIS provides various output indicators that may be used for reporting, risk management or 

engagement. For instance, at the portfol io level, aggregated indicators such as global multi -

hazard scores are useful for reporting or risk management, whereas hazard -specific scores are 

more useful for engagement. A non -exhaustive list of useful indicators would be: 

- At the portfolio level : Glob al, hazard specific physical risk scoring for various IPCC 

scenarios ; Sectoral and global best and worst in class ; Sectoral averages, part of the 

portfolio exposed to high risk, distribution of scorings across portfolio, exposure to 

vulnerable sectors, ben chmark comparison. 

- At the issuer level: Global, hazard specific physical risk scoring for various IPCC 

scenarios ; Hazard -specific scoring for each business unit (sector/country based) ;

Benchmark comparison ; Qualitative comments and recommendations on adaptation. 5                                                                                                                                                                                   

> 41
> 51
> 44
> 56
> 45
> 64
> Mediumrisk ratingof44
> Incr easein
> average
> temp erature
> Incr easein
> heatwaves
> Incr easein
> dr oughts
> Ch angesin
> rainfa llpatterns
> Incr easein
> heavyrainfa ll
> Incr easeinsea
> level rise
> Incr easein
> storms
> 29 40 46 22 43 55 49
> Mid-t erm
> (2 0 5 0 )
> Long-t erm
> (2 1 0 0 )
> Low-e m i ssionsc e nario
> Medium -e m i ssion
> sc e nario
> High-e m i ssionsc e nario
> Riskratingsbyclimatehaza rdfortheassetformid-termhorizo nandmedium-emissionscenario
> Ratingsfo reach hazardareexp ressedonasca lefr om0to99acr ossallsce narios,time horizons,andco untries.
> Ag greg ated risk ra ting for mid -term a nd med ium-emission scena rio, a nd sensitivity a na lysis for
> variousscenariosandtimehorizo ns
> Ratingsareexp ressedonasca lefr om0to99acr ossallsce narios,time horizons,andco untries.
> Sco reKey
> Lower Risk Moderate Risk Medium Risk Hi gh Ri sk Very Hi gh Ri sk

CRIS Prop. datasets 

Information on risk-aggravating context Vulnerability profiles for all sectors Sovereign resilience profiles for all countries IPCC projections for climate hazards, run for 2 time horizons and scenarios 

CRIS model and analysis 

Asset-specific information 

Location, sector, site-specific aggravating factors 

Risk scores and information 

© 2019 Carbone 4 Chapter 17 

272 

Figure 17 -7 ENGIE’s physical risk assessment to climate change, based on public 

financial information and CRIS model 

Source: Carbone4 

# 4 Case study 

N°1: corporate portfolio’s analysis 

For corpor ates , CRIS was applied to 1 765 companies - covering most of the MSCI World ’s

constituents, see  Figure 17 -8). Results show a strong inter -sector and intra -sector disparity 

in risk levels, allowing for an active management of the risks (stock -picking, benchmarking, 

etc.). Sectors most at risk are on average chemicals & pharmaceutical, food & beverages, 

utilities, industrial and mining & materials. Stron g disparity appears in the utility sector as it 

comprises companies from very different countries (more diverse than in other sectors). The Notes de risque par al éa pour la soci été (horizon moyen-terme et sc énario d ’é missions moyen) 

Les notes pour chaque al éa sont construites sur une échelle de 0 à 99 pour tous les sc énarios, tous les horizons de temps et tous les pays. 

Moyen-terme (2050) Long-terme (2100) 

Notes de risque agr égées pour diff érents horizons de temps et sc énarios ( échelle 0-99) 

Temp érature Vagues de chaleur Sé cheresse Ré gime de pr écipitations Pr écipitations intenses Hausse du niveau marin Temp êtes 

30 41 33 26 39 51 29 

35 

42 37 

47 38 

52 

La note de risque d ’ENGIE est de 37/100 en 2050 

42 Moyenne sectorielle 

34 Meilleure note du secteur 

> © 2019 Carbone 4

Description des principaux risques pour les al éas climatiques les plus importants (horizon moyen-terme et sc énario d ’é missions moyen) 

Les activi té s d’ Engie sont tr ès sensibles à l’élé vation du niveau de la mer et pr ésentent un risque au vu des gé ographies d’ implantation. Les activi té s de production d’é lectricit é sont sensibles du fait de leur dé pendance aux infrastructures portuaires pour l’ approvisionnement en ressources fossiles. De plus les actifs sont difficilement relocalisables. Par cons équent, Engie est expos é à une dé pr éciation possible de certains actifs, à une augmentation des frais de maintenance et des frais d’ assurance et à des baisses de production possibles. Parmi les op érations principales d’ Engie, ce sont les activi té s de production au Qatar et aux Emirats Arabes Unis qui seraient expos ées (note de 57 et 58). Parmi toutes ses business units, les op érations à Singapour pr ésentent le niveau de risque le plus él ev é (88). 

Hausse du niveau marin 

Les op érations de services in té gr és de production et distribution d’é lectricit é à

Singapour sont tr èsexpos ées (88). 

Point d ’attention 

Risque faible Risque mod éré Risque moyen Risque fort Risque tr ès fort 

Les activi té s d’ Engie sont tr ès sensibles à l’ augmentation de l’ intensit é et de la fr équence des vagues de chaleur, du fait de la forte sensibilit é de la demande d’é lectricit é à la chaleur et du besoin en refroidissement de ces op érations pour maintenir un bon niveau de production. Des baisses de production sont donc possibles (mais opportunit és de demande croissante, non ét udi ée ici). Ses activi té s au Qatar sont les plus expos ées (notes de 74). 

Les op érations de services in té gr és de production et distribution d’é lectricit é

au Qatar sont tr èsexpos ées (74). 

Point d ’attention 

51 

41 

88 

74 

Vagues de chaleur 

# ENGIE 37/100 

Secteur majoritaire: Production d ’é lectricit é conventionnelle Note de risque en 2050 Sc énario optimiste Sc énario moyen Sc énario tendanciel 

Commentaire gé néral 

Engie pr ésente un profil de risque mod éré (note agr égée de 37), et inf érieur à la moyenne du secteur. Les al éas les plus importants pour le groupe sont, dans l’ ordre dé croissant de risque, 

la hausse du niveau marin, les vagues de chaleur et les pr écipitations intenses. Ces al éas peuvent causer des dommages importants sur les actifs et avoir des implications fortes sur les 

coû ts de maintenance et de ré paration. Des ruptures dans le niveau de production sont à

pr évoir. L’é tude n’é tudie pas les opportunit és lié es à la demande croissante en él ectricit é.Les notes de risque associ ées à ces al éas sont tr ès vari ées au sein des nombreuses 

gé ographies d’ intervention du groupe : le Qatar, les Emirats Arabes Unis et Singapour apparaissent comme des gé ographiques particuli èrement expos ées .Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios 

273 

company most at risk is an electric utility (several power plant) based in Asia, very much 

exposed and potentially v ulnerable to storms, sea level rise and floods. 

Figure 17 -8 Physical risk assessment of a global portfolio of listed companies, based 

on CRIS model 

Source: Carbone4 

N°2: sovereign portfolio’s analysis 

Fo r sovereign analysis, CRIS was applied to all countries in 2018. Detailed results are thus 

available. For instance,  Fig ure 17 -9 is the report for Vietnam that comprises synthetic risk 

metrics but also detailed information on the vulnerability and exposure of the country to 

physical risks coming from climate change. The results displayed were run with the optimistic 

climate scenario and with a focus on 2050 time horizon. The country is particularly at risk to 

heavy rainfall and sea level rise. Indeed, the country is very vulnerable to floods because most 

of its populatio n and GDP is located in flood prone areas and area s prone to landslides because 

of mountainous context. Vietnam is also vulnerable to other hazards (droughts, change in 

rainfall patterns), but risks are lower because climate trends are less dramatic. Distribution of the levels of future cliamte-related for a sample of companies 

Multi-criteria CRIS risk scores according to the high-emissions scenario to 2100.   

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> BUILDINGS
> CHEMICALS &
> PHARMACEUTICAL
> FOOD & BEVERAGES
> FOREST & WOOD
> HEAVY
> CONSTRUCTION
> INDUSTRIAL
> MINING & MATERIALS
> NON MATERIAL
> SERVICES
> PUBLIC EQUIPMENTS
> RETAIL
> TELECOM
> TOURISM
> TRANSPORTATION
> UTILITIES
> AverageRiskRating

The 6 sectors at highest risk © 2019 Carbone 4 Distribution of the levels of future cliamte-related for a sample of companies   

> Multi-criteria CRIS risk scores according to the high-emissions scenario to 2100.
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> BUILDINGS
> CHEMICALS &
> PHARMACEUTICAL
> FOOD & BEVERAGES
> FOREST & WOOD
> HEAVY
> CONSTRUCTION
> INDUSTRIAL
> MINING & MATERIALS
> NON MATERIAL
> SERVICES
> PUBLIC EQUIPMENTS
> RETAIL
> TELECOM
> TOURISM
> TRANSPORTATION
> UTILITIES
> AverageRiskRating

The 6 sectors at highest risk © 2019 Carbone 4 Chapter 17 

274 

Fig ure 17 -9 Vietnam climate risk profiles based on CRIS model 

Source: Carbone 4 Climate Change “Physical Risk” Assessment on Investment Portfolios 

275 

# 5 Limitations , outlook and future development 

CRIS ’ objective to provide a comprehensive assessment of physical risks at the asset level and 

at the portfolio level has been achieved. CRIS risk metrics encompass risks coming from a large 

panel of hazards and are available for all sectors and geographies. However , CRIS do not 

provide a quantified estimation of future financial risks in monetary terms (except exposure), 

which is one of the major challenges in this research field. We know rigorous damage functions 

do es not exist for all sectors, geographies , and hazards; therefore we only provide quantified 

estimations of future f inancial risks only for some sectors and some impacts (for instance, 

energy or agriculture) , or through detailed asset -specific assessments. To enrich damage 

modeling on portfolios, more detail s on past damages should be requested or consolidated at 

the se ctor level (for each hazard) with the help of (re)insurance actors. 

Another gap is the lack of robust asset -specific data at the company level (listed or not). 

Spatially specific information on the value chain is key in this assessment as it determines the 

climate exposure of the supply chain, production facility and markets. This is particularly true 

for some vulnerable sectors. More detailed disclosure should be requested to enrich these 

assessments. 

The main challenge today is to demystify the damage fun ctions and climate impact modelling 

and to explain that most black boxes providing financial estimation of future physical risks on 

large portfolios of universe also cause higher levels of uncertaint y. The appetite for financial 

output indicators should no t impede the level of scientific rigor needed in the risk assessment, 

nor the use of other risk metrics that already enable mainstreaming climate physical risk in 

risk analysis, management and reporting. 

Carbone 4 has been developing other specific methods for infrastructures and real assets that 

provides more accurate risk metrics based on more specific damage functions and asset -

specific information. More information on the 2InfraChallenge can be found from the 

following link: http://www.carbone4.com/2 -in frachallenge/. Chapter 18 

276 

# Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

By 

Ortec Finance 1

# Abstract 

This chapter by Ortec Finance focuses on climate scenario analysis from a top -down, systemic 

risk perspective. It describes how transition and physical climate risks have macroeconomic 

consequences ( i.e., networked effects) based on indicators such as GDP growth, interest rate s, 

inflation, investment and international trade flows and other considerations. These climate -

adjusted macro -economic risk drivers in turn affect risk -return expectations across all asset 

classes, regions and sectors. Insights gained from climate scenario analysis allow financial 

institutions (pension funds, asset managers, banks and insurance companies) to make better 

informed strategic investment decisions, including Asset Liability Management (ALM) and 

Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA) approaches with th e aim to achieving more climate resilient 

investment portfolios and loan books. 

Keywords : climate, scenario -analysis, systemic risk, asset -liability management, strategic asset 

allocation 

# 1 Introduction 

This chapter is written by Ortec Finance, an independen t provider of technology and solutions 

for risk and return management headquartered in The Netherlands. Ortec Finance is 

innovating the modelling of systemic climate -related risks and opportunities for use in, inter 

alia, strategic asset allocation and ass et -liability management. The chapter focusses on 

explaining key concepts around climate change as a systemic risk and climate change informed 

scenario analysis for investors. This chapter also presents a case study in the form of a 

representative diversifi ed investment portfolio analy ze d through the systemic climate risk 

lens using the ClimateMAPS methodology. The chapter concludes with a discussion on what 

practical steps investors can take in order to act on the outcomes of the analysis and options 

for fu rther modelling sophistication. 

# 2 Climate -informed scenario analysis in the context of SAA & ALM 

Why scenario analysis? 

Scenario analysis is an important tool for managing uncertainty in both business and financial 

modelling, as well as in the climate science world. In general, “a scenario is a possible evolution 

of the future consistent with a clear set of assumptions ” (Bu nn and Solo, 1993). Scenario     

> 1The authors of this chapter are Willemijn Verdegaal and Lisa Eichler, both of whom are Co -Heads of Climate & ESG
> Solutions at Ortec Finance. Emails: Willemijn.Verdegaal@ortec -finance.com ;Lisa .Eichler@ortec -finance.com .Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk

277 

analysis is a powerful method for assessing uncertainty. It supports investors in making 

informed decision today about how they can best reach their objectives in an uncertain future. 

Figure 18 -1 below is a stylized illustration of scenario modelling. It shows historical global 

equity development (blue line to the left of the orange scenario fan), the expected mean (blue 

li ne that is in the cente r of the orange scenario fan), the ‘fan ’ of potential scenario ’s according 

to their likelihood of manifesting (fan consisting of shades of orange) and what actually 

happened during the modelled period (green line in the orange fan). 

Figure 18 -1 What is scenario thinking? 

Source: Ortec Finance 

In financial modelling relevant for strategic asset allocation (SAA) and asset liability 

management (ALM) analysis, scenario thinking is typically used to simulate the balance sheet 

across different scenarios as shown in  Figure 18 -2. In different potential financial worlds, 

different asset mixes might either under - or over -perform. For example: in a high growth 

scenario a larger allocation to equity relati ve to fixed income will be beneficial, whereas in a 

highly volatile period the opposite is likely the case. As an investor you do not know what lies 

ahead of you, so you do not know whether the coming period will be one of high growth or 

high volatility. A nd when you know, you will probably be too late. Scenario analysis can help 

determine which asset mix is most suitable or robust across a range of potential futures. Chapter 18 

278 

Figure 18 -2 Scenario modelling applied t o balance sheet simulations for SAA/ALM 

analysis 

Source: Ortec Finance 

Thinking critically about assumption s

As explained in the previous section, scenario modelling requires the development of one or 

more scenarios based on a consistent set of well -motivated assumptions. These assumptions 

determine how key variables or ‘risk drivers ’ develop across possible futu res. In the case of 

financial scenario sets the key risk drivers are GDP, inflation and interest rates. They are the 

building blocks of the financial scenario sets and drive the changes in risk -return profiles of 

asset classes across the different scenari os. 

So if assumptions drive the development of key risk drivers (GDP, inflation and interest rates), 

and risk drivers determine the investment performance of the portfolio in a given scenario –

then what are these assumptions based on ? Th is is the key que stion .

Traditionally , assumptions on how GDP, interest rates and inflation develop, and how they 

influence financial performance, are based on historical relationships and historical averages. 

It is a ‘backward -looking ’ methodology. For many applications this is an effective and 

appropriate methodology, but not when it comes to modelling the potential impacts of climate 

change. By definition historical data only includes information on past events. As there have 

not been significant periods of climate chan ge in the period on which there is economic and 

financial data available, it is barely reflected in the historical data. Therefore , climate risk is not 

captured by most traditional assumption building methodologies. 

Considering how material both physical and transition al climate -related financial risks are, the 

fact that they are not captured by traditional methodologies used for SAA/ALM processes is 

highly problematic. Investors are taking crucial decisions about portfolio construction based 

on methodolog ies that do not capture climate -related financial risks. This becomes even more 

problematic in the realization that climate -related financial risk is a systemic risk that 

influences all sectors, geographies and asset classes. The next paragraph considers c limate as 

a systemic risk in more detail. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

279 

Climate change as a systemic risk 

Figure 18 -3 sets out the concept of systemic risk in the context of climate change. 

Figure 18 -3 Climate change as a systemic risk 

Source: Ortec Finance 

Climate change can affect macro -economic variables (the risk drivers) such as economic 

growth, interest rates and inflation. Therefore , climate change impacts may significantly 

influence the resulting performance of asset classes and industry sectors. Take, for example, 

the impact of average temperature rise on the productivity of labor and land. It is well 

established in the li terature 2 that when temperatures rise above a certain point , productivity 

declines. The relationship is non -linear and so productivity rapidly declines in the face of rising 

temperatures. This has knock -on effects across the economy. Another example is the potential 

collapse of certain high -carbon sector s. This event impacts all other sectors it is networked 

with, even if they are not particularly high carbon. Retail, banking, real -estate and even 

government budgets and expenditures can be impacted. Via the se routes of contagion, 

climate -related risks (and opportunities) spread through the economy.  Figure 18 -4 and  Figure 

18 -5 illustrate this principle.  Figure 18 -4 illustrates how a policy intervention (in this case a 

carbon tax) works its way through the real economy.  Figure 18 -5 shows how policies aligning 

the wo rld economy with Paris climate goals can impact partic ular countr ie s econom ies – in 

this example Canada – very differently vis -à-vis the global average.      

> 2See for instance Burke &Tanutama (2019 ).Chapter 18

280 

Figure 18 -4 Modelling the impact of a carbon tax 

Source: Cambridge Econometrics, stylized example from the E3ME model 

Figure 18 -5 Impact on output per sector of Canada vs. the global average in a Paris 

aligned pathway 

Source: Ortec Finance, based on outputs from E3ME 

Note: Results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision making. 

The above examples illustrate the systemic nature of climate risk. These risks (and 

opportunities) are ass ociated with each potential global warming pathway – ranging from an 

ambitious transition to no further action. Therefore, the assessment of climate change as a 

systemic risk driver in strategic investment decision -making is an increasingly necessary 

activ ity. 

Bottom -up versus top -down approaches 

In order to understand how systemic climate risks are captured in various scenario -analysis 

methodologies it is useful to distinguish between the two main approaches currently used by 

investors in the market: botto m-up and top -down. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

281 

• Bottom -up approaches: these approaches look at company level data such as carbon 

foot printing, emission intensity, costs associated with reducing a company ’s carbon 

footprint, management quality , etc. The risks per company are added up in order to 

have an understanding of the total amount of risk in – for example an equity portfolio. 

Advantages of this approach is that it allows for a very granular, company level view. 

The draw -back is that it does not capture networked effects. It is h ighly questionable 

if adding up the risks of all the individual companies equals the total level of risk. Due 

to networked effects the total level of risk is likely to be many order of magnitudes 

higher. 

• Top -down approaches: these approaches use macro -eco nomic models to 

understand how the economy functions as a whole. Variables like consumer 

spending, government spending, taxation, international trade, and production are 

considered . These approaches build up from the sector and region levels and are fit -

fo r-purpose in capturing systemic risks (the networked effects) and therefore the 

total level of risk. The drawback is that they are restricted in the level of granularity 

they can achieve as they cannot look beyond the country and sector level of 

granularit y. 

Top -down approaches are required to capture climate as a systemic risk. Top -down approaches 

allow for better informed forward -looking assumptions about how GDP, inflation , and interest 

rates may develop in climate -informed scenarios, and how this in tur n affects portfolio 

performance across all asset classes, countries and sectors. Therefore , using a top -down 

approach is crucial when performing climate -informed SAA/ALM analysis. 

Integrating climate risk consistently throughout the investment process 

Unq uestionably, the investment process goes beyond SAA/ALM. Ideally, therefore, when 

integrating climate -related financial risks, these risks should be integrated consistently 

throughout the entire investment process: from the strategic to the implementation (holding 

selection) level. For example: if the asset owner optimizes the asset allocation for a 2°C 

warming pathway (increasing exposures to sectors and regions likely to be least affected by 

systemic climate risk and even stand to benefit from it) then th e asset manager should select 

companies that are more likely to perform well under this Paris -aligned pathway as well. Too 

often asset managers seem to not take the systemic nature of climate -related risks and 

opportunities sufficiently into account. For e xample, a certain low -carbon technology 

company may seem to perform well in a 2°C warming pathway – however if that company is 

likely to face severe macro -economic headwinds because the rest of the economy it operates 

in is exposed to negative impacts, the n the company is not likely to do well in that pathway 

(networked effects), then perhaps the asset manager should be cautious to invest. 

In order to design this consistent climate -informed portfolio it is important that asset owners 

and asset managers cooperate closely in order to achieve this consistency. Also, in such a 

setting, top -down and bottom -up data may play a complementary role. 

The section below describes the process of designing a consistent climate -informed portfolio 

and highlights the respective roles of asset owners, asset managers as well as top -down and 

bottom -up datasets. Chapter 18 

282 

Figure 18 -6 Towards a fully consistent climate resilient investment strategy 

Source: Ortec Finance 

What investors should be asking themselves 

When integrating climate -related risks and opportunities into SAA/ALM, investors may want 

to ask themselves the following qu estions: 

• Does my organization recognize climate as systemic risk? 

• Are the datasets that I am using to measure climate risk able to capture the 

networked impacts of both physical (including extreme weather events) and 

transition climate -related risks and opportunities or are they assuming companies 

operate in isolation? 

• Are the assumptions used in the scenario methodology for ALM/SAA climate -

informed or are they only based on historical, backward -looking information? 

• Are my projected return estimates reaso nable under different global warming 

pathways? 

• What risks and opportunities are relevant for me on which time horizon? 

• How will climate -related risks impact my funding or solvency ratios? 

• Is the management of climate -related financial risks implemented con sistent across 

the different steps of the investment process: from asset allocation, to manager 

selection and portfolio implementation? 

In conclusion of the first section of this chapter we would like to reiterate the importance of 

investors challenging wh ether key assumptions used for modelling risk and return projections 

remain valid under different global warming pathways. A scenario approach considering 

different plausible climate futures may be more appropriate than taking a traditional climate 

uninfor med approach. Taking this climate informed approach is increasingly being recognized 

by central banks and regulators as part of the fiduciary duty of institutional investors. 3 

> 3UN PRI, “Embedding ESG issues into strategic asset allocation frameworks: Discussion paper”, September 2019 Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk

283 

Taking an approach that is ‘systemic ally climate risk -informed ’ can therefore co ntribute to 

taking better investment decisions for allocations to asset classes, regions , and sectors ; and 

consequently, can construct a more climate resilient investment portfolio given a certain 

global warming pathway. If the systemic climate risk -inform ed approach is implemented both 

at the strategic and implementation level then the entire investment strategy is consistently 

addressing climate -related risks at every level of decision -making. 

# 3 Case study: Applying a systemic climate risk -informed approach to 

# SAA & ALM 

Applying a systemic -climate risk informed approach to a diversified institutional investment 

portfolio enables a comprehensive analysis of total portfolio performance and attribution by 

asset classes per country and per sector. In this sectio n of the chapter, we provide a high -level 

overview of the modelling methodology used by Ortec Finance in order to achieve a systemic -

climate risk informed approach (ClimateMAPS). We then provide indicative quantified results 

for an illustrative portfolio. The chapter concludes with pointing out current model limitations 

and areas in which the model can be further developed. 

Methodology 

The climate risk integration logic applied by Ortec Finance in order to ‘tie together’ climate 

science, macro -econometric modelling , and financial modelling can be explained as follows: 

Figure 18 -7 ClimateMAPS – climate risk integration logic 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

The climate change impact per global warming pathway and the policy and technological 

changes necessary to reach the different temperature targets are based on robust climate 

science. These assumptions inform the macro -econometric model of Cambridge Econom etrics, 

which considers worldwide macro -economic interactions. The Cambridge Econometrics E3ME 

model is a non -equilibrium global macro econometric model with linkages between the 

economy, energy sector, and environment. It can fully assess both short and l ong -term impacts 

and is not limited by many of the restrictive assumptions common to Computable General 

Equilibrium (CGE) models. The model facilitates the integrated treatment of the world ’s

economies, energy systems, emissions and material demands. This enables it to capture two -

way linkages and feedbacks between these components. Chapter 18 

284 

The outputs from the macro econometric model are deltas (differences) in annual growth rates 

per country, from a macro -economic baseline outlook that does not use the climate s pecific 

inputs, i.e., that is climate -uninformed. 

These “climate -adjusted GDP shocks ” per country/sector and per year are then put into the 

Ortec Finance stochastic financial model. This model translates the impacts of the climate -

adjusted GDP shocks onto a wide range of financial and economic variables (including interest 

rate, inflation, impacts on different asset classes) via stylized facts based on historic data and 

economic rationale. 

The resulting systemic climate risk -aware scenarios set delivers q uantified climate -adjusted 

consistent global economic and financial outlooks up to 2060 differentiated per country/sector 

and per global warming pathway, which then can be used for climate -informed portfolio 

analysis. It should be noted that the pathway as sumption narratives extend to the end of the 

century as this aligns with climate science time horizons. Financial modelling is not extended 

beyond 2060 as, under the Failed Transition pathway, changes might become so dramatic that 

stability of the entire f inancial system is at risk. This is uncharted territory and would render 

quantified modelling results very uncertain. 

We consider two broad options for the future: either the world continues on the current path 

or we transition to a low -carbon economy. To represent these two alternative pathways, Ortec 

Finance has developed economic scenario sets to reflect these two variants: the Paris 

Transition pathway and the Failed Transition pathway. These two pathways inform the 

underlying transition and physical cli mate risk parameters. Furthermore, the Paris Transition 

pathway is then broken down into two possible market reactions: orderly versus disorderly. In 

the latter case, the transition risks are supplemented by a confidence shock representing an 

aggressive ma rket correction of carbon -intensive and related assets. 

Each main pathway is built on key policy and technological assumptions across countries and 

sectors to represent transition risks and opportunities, which are summarized in  Figure 18 -8.

Physical risks are composed of, on the one hand, gradual physical risks, such as sea level rise 

and temperature effects on worker and agricultural productivity. On the other hand, physical 

ri sk also derives from increasing frequency and loss impacts of extreme weather events, such 

as floods, storms, wildfires, that are attributable to climate change. 

A continuation of current policies and technological trends will lead to increasing global CO 2

emissions (Failed Transition pathway) and in turn continuously increasing average global 

temperature reaching up to 4°C by the end of this century. However, in a pathway that limits 

warming to below 2°C, CO 2 emissions peak in 2020 and decrease sharply to reach net zero 

before 2066 (in both Paris pathways). Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

285 

Figure 18 -8 Key assumptions per global warming pathway 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Pricing -in the future impact of transition and physical risks 

The main driver of differences in investment returns in the coming decade between the 

different pathways is a potential price correction (“ pricing -in ”) in financial markets, particularly 

equity markets. That is, at a certain point in time, financial market s will realize what the longer -

term impacts will be of the transition to a low -carbon world and what the impact will be of 

gradual physical risks (such as reduced agricultural productivity) and extreme weather events 

(whether the transition succeeds or not ). By translating this impact to changes in future 

expected output, earnings and dividend growth, the modelling estimates the expected price 

correction on financial markets. This price correction differs per climate pathway and per 

country and sector. Ther efore, the overall impact on investment return will depend on the 

composition of the investment portfolio. 

In the Paris Orderly Transition pathway, we assume that pricing -in will take place in the coming 

five years, i.e., 2020 - 2024. In the Paris Disorder ly Transition pathway, we assume that pricing -

in starts later, in 2024, and that the full price correction materializes within one year. This large 

price correction leads to negative market sentiment, and consequently to a sentiment shock 

in 2025, followed by (positive) price corrections in consecutive years to compensate for the 

overshooting in previous years. Market volatility is high in this 2024 - 2026 period. 

In the Failed Transition pathway, in the second half of this decade investors will start to r ealize 

that the transition to a low -carbon economy will fail. Therefore, they will price in the resulting 

impact of increasing physical risks and extreme weather events on expected future output, 

earnings and dividend growth in the period 2025 - 2029. We a ssume that this first pricing -in 

shock reflects only the impact of physical risks and extreme weather events on growth 

prospects up to 2050. However, in the Failed Transition pathway, physical risks will increase Chapter 18 

286 

significantly in the second half of this ce ntury. At some point in the future, financial markets 

will start to also price in these very substantial post -2050 physical risks. We assume that this 

second pricing -in shock occurs in 2035 - 2039. 

Modelling climate -related extreme weather event frequency & associated losses 

While most climate scenario models are already well advanced in the modelling of transition 

risks and opportunities, the modelling of physical risks is still rather underdeveloped. In 

particular, most academic climate models currently d o not capture the effects of climate -

related extreme weather events and how these would influence climate scenarios. To 

overcome the current lack of inclusion in scientific models, we apply the PALgamma model, 

which forecasts the increase in frequency as w ell as the financial impact of climate -related 

extreme weather risk and, uniquely, identifies the extent to which urbanization and climate 

change contribute to risk, year by year and across over 120 countries worldwide. 

Figure 18 -9 PALgamma (climate change -related) Extreme Weather Risk & Impact 

Model 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimatePREDICT 

This quantification of year -on -year and region -by -region exposure to risk from extreme 

weather attributable to climate ch ange is integrated in the systemic climate risk scenarios, but 

when disaggregated into the individual climate risk drivers, insights help inform other aspects 

of improved investment decision -making such as assessing climate related physical risks of real 

assets, real estate and mortgage portfolios, or enhance insurance companies ’ in -house P&C 

catastrophe models. 

Case study portfolio description 

The case study in this chapter provides an illustrative example - based on a UK diversified 

investment portfolio – of the type of forward -looking, quantified analysis that can be done by 

using a systemic -climate risk informed approach. The scope covered provides a perspective of 

climate -related risk (and opportunities) for institutional investors under the three diffe rent 

global warming temperature pathways: Paris Orderly Transition, Paris Disorderly Transition 

and Failed Transition pathways compared to a climate -uninformed baseline. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

287 

Due to the nature of climate risks, the time horizon is longer than typical periods u tilized by 

pension funds. The analysis covers forecasts up to 40 years ahead and results are expressed 

relative to the baseline (climate -uninformed) pathway. It should be noted that all climate -

adjusted economies used in this case study are built on the De cember 2019 market situation. 4

The example pension scheme that we use in our case study has been chosen to be fairly typical 

of the current situation of DB schemes in the UK. It has a relatively high initial allocation to 

growth assets which results in hi gher exposure to climate risks than a more mature scheme 

with a low allocation to growth assets. The liabilities and investments modelled give a starting 

funding ratio of 75% on the Long -Term Funding Objective. To help to eliminate the deficit, a 

recovery plan has been agreed such that company contributions are paid annually over the 

first 10 years. 

We assume that the pension fund invests according to a fixed, static asset allocation with the 

following characteristics: 

Table 18 -1 UK pension scheme asset allocation table 

Insights: Impacts on financial risk drivers 

The physical and transition risks and opportunities narratives that are informed by the climate 

and macro -econometric modelling influence the behavior of key financial risk drivers such as 

growth and inflation. 

Impacts on GDP growth 

The figures below illu strate the dynamics of the growth risk driver for three countries: The US, 

Canada and Europe.        

> 4Ortec Finance ,December 2019 Quarterly Outlook (https://www.ortecfinance.com/en/insights/whitepaper -and -
> report/quarterly -outlook )

Asset Class Duration (Years) Weight Fixed Income 22 50% 

UK GILTS 31 12.5% UK Index-Linked GILTS 40 12.5% UK Corporate Credits (Investment Grade) 9 25% 

Equity 40% 

Equity World (USD) 35% Equity Emerging Markets (USD) 2.5% Equity UK 2.5% 

Property 5% 

UK Retail 2.5% UK Offices 2.5% 

High Yield 4 5% 

US Corporate Credits (High Yield) 4 5% Chapter 18 

288 

Figure 18 -10 Cumulative real GDP growth across all climate -informed pathways 

(percentage difference to climate -uninformed baseline pathway in the level of GDP) 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision making. 

There is considerable variation in the impacts ac ross geographic regions. These differences are 

mainly caused by the level of transition risks over the short term and physical risks over the 

longer term. Higher temperatures exacerbate damage intensity and the frequency of natural 

disasters. 

Impact on in terest rates 

Transition and physical risk impact economic variables and asset prices. An example is given in 

Figure 18 -11  with the changes in interest rates across four different regions under the Paris 

Disorderly Transition pathway. 

Figure 18 -11 Paris Disorderly Transition -adjusted interest rate growth (annual 

difference to c limate -uninformed baseline pathway) 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Resul ts are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision making. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

289 

The impact of ‘pricing -in ’ across equity sectors and regions 

Different sectors and regions will be impacted differently by a transition towards a low -carbon 

economy and by materializing physical risks and extreme weather events. In a successful 

transition, the low -carbon energy sector will probably benefit, whereas fossil fu el producers 

and other carbon -intensive sectors will suffer losses . Likewise, countries with economies that 

are highly dependent on fossil fuel extraction and exploration will suffer, whereas net 

importers of fossil fuels will be hit less. Finally, how severely economies will be impacted by 

physical risks and extreme wea ther events depends on their geographical location. These 

differences in sensitivities to transition risk and opportunities, and physical risks and extreme 

weather events, are also visible in the size and direction of the pricing -in shocks. These 

differenc es can also be seen in  Figure 18 -12  and  Figure 18 -13 . In these figures, you can see 

that the low carbon electricity sector will benefit greatly in a successful transition to a low -

carbon economy, where other (i.e. , brown ) utilities will be hit severely. When the transition 

fails, India is expected to suf fer significantly from increasing physical risks (lower labor and 

agricultural productivity due to increasing temperatures), where countries closer to the North 

Pole, like Canada, are much less sensitive to increasing temperatures. On the other hand, the 

Canadian economy is hit severely in a transition pathway, as the Canadian economy is heavily 

dependent on tar sand, and this sector will be entirely wiped out when we transition to a low -

carbon world. 

Figure 18 -12 Global equity pricing -in shocks for a selection of sectors (expressed as 

a difference to climate -uninformed baseline) 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision making. Chapter 18 

290 

Figure 18 -13 Equity pricing -in shocks for a selection of regions (expressed as a 

difference to climate -uninformed baseline) 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision ma king. 

Portfolio performance results 

This section provides model results on the performance of the case study portfolio (as 

described in section 3.2 above). The illustrative analysis focuses on risk -return impact on total 

fund level, impact attribution across asset classes and regions, as well as insights of 

contributing financial impacts to the underlying climate risk factors. 

Risk -return impact at the total fund level 

The results on a total fund level for the hypothetical portfolio are summarized in th e table 

below. The table highlights results separately for each of the analy zed global warming 

pathways by time horizon. The results are shown at the ‘total portfolio ’ level of aggregation. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

291 

Table 18 -2 Quantif ied Cumulative Return Impact for Total Fund Value, shown as 

climate pathways relative to climate -uninformed baseline 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Case study results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used 

to inform investm ent decision making. 

Figure 18 -14  shows the mean annual investment return and the 5% Value -at -Risk for two time 

periods.  Figure 18 -15  shows the result in an ALM context, focusing on the mean and 5% VaR 

of the funding ratio in year 10 and year 20 respectively. A key insight from this stage of the 

analysis is that the climate -uninformed baseline overestimates the expected retur ns and 

underestimates the risks. Furthermore, an orderly transition pathway to meet the Paris 

agreement has positive implications on the fund performance compared to a disorderly or 

failed transition. The more disorderly the transition, the more value is d estroyed in the short 

term. In the longer term, even a disorderly transition shows lower negative impacts in terms 

of risk -return than a Failed Transition pathway. 

Figure 18 -14 SAA insights: from climate -uni nformed to climate risk -aware thinking 

about risk -return measures 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Case study results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used 

to inform investment decision making. Median Median Median Median Median Median                        

> Paris orderly transition
> pathw ay -3% 0% -1% -2% -3% -8%
> Paris disorderly transition
> pathw ay -4% -4% -1% -2% -3% -12%
> Failed transition pathw ay 0% -5% -13% -3% -7% -25%
> 2020-2024 2025-2029
> Cum ulative return relative to clim ate-uninform ed baseline
> Quantified Return Im pact for Total Fund Value
> Investm ent portfolio 2030-2039 2040-2049 2020-2059 2050-2059 Chapter 18

292 

Figure 18 -15 ALM context: from climate -uninformed to climate risk -aware thinking 

about funding ratios 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Case study results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used 

to inform in vestment decision making. 

Impact attribution across asset classes and regions 

For the three climate informed pathways,  Table 18 -3 below shows the cumulative return 

impact relative to the climate -uninformed baseline of the assets that the example pension 

fund is invested in. It can be seen that, in this example, especiall y equities and real estate are 

significantly impacted by transition and physical risks, leading to substantially lower returns 

than in the climate -uninformed baseline. In the Failed Transition pathway, over a 40 -year 

horizon, the cumulative return on equit y is around 50% lower than in the climate -uninformed 

baseline. This lower return is purely due to the increasing and devastating impact of gradual 

physical risks and extreme weather events caused by increasing temperatures. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

293 

Table 18 -3 Cumulative return differences to baseline for several asset classes 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note: Results are merely for illustrative purposes and should not be used to inform 

investment decision making. Condition al formatting is applied per column per 

period to highlight the differences per (sub) asset class. Returns are calculated using 

the geometric mean methodology. Cumulative measures 

Paris orderly transition pathway 

(ratio to climate-uninformed baseline) 

Fixed Income FI Government Bonds Index-Linked Gilts UK 0% 0% 0% 0% -1% -1% -6% -6% Gilts UK 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 1% -1% Credits Credits GB 0% 0% 1% 1% 0% 0% -2% -2% Equity Equity Developed Markets -6% -6% -1% -2% -2% -2% -14% -16% Equity Emerging Markets -8% -8% -1% -1% -3% -3% -19% -19% Equity United Kingdom -6% -6% -1% -1% -2% -2% -16% -16% Property Direct Real Estate UK -6% -6% -1% -1% -3% -3% -17% -17% Direct Real Estate Residential UK -4% -4% -1% -1% -2% -2% -13% -13% Direct Real Estate Offices UK -6% -7% -1% -1% -3% -3% -18% -18% High Yield Corporate Credits HY US 0% 0% 2% 2% 0% 0% -1% -1% 

5%Va

Median 5% VaR 

2025-2029 2030-2039 2020-2024 20 2020-2059 

Median 5% VaR Median 5% VaR Median 5% VaR Cumulative measures 

Paris disorderly transition pathway 

(ratio to climate-uninformed baseline) 

Fixed Income FI Government Bonds Index-Linked Gilts UK -1% -1% 1% 1% -1% -1% -6% -6% Gilts UK 0% 0% 1% 0% 0% 0% 1% -1% Credits Credits GB -1% -1% 2% 2% 0% 0% -1% -1% Equity Equity Developed Markets -7% -9% -12% -17% -2% -3% -25% -31% Equity Emerging Markets -9% -9% -13% -16% -3% -3% -30% -30% Equity United Kingdom -8% -17% -10% -29% -2% -2% -26% -35% Property Direct Real Estate UK -7% -7% -7% -7% -4% -3% -24% -24% Direct Real Estate Residential UK -5% -5% -4% -3% -2% -2% -16% -17% Direct Real Estate Offices UK -8% -9% -7% -6% -4% -4% -25% -26% High Yield Corporate Credits HY US -3% -4% 8% 7% 0% 0% 2% 1% 

Median 5% VaR Median 5% VaR 

2030-2039 2020-2059 2020-2024 2025-2029 

Median 5% VaR Median 5% VaR Cumulative measures 

Failed transition pathway 

(ratio to climate-uninformed baseline) 

Fixed Income FI Government Bonds Index-Linked Gilts UK 0% 0% 0% 0% -1% -1% -10% -10% Gilts UK 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 3% -1% Credits Credits GB 0% 0% 0% 0% 1% 1% -2% -2% Equity Equity Developed Markets 0% 0% -10% -10% -28% -28% -48% -48% Equity Emerging Markets -1% -1% -14% -14% -32% -32% -56% -56% Equity United Kingdom -1% -1% -9% -9% -18% -18% -40% -40% Property Direct Real Estate UK -2% -2% -10% -11% -15% -16% -41% -41% Direct Real Estate Residential UK -1% -1% -6% -6% -23% -23% -42% -42% Direct Real Estate Offices UK -2% -2% -11% -12% -16% -16% -43% -43% High Yield Corporate Credits HY US 0% 0% 1% 1% 6% 6% 16% 15% 

Median 

2030-2039 2020-2024 2025-2029 

5% VaR Median 5% VaR Median 5% VaR 

2020-2059 

Median 5% VaR Chapter 18 

294 

Depending on the level of granularity of the fund hierarchy, a deeper assessment of climate 

risks is possible. Within emerging markets equities, for example, one can assess which 

countries are the most impacted by climate factors in the region. 

Contributing financial impacts to the underlying climate risk factors 

Asset owners are also interested in gaining a better understanding about the underlying 

drivers for the differences in return with the climate -uninformed baseline. In  Figure 18 -16 , for 

global equities, we can see that in the Failed Transition pathway, the underperformance is 

largely driven by the second pricing -in shock that is expected in the late 2030s. This pricing -in 

shock takes into account the expected negative impact of the increas ing physical risks beyond 

2050. Furthermore, in case of a Paris Disorderly Transition pathway to a low -carbon economy, 

the expected sentiment shock is actually larger than the impact of transition and physical risks 

in the real economy. On a global level, the real world transition impact is actually very small. 

That is, risks and opportunities level out more or less. 

Figure 18 -16 Cumulative return differences to baseline for several asset classes 

Source: Ort ec Finance. ClimateMAPS 

Note : The vertical axis shows the annualized difference in return between the 

climate uninformed baseline and the climate -informed pathway. 

The following textbox provides a zoom -in to the potential future impacts of extreme weather 

events and how these may affect the portfolio ’s exposure to assets located in London. These 

zoomed -in insights aim to illustrate and underline the importance to tak e into account not 

only gradual physical risks, such as the effects of sea level rise, but to also consider the 

consequences of more frequent and more severe extreme weather events and how much of 

them can be attributed to climate change. Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

295 

Box 1: Zoom -in to explore extreme weather related risks on portfolio exposure to London 

To illustrate the application of the 

PALgamma model, let ’s consider 

Meteorological or storm events. The 

diagram below shows, year by year, the 

prediction of the number of MET events 

and the likely trend in event frequency 

under four climate scenarios ranging 

from the counterfactual (no climate 

change) to a Failed Transition where the 

climate sensitivity to each ton of CO 2

emitted is boosted by earth ’s feedback 

sy stems. As shown in the figure, the event 

frequency of storm events globally 

increases sharply from just under 500 events annually today to twice that number by 2050 

and beyond if the world fails to transition (orange lines). 

With over 1800 individually ca librated cities in its database, Climate PREDICT is used to 

assess the specific risk profiles of individual cities e.g. the unmitigated flood losses of 

London when considering the 

rationale for a 2nd Thames Barrier. As 

can be seen in this figure, when 

zoom ing into a specific city ’s climate -

related extreme weather risk 

exposure for one specific type of peril, 

flooding in this case, the amount of 

losses attributable to different global 

warming pathways is seen to start 

diverging as early as the late 

2020s/ear ly 2030s , and by 2060 

climate -attributable losses from flood 

events experience in London may be 

twice as high if the worlds fails to 

transition as compared to a Paris 

transition pathway. 

These types of quantified 

insights on climate -

related extreme weath er 

frequency and loss 

modelling is of interest to 

risk managers , in 

particular when adding 

dimensions of trends and 

spreads. To this end, the 

PAL model identifies the 

growing extent by which 

climate change is amplifying extreme weather losses under a range of climate scenarios. 

This figure illustrates how – on a global level – total extreme weather losses under a Failed Chapter 18 

296 

Transition pathway can be split into expected trends under a climate -uninformed baseline 

(i.e., expected losses per type of peril) and a pr oportion that is attributable to the specific 

climate scenario (in this case a Failed Transition) the world would find itself in. Under this 

scenario, whilst the frequency of extreme weather events is expected to almost triple 

between now and 2100, overall direct losses are expected to increase almost fivefold (in 

2015 US$ terms). 

Source: Ortec Finance. ClimatePREDICT 

From insight to action 

Central banks, pension funds, insurers and banks increasingly use scenario analysis to better 

understand and analy ze their potential exposure to climate -related risks (and opportunities). 

Climate -informed decision making has become a fundamental consideration for institutional 

investors as part of their fiduciary duties, to support in strategic investment decisions, fo r

better holistic risk management and in developing more resilience in their portfolios. 

This chapter has illustrated one possible approach to carry out such forward -looking climate 

scenario analysis: a top -down model to explore the financial impacts of t hree plausible climate 

pathways on the performance and funding position of an example UK diversified portfolio. It 

is important to note that the scenarios illustrated are not intended to be extreme. The climate 

impacts for the example portfolio under “wors t case ” scenarios could be much larger than 

those illustrated. 

However, as the case study results in this chapter have shown, these impacts alone are quite 

dramatic particularly under a Failed Transition pathway: 

• GDP: drops 60% for the UK by 2100 with simi lar impacts globally . Indeed in the longer 

term the physical damage caused by climate change is expected to outweigh the 

economy ’s ability to grow resulting in real GDP declining from the 2060’ s and future 

generations being worse off than their parents. 

• Fi nancial market impact will also be significant with permanent declines in median 

cumulative returns of 50% relative to a climate -uninformed baseline by 2050 and an 

accelerating downward trend thereafter. 

There are also significant short -term risks for fina ncial markets especially from a disorderly 

transition: In the Paris Disorderly Transition pathway, equity markets fall by almost 50% within 

the next 5 years relative to the climate -uninformed baseline, although then recover about half 

of those losses by 20 35. A smoother Paris Orderly Transition pathway, on the other hand, 

would reduce the severity of these impacts. With equity markets declining by ca. 20% over the 

next five years relative to the climate -uninformed baseline and recovering about half by 2035. 

In the longer term, from 2035 to 2060 both Paris Transition Aligned pathways slightly 

underperform the climate -uninformed baseline pathway due to lower GDP growth 

expectations from physical risks and the repayment of transition investment. This lower GDP 

also leads to lower long -term interest rates by 2060 but this decline in yields is roughly half 

that than the Failed Transition pathway. 

These modelling insights represent significant market risks and therefore have significant 

implications for financial planning within financial intuitions over both short and longer -term Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

297 

horizons. The implications for markets and GDP are relevant for turning ‘insights into action ’

not only by financial institutions but also by regulators and policymakers. 

Once implemented , the results of a top -down climate scenario analysis, such as the one 

provided in this chapter ’s case study, can be ‘turned into action ’ via several routes. Most 

directly, the quantified insights can support financial institutions in: 

• Enabling climate -ris k integrated modelling of macro -economic outlooks and macro -

economic risk drivers used by financial institutions; 

• Identifying and quantifying impact of systemic climate risk (networked effects) on a 

portfolio; 

• Increasing resilience of a portfolio ’s top -dow n risk budget under different global 

warming pathways via sector -, region -, or asset class re -allocation. 

Furthermore, top -down, systemic climate risk insights enable more informed decision -making 

throughout other aspects of the investment process: 

• Better informed portfolio management via risk -return insights per asset class, sector, 

and region across different possible global warming pathways that should be used in 

conjunction with bottom -up climate risk analysis on the individual securities level; 

• Climate scenario analysis helps prepare for and fulfil climate -related disclosure and 

regulatory requirements (e.g. , TCFD); 

• Delivers complementary information to enable effective engagement (regulatory & 

corporate). 

# 4 Limitations and outlook 

Given that the future is uncertain, the random variation in future economic variables and 

investment returns over the short -term may result in experience that is significantly different 

to the expected long ‑term average experience. This is true of all stochastic financial mode ls 

but is particularly important here because there is material uncertainty in all aspects of climate 

scenario modelling. The use of judgment is required at all stages in both the formulation and 

application of climate scenario models. 

The modelling is in tended to illustrate possible plausible impacts. Rather than focusing on the 

absolute results under each scenario, we encourage readers to focus on the relative results of 

the climate -aware scenarios compared with the climate -uninformed baseline. 

The scena rios we have modelled do not cover the full range of possibilities. For example, our 

Paris Disorderly Transition pathway assumes a late realization only on the part of the financial 

markets of the physical and transition risks of climate change. Other poss ible drivers of 

disorder include a late realization of the risks by policy makers leading to abrupt policy action, 

unexpected technological breakthroughs, or a sudden shift in consumer sentiment. These 

would all result in disorderly impacts that would diff er in impact and timing from what we 

have modelled. Moreover, the actual outcome is likely to be different from any of our scenarios. 

However, the scenarios do give some idea of the types of impacts that may be seen, and of 

their potential relative signifi cance. Chapter 18 

298 

The model we have used relies on Cambridge Econometrics ’ macro -econometric model E3ME 

to integrate transition and physical risk drivers and calculate their impact on macro -economic 

outputs. E3ME considers only CO 2 emissions from the energy sector an d does not model land 

use and emissions from land use change. In order to capture the effects of other greenhouse 

gas emissions, the model uses a climate sensitivity coefficient that implicitly includes these 

other emissions. Another assumption in E3ME is that natural resources are unlimited, i.e., only 

the demand side is modelled, not supply. 

The modelling translates the impacts of climate -adjusted GDP shocks onto a wide range of 

financial and economic variables. To do this, GDP is the only translation me chanism from the 

macro econometric model to the stochastic financial scenario model. Other potential 

translation mechanisms (such as carbon -price impact on inflation and interest rates) are out 

of scope and follow purely from the estimated relationships wi th GDP in the financial model. 

The results of the modelling are highly dependent on the assumptions used to translate the 

GDP shocks onto the other variables. 

There is particular uncertainty about how climate change might affect interest rates and 

inflati on since there has not yet been much research in this area, and the evidence that is 

available is mixed. Historically, inflation and interest rates have generally been lower when 

economic growth is low. In this model, inflation and interest rates fall broa dly together in the 

central case which means that the real interest rate, which is the most important driver of 

pension scheme liabilities, does not change that much. However, plausible narratives can be 

constructed in which interest rates fall but inflati on is stable or even rises. 

Existing research on how climate change affects financial market volatility is limited and 

inconclusive. Volatility might increase as the physical and transition impacts of climate change 

unfold, particularly if this happens in an unpredictable manner. Due to the inconclusiveness of 

the research, the modelling does not make any allowance for this, except in the Paris 

Disorderly Transition pathway during the period 2024 -2026 while pricing in of climate -related 

risks takes place. 

Furthermore, it should be noted that the modelling does not consider broader environmental 

tipping points and knock -on effects, such as climate change related migration and conflicts. 

Nor does it consider the potential for food or other resource shortages which may lead to both 

lower GDP and higher inflation. In the aggregate, it is quite likely that the modelling is biased 

to under -estimate the potential impacts of climate related risks, especially for the Failed 

Transition pathway. 

Finally, the modelling is based on market conditions at 31 December 2019 and makes no 

allowance for subsequent events, notably the Covid -19 pandemic .Scenario Analysis for Systemic Climate Risk 

299 

# Bibliography 

Burke, M., & Tanutama, V. (2019). “Climatic Constraints on Aggregate Economic Output,” 

NBER Working Paper No. 25 779, April. Chapter 19 

300 

# Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory 

# Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

By 

2°Investing Initiative 1,2

# Abstract 

A debate has recently emerged as to whether climate risks may be material for financial 

stability . This is driven by a solid body of evidence that climate risks may strand assets across 

key sectors that are prominently represented in financial markets. As a result, financial 

supervisory authorities are starting to explore how these risks can be integrated into existing 

stress -testing frameworks. This study proposes a methodology that financia l supervisors could 

follow to build “late & sudden ” transition scenarios that could be used to input into either 

traditional or climate -specific stress -tests of regulated entities. It also proses that supervisors 

run multiple simulations of these scenarios across regulated entities to inform on system and 

idiosyncratic ‘impact tolerance ’ and enable the setting of minimum recovery standards. An 

illustrative application of the process is shown, focusing on listed equity and corporate bonds 

tied to climate sen sitive sectors (fossil fuels, power, steel, cement, automotive and aviation). 

Keywords: climate stress -test, climate transition risks, scenario analysis 

# 1 Introduction 

In order for global temperatures to stay below 1.5° above the pre -industrial era by the e nd of 

the century, estimates suggest that $2.4 trillion would have to be invested annually until 2035 

for the transition of the industrial, energy, agricultural, residential and transport sectors (IPCC, 

2018 ). Similarly, a significant amount of capital will need to be moved out of current high -

carbon investments in a range of sectors, including fossil -fuel mining, utilities, certain types of 

high -carbon manufacturing, and transport infrastructure. These necessary shifts in global 

financing flows will give ri se to a new set of financial risks associated with the transition to a 

low -carbon economy. Failing to anticipate these so called “energy transition ” risks might lead 

to large -scale mispricing of carbon -intensive assets (Delis et al., 2018 ), inevitably foll owed by 

sudden repricing when the market finally realizes the depth of the transition to come. 

In the speech that he gave to the European Commission on 21 st March 2019, Mark Carney, the 

then Governor of the Bank of England, highlighted the need for financial supervisors to 

conduct climate stress -tests to assess the resilience of their regulated entities to such risks, 

and specifically to consider the eventual ity of a “Climate Minsky moment ”, i.e., a sudden 

materialization of climate risks. Similarly, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) 

recommended exploring how transition risks could be integrated into mainstream banking 

stress -testing frameworks, and desc ribed in its scientific advisory board ’s report “Too late, too             

> 1This chapter is written by Michael Hayne , S enior Analyst at the 2° Investing Initiative ,email :michael@2degrees -
> investing.org; Soline Ralite, Analyst at the 2° Investing Initiative ;Jakob Thomä, Managing Director of the 2° Investing
> Initiative , email: jakob@2degrees -investing.org ;Daan Koopman, Data Scientist at 2° Investing Initiative .
> 2This repo rt was supported by the International Climate Initiative (IKI) through project grant18_I_351_Global_A_Paris and
> financial markets .Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition

301 

sudden? ” how a “late & sudden ” transition scenario could impact overall financial stability 

(ESRB, 2016 ).

The aim of this chapter is to outline why current stress tests do not capture the natu re of true 

“late & sudden ” economic decarbonization and calls for a new approach. It then provides 

financial supervisors with a methodology that could help build a range of late & sudden 

transition scenarios to input into either traditional or climate -spec ific stress -tests of regulated 

entities. The methodology specifically focuses on equity and corporate bonds tied to climate 

sensitive sectors (fossil fuels, power, steel, cement, automotive and aviation). Section 1 of this 

chapter describes the scope of tr aditional regulatory stress -tests and reviews past climate 

stress -testing initiatives . Section 2 provides discussion on why current stress test may not be 

appropriate and why there is a need for abrupt late & sudden transition scenarios . Section 3 

details the methodology that financial regulators could follow to estimate the impact of a late 

& sudden scenario on equity & bonds in climate -sensitive sectors to provide ‘impact tolerance ’

indicators for markets, portfolios or firms . Finally, Section 4 presents illustrative results 

obtained by applying this methodology. 

# 2 Background 

The scope of traditional regulatory stress -tests 

According to Bank of England, “Stress testing involves putting a severe amount of pressure on 

an object or system, to test how resilient it is under extreme conditions. When applied to 

banks, stress testing involves analyzing how these institutions would cope with hypothetical 

adverse scenarios, such as severe recessions or financial crises ” (Bank of England, 2016) .

Stress -tests are conduc ted internally by financial institutions as part of their risk management 

strategy, by regulators as part of the macroprudential policy framework, or by outside actors 

providing external analysis. 

Stress -tests usually consist of three main parts: (i) a qua litative description of several 

disruptive economic scenarios and how they could propagate to the financial sector, (ii) a list 

of macroeconomic and sectoral parameters, as well as the values that they would take under 

each above -mentioned scenario, and (i ii) impact indicators reflecting how each scenario 

impacts the financial sector. The time horizon of the scenarios is usually three years, and the 

scenario parameters and impact indicators displayed are often limited to a dozen.  Table 19 -1

displays the main characteristics of the stress -test conducted yearly by the Fed reserve in the 

United States, and by the ESRB in Europe. Chapter 19 

302 

Table 19 -1 Main characteristics of US & EU regulatory stress -tests 

Fed reserve stress -test (USA)  ESRB stress -test (EU) 

Risk scenarios 

considered 

• Severe global recession 

accompanied by a global 

aversion for long -term fixed 

income assets, leading to a 

broad -based and deep 

correction in asset prices 

• Weakening economic 

activities across all sectors, 

accompanied by rapid 

declines in long -term rates 

and flattening yield curves 

• Abrupt and sizeable repricing of 

risk premia in global finan cial 

markets – triggered e.g. by a policy 

expectation shock 

• Adverse feedback loop between 

weak bank profitability and low 

nominal growth 

• Public and private debt 

sustainability concerns; 

• Liquidity risks in the non -bank 

financial sector 

Time horizon  3 years  3 years 

Macroeconomic 

& sectoral 

indicators 

displayed 

GDP growth rate, unemployment 

rate, National House Price Index 

GDP growth rate, unemployment, 

HICP, Real estate prices 

Impact indicators 

displayed 

Value of the Dow Jones Stock 

Market Index, U.S. BBB corporate 

yield, Projected 

loan/revenues/net income losses 

& capital ratios for participating 

institutions 

Stock prices, Long -term rates, 

Exchange rates, Foreign demand & 

commodity prices, SWAP rates, Credit 

spread indices 

Sources: Authors, based on ESRB (2018) & FED reserve (2018) 

A growing interest from regulators for climate stress -testing 

There is a growing debate as to whether climate risks may be material for financial stability. 

The claim is driven by a solid body of evidence that climate risks may create value destruction 

for key industrial sectors that are prominently represented in financial markets (e.g. energy, 

utilities). Indeed, according to Moody ’s analysis, $9 trillion of their rated debt may be at 

immediate or elevated risk of downgrade in response to environmental risks (Thomä & Dupré ,

2017 ). Around $15 -20 trillion of market capitalization in stock markets is tied up with 

companies that are covered in the decarbonization scenarios of the International Energy 

Agency (Thomä & Dupré , 2017 ).

As a result, financial supervisory authorities are starting to explore how climate risks – and 

especially transition risks – can be integrated into existing stress -testing frameworks. 

Associated recommendations around integrating such risks have been put f orward by the 

UNEP Inquiry (Dupré et al., 2015 ), as well as a number of leading think tanks 3. The European 

Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) also recommended exploring how transition risks could be 

integrated into mainstream banking stress -testing frameworks (ESR B, 2016 ). Research 

initiatives along these lines have been launched by the financial supervisory authorities in 

Sweden, the Netherlands, United Kingdom, and France (Chenet et al., 2015 ). We detail 

hereafter some of the most notable initiatives.     

> 3See for example the report from Bruegel, Schoenmaker &van Tilburg (2016). Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition

303 

In 2017, Ba ttiston et al., assessed the exposure of European financial institutions to fossil fuel 

production sectors and energy intensive sectors and analyzed the losses that these institutions 

would bear assuming an arbitrary 100% shock in the market capitalization of the fossil fuel 

sector. They concluded that such a shock to the equity value of the fossil fuel sector wouldn ’t

threaten European financial stability, although specific banks could be significantly impacted. 

In the same year, the Dutch Central Bank assessed the potential impact of floods on credit 

losses and quantified the exposure of Dutch financial institutions to transition risks (Regelink 

et al., 2017 ). This report was followed by another, more in -depth analysis of transition risks 

and their impact on financial institutions ’ expected losses (Vermeulen et al., 2018 ). This latter 

analysis was conducted using a Computable General Equilibrium model (CGE), whose 

production functions were modified to reflect the consequences of several transition 

scenarios, and the macroeconomic impact was then distributed across sectors based on their 

relative emission intensities. 

In 2018, the California Insurance Commissioner ’s Office conducted, in partnership with the 2° 

Investing Initiative (2°II), a climate scenario analysis of insurance companies operating in 

California, aiming at quanti fying the current and future exposure of these institutions to 

transitions risks, and physical risks on the asset -side of their balance sheets. However, the 

impact of these risks, were they to materialize, wasn ’t quantified. The Bank of England also 

includ ed the impact of climate change and of a delayed transition in its UK insurers stress tests 

in 2019, partly based on the methodology presented in this study. Finally, building on 

Battiston ’s (2017 ) paper, Battiston & Monasterolo, published in 2019 a stress -testing 

methodology aiming at pricing transition risks in today ’s value of equity and corporate bonds 

in the energy & power sector, as well as in sovereign bonds ’ value. 

The choice of the transition scenario 

Many uncertainties remain as to the form that a low -carbon transition would take. The ESRB 

scientific advisory board ’s report “Too late, too sudden? ” (ESRB, 2016 ) identified two types of 

scenario outcomes, a “gradual ”, smooth ambitious scenario and a late & sudden one. This 

concept has been further d eveloped by the UN PRI in 2018 operating under the premise of an 

“Inevitable Policy Response ” (PRI, 2018 ). In addition to the two more ambitious scenarios, 

transition outcomes could also involve a “do nothing ” approach or a limited climate transition 

ambition but are of little interest to assess the materiality of transition risks. 

Considering that the purpose of a stress -testing exercise is to assess the impact of a worst -case 

scenario on the financial system, a late & sudden scenario is more suited t han one that 

describes a smooth transition. Such a late & sudden scenario assumes that limited climate 

action is taken for several years but is then followed by ambitious action to stay below the 2°C 

threshold by the end of the century . This approach also includes a “sentiment ” shock at the 

moment climate action is taken, leading to a sudden repricing of financial assets. 

However, these types of scenarios are yet to be fully explored by macroeconomic or energy -

economy models, and little information is avail able to quantify their economic implications. A 

project aiming at bridging this gap and commissioned by the PRI is currently underway (PRI, 

2019 ), however this project focuses on establishing alternative baseline scenarios and not 

‘stress -tests ’-type resul ts representing tail risks. 

The choice of methodological approaches 

Before estimating the impact of the energy transition on the value of tradable financial assets, 

the first step is to understand how the profits of companies issuing these securities would be Chapter 19 

304 

affected by an energy transition, and in particular by a “too late, too sudden ” transition. 

Generally speaking, this can either in top down or bottom up fashion as per  Table 19 -2.

Table 19 -2 Main approaches used by studies to estimate the impact of transition 

risks on share prices 

Source: CISL (2015) , Vermeulen et al. (2018) , Ecofys (2018) 

# 3 The case for of a standardized framework for climate stress testing 

# and abrupt late & sudden scenarios 

As highlighted above, methodologies already exist to quantify the exposure of financial 

institutions ’ portfolios to climate risks, and first steps have been taken to assess the potential 

losses that these institutions would incur, were these risks to materialize. The purpose of this 

chapter is to propose ‘upgrades ’ on two fronts. The first is on how climate stress tests are 

designed and the coordination between the des igners and financial supervisors. The second 

is on the need for abrupt late and sudden scenarios, as current stress tests scenarios do not 

capture the potential effects between macroeconomic indicators, firm specific microeconomic 

indicators and financial asset evaluation. 

To address how stress tests are created, a guiding framework is required to enable cross 

comparison of scenarios and stress test results. The need for a unified framework arises from 

the lack of capacity across supervisors to develop co nsistent scenarios using consistent and 

disclosed inputs as well as methodologies. For example, the information on the activity in the 

real economy (e.g. , the future production and capital expenditure plans of non -financial 

companies), the relationships of macroeconomic and sectorial indicators (currently based on 

historical relationships, e.g. oil price and GDP), as well as the relationship between economic 

and financial indicators (e.g. , GDP and non -financial firms ’ individual revenues) should all be 

cons idered .

Trying to predict how the markets might behave in an abrupt late & sudden low -carbon 

transition is a daunting task given the lack of precedence and knowledge of the relationship 

between economic and financial indicators under such circumstances. An approach to address 

this uncertainty could be by evolving the current research question of “which institutions or 

markets fail in specific scenarios ” to, “how many different scenarios does a financial institution 

or market show significant stability to so lvency concerns ”. For this to be possible there needs 

to be a common framework for creating scenarios. This would both help mitigate the error 

and uncertainty that arises from the speculative nature of how the markets might behave in Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

305 

abrupt late & sudden l ow -carbon transition, give an estimation of resilience of financial 

markets, as well as reduce transaction cost of conducting such assessments. 

Abrupt late & sudden scenarios 

Current scenarios and the assessments that apply them do not capture the anticipa ted nature 

of an abrupt late & sudden decarbonization of global economies on several fronts. Explicitly 

current assessments do not cover one or more of the follow attributes: 

• The change in sectorial production from non -financial firms (or value) would be non -linear, 

and the magnitude will accumulate with inaction .

• There will be strong differentiation in the evaluation of financial assets issued by different 

non -financial firms in sectors undergoing the transition .

• The change in sectorial production and/or revenues would not be cyclic .

• The change in demand would likely be too sudden to allow market forces act to induce 

cost minimized deployment of future supply and it is uncertain how this would be 

reflected in terms of market sentiment. 

Current scenarios th at apply a linear shock to a sector or demand from a specific technology 

fail to capture the true dynamic of an absolute carbon budget that is being continually 

exhausted and the action that would be required to reduce greenhouse gas concentration. An 

‘ine vitable policy response ’ would trigger a tipping point in sectoral and/or technological 

demand, which will manifest itself some point in the future. Consequently, the required 

magnitude of change accumulates over time as the carbon budget is consumed, and thus 

greater action is required sooner. As the dependent variable in stress tests is the evaluation of 

financial assets, which is always a function of future cash flows, when the tipping point occurs 

will also impact the results independent of the magnitud e of shock. Consequently, the time in 

which the policy response is enacted will have a strong impact on the size of the required 

response, and testing should be carried out across both size of the shock and when it occurs. 

The future capacity for non -finan cial companies to meet demand and estimations of their 

future production is available at market intelligence agencies, who track capacity and 

production at the asset level (Weber at al., 2017). These databases track the purchases of land, 

permits, and supp ly chains to be the first to identify corporate activity and sell that to 

respective industries constituents, as market intelligence. Such data has already been used 

extensively by financial institutions and supervisory authorities to track the alignment o f

capital expenditure plans with climate change mitigation commitments (Thomä et al., 2017 ).

This forward -looking information can be used in conjunction with demand -side production 

shocks and discounted cashflow modelling to estimate the impact of these sh ocks on the 

financial asset prices of each non -financial firm in a bottom -up fashion. The benefits of this 

approach are threefold. It incorporates granular firm specific data at the physical asset level, 

it is informed by future expectations and not just p ast performance, and lastly the 

methodology of formulating/accounting of these expectations is in a consistent manor across 

each firm in each sector. In theory this should in turn provide more accurate assessment of 

non -financial firm solvency and be able to be translated into asset prices and inform financial 

firms solvency. 

The nature of decarbonization of some sectors will not manifest in a cyclical nature as there 

will be no rebounding for some sectors or some technologies. Traditional stress tests have aChapter 19 

306 

time horizon of three years, assuming cyclicality would imply that companies in transitioning 

sectors generally have an adaptive capacity to rebound within this time horizon. This does not 

seem likely for non -financial firms that operate solely in fossi l-fuel extraction and production 

for example. An outcome of a stress test should be the degree in which these companies can 

remain solvent indefinitely given that there is no rebound in sectoral value. 

The change in the evaluation of equity and bonds (the sentiment shock ) will not be the direct 

evaluation of the demand side change currently theorized and represented by traditional 

integrated assessment models, such as those created by the IEA and members of the 

Integrated Assessment Modelling Consortium. Th is is because without any early warning 

system, the tipping point would likely be too sudden to allow market forces act to induce cost 

minimized deployment of future supply. This especially true within the time frame of 

traditional stress tests of three years. 

# 4 A framework for climate stress testing and developing late & 

# sudden scenarios 

To the authors ’ knowledge, there are currently no energy -economy models assessing the 

consequences of a truly “late & sudden ” scenario on sectoral value -added. The followi ng 

section outlines an illustrative framework and methodology to build these scenarios using a 

bottom up approach. First it outlines the framework below in point form, it then illustrates our 

first attempt in completing such an exercise. Finally, it shows illustrative results of the 

application of such a framework on two theoretical equity and bonds portfolios whose sectoral 

investments are aligned with the IEA ’s NPS scenario. 

In this chapter we have only run one scenario, but the key message of the chapt er is that many 

can be run, and that solvency over different scenarios will provide useful insight into market 

stability and resilience. In addition, a lthough we focus on changes in aggregated sectoral and 

technological profits for selected indices in this study, a bottom -up approach also allows total 

market -level analysis, firm -level analysis as well portfolio level analysis. Consequently, it can 

inform on both idiosyncratic and systemic sensitivities to late and abrupt decarbonization. 

The application fr amework consisting of the following elements: 

• Identification of relevant financial indicators that that drive relationship between 

industrial GHG emissions and firm profits 

• Identification of the appropriate granularity of the above indicators and sourcing the 

corresponding business as usual data for each 

• The formulation of a wide range of plausible abrupt late & sudden scenarios 

• Identification of an appropriate evaluation methodology to suit each financial asset class 

• Benchmarking each firm/portfolio or mar ket BAU evaluation against the range of 

scenarios developed through step iii 

Inputs and Indicators under a business as usual scenario 

The first steps in building the model is to define the relevant data inputs and indicators that 

drive financial asset evaluation and identify the appropriate granularity and consistent sources 

for this data under a business -as -usual scenario. The independent variables calculating the net Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

307 

profit, in simplified terms , are production, prices, and the fixed and variable costs . Table 19 -3

below illustrates how transition risks, and particularly those stemming from a “too late, too 

sudden ” transition, would impact carbon -intens ive industries ’ profits across the entire “profit 

value chain ”, and details the indicators needed to quantify each of these impacts. Chapter 19 

308 

Table 19 -3 Impact of transition on sectoral profits & indicators needed to quantify 

the impact 

How could transition risks impact sectoral profits?      

> Net profits = (Production volume * Prices) –Costs of Goods Sold
> –OPex –(Taxes + Interests)

Indicators needed to 

quantify the impact 

Increased cost of emitting CO 2: Under a transition scenario, 

the implementation of a carbon tax will cut the margin of 

carbon intensive industries proportionally to their 

emissions. Under a “too late, too sudden ” scenario, carbon 

prices would need to be higher than under a “smooth ”

tra nsition scenario, in order to foster a quick decrease in 

emissions. 

- Production 

- Carbon intensity of 

production 

- Carbon tax 

Increased cost of production inputs : During a low carbon 

transition, carbon intensive goods will increase in prices due 

to pass -through of direct emissions costs. Industries using 

such carbon intensive goods as production inputs will thus 

be impacted. 

- Prices of 

production inputs 

Additional depreciation costs and R&D expenditures :

Under a transition scenario, significant capital expenditures 

in low -carbon technologies will increase companies ’ annual 

depreciation costs (included in Operating Expenses). R&D 

expenditures will also likely increase in the short -term as 

deployment of new technologies will have to be expedited 

to meet the unanticipated demand. 

- CAPEX 

- R&D expenditures 

- All other OPEX 

Changes in revenues : Companies ’ revenues will be affected 

through a change in prices and consumer demand: As they 

become increasingly costly to produce, prices of carbon 

intensive goods will likely increase, and consumers will, in 

turn, decrease their demand for such goods. A delayed 

transition, as it would increase the costs bared by carbon -

intensive industries, would likely deepen this effect. 

- Production 

- Prices 

A range of initiatives have already sought to quantify the sectoral impacts of a “smooth ”

energy transition , and provide some indicators allowing to quantify its impact on the profits ’

determinants detailed in  Table 19 -3. Two relevant initiatives in this regard are the EU H2020 -

funded ET Risk project and UNEP FI ’s working group on transition risks (UNEP FI & Mercer, 

2018 ). To the knowledge of the authors, no research has however yet been conducted to 

understand the impact on sectoral profits of a delayed t ransition scenario, although initiatives 

looking at this issue are under way (notably led by UN Principles for Responsible Investment 

as part of their “Inevitable Policy Response ” work) (PRI, 2019 ).

Building on this formulation,  Table 19 -4 below details the indicators and their data sources 

that were used to build the “too late, too sudden ” scenarios used here. 

# 1

# 2

# 3

# 4Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

309 

Table 19 -4 Sectors included in the analysis and indicators used for profits 

calculation 

Sector  Target 

companies  Geography 

Indicators used 

for profits 

calculation 

Source of the data 

for the BaU & 

smooth transition 

scenarios 

Oil  Upstream oil  Europe, North 

America, South 

& Central 

America, 

Middle East, 

Africa, Asia 

Pacific, Eurasia 

Production, 

Prices 

-Production data 

taken from Asset 

Resolution 4, IEA 

WEO2018 SDS & 

NPS 

- Prices data taken 

from ETP2017 

B2DS & RTS 

Coal  Coal mining 

Natural gas  Upstream 

natural gas 

Power 

Power 

generators 

(Coal, Gas, Solar, 

Wind) 

Europe, USA, 

Latin America 

Production, 

Prices, 

Levelized Cost 

of Electricity, 

Subsidies 

- Production data 

taken from Asset 

Resolution, 

WEO2018 SDS & 

NPS 

- Electricity prices, 

LCOE & Subsidies 

taken from ET Risk 

Steel  Crude steel 

producers  Brazil, USA, 

Mexico, France, 

Germany, Italy 

Production, 

Prices, Carbon 

prices, Carbon 

intensity 

Production data 

taken from Asset 

Resolution, Prices, 

carbon prices & 

carbon intensity 

taken from ET Risk 

Cement  Cement 

producers 

Automotive  Car producers 

World average 

Production, Net 

margin by 

powertrain type 

Production data 

taken from Asset 

Resolution, 

Production data & 

net margin 

derived from 

ETP2017 & BNEF 

Aviation  Airlines 

(international) 

Demand, Fuel 

efficiency, Fuel 

prices 

Fleet data taken 

from Asset 

Resolution, 

Demand taken 

from ETP2017 

B2DS & RTS, fuel 

prices & fuel 

efficiency taken 

from ET Risk    

> 4Asset resolution is a market intelligence data aggregator, that links real economy production data form various high
> carbon sector s to financial securities ( https://asset -resolution.com/ ). Chapter 19

310 

Estimating prices and production under an abrupt transition 

Once the baseline values for each of the indicators are defined, the next step is to develop a 

framework for producing late and sudden scenarios expressed in the terms of the required 

identified indicators listed above in  Table 19 -2.

There many different approaches to estimating future production profiles as well as a 

plenitude of different outcomes from these models. For instance, the are dozens of integ rated 

assessment models used to inform on the probability of global warming, in part by estimating 

future production profiles, and thousands of outcomes. Thus, it is anything but certain what 

the exact production profiles representing global markets underg oing a climate Minsky 

moment may look like and how they should be formulated. However, for measuring the 

tolerance of financial markets to these different outcomes, the exact method for producing 

the production profiles may not need to be so sophisticated. Here we present two simple 

approaches to estimating the future production profiles representing global markets 

undergoing a climate Minsky moment. 

The first method defines the year in which a production shock occurs, and the duration of this 

shock. After which the production trajectory resumes the profile of current IAM estimations 

of future demand. The intent of this style of approach, would be purely understanding how 

financial asset prices may react under modification of parameters independent on what t he 

consequences may be for emissions, as well as the impact of those emissions on future 

demand. 

The second approach attempts to use a global carbon budget accounting approach that 

approximates keeping GHG emissions within roughly within 450 ppm, albeit in a very 

simplified man ne r (further detailed in Annex A). The intent of this approach is to simulate the 

outcome of a policy response that manages to maintain a likely probability of limiting global 

warming to within 2 degrees by the turn of the century, i. e., stylizing an attempt to meet the 

Paris Agreement, assuming the policy action occurs somewhere between 2025 -2035. 

Using the first model to understand a market, firm or portfolios ’ sensitivity to a climate Minsky 

moment in general, requires that the prod uction profiles for each region and technology to be 

iterated over the parameter for size of the shock, when the shock occurs, and its duration. The 

evaluation of the impact of this production/demand side shock then informs financial asset 

pricing through DCF modeling and bond default probability and pricing models. Similarly, for 

the second model, the year of the shock and the assumed ‘climate lag ’, the residence time for 

emitted CO 2 in the atmosphere, would be iterated over suitable range of values. The r esults 

could be representing in simple matrices that illustrate the tolerance of a market, firm or 

portfolio to the combinations of shock magnitude and climate Minsky year for each technology 

or sector. 

Although both approaches described above represents a valuable first step in the 

development of “too late, too sudden ” transition scenarios, there are several caveats to bear 

in mind. First, the approaches overlook possible interactions between sectors (in reality, 

emissions may decrease less than needed in an industry and more than needed in another) –

although it takes into account risk propagation across industries (e.g. , an increase in oil prices 

impacts airlines expenses). Second, in the absence of alternative solutions, it features a very 

simplistic pr ice dynamic. Finally, in the absence of alternative solutions, it neglects changes in 

net margins for some sectors. In both methods however, all other indicators within Table 3 

could be also be varied to help understand if the uncertainty in their estimati ons flow through 

to impact evaluation at the market, portfolio, or firm level. Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

311 

Estimating equity value under a “too late, too sudden” transition scenario 

As explained above, the energy transition will impact companies ’ revenues and expenses, with 

the ampl itude of the effect varying depending on the sector they operate in, which market 

the y operate in , and when the shock occurs. These changes in the companies ’ profits will 

subsequently impact their market value, as the demand for shares issued by weaken ed 

companies will decrease. We rely on standard evaluation approaches to capture these changes. 

To estimate changes in share prices under a “too late, too sudden ” scenario, we rely on 

Gordon ’s formulation of future dividends ’ flows (Gordon, 1959 ). The equity market price 𝑉 𝐸 

at time 𝑡 0 is given by: 

𝑉 𝐸 ,𝑡 0= 𝐷 1

> 𝑟 −𝑔

with 𝐷 1 being the expected dividends for the next year, r being the cost risk of capital 

for the company, and g being the dividend ’s growth rate. 

Assuming dividends for a given year are proportional to the net profits of the company for this 

year, and explicitly modeling the future evolution of profits, we derive the following formula: 

𝑉 𝐸 ,𝑡 0=𝛼 ∑ 𝑃 𝑡  

> (1+𝑟 )𝑡
> 𝑡 𝑏
> 𝑡 =𝑡 0∗(1+𝑥 )

With Pt being the pro fits made by the company in year t (modelled as explained in Section 2.1), 

tb the date until which we explicitly model cash -flows, x the percentage of modelled value in 

the terminal value, and α the proportionality coefficient between net profits and divid ends. 

In simple words, the value of equity for a given company is assumed to equate the Net Present 

Value of its future cash -flows. The difference between V E,t0 under the BAU and the “too late, 

too sudden ” scenarios is the equity value put at risk by the transition. 

Estimating corporate bonds’ value under a “too late, too sudden” transition 

scenario 

The most influential factors that affect a bond's market value are its yield, prevailing interest 

rates (as they affect the discount rate of the bond ’s cash flows) and the bond's probability of 

default. For simplicity , we don ’t hypothesis how a “late & sudden ” transition would affect 

inflation and thus long -term interest rates . The refore, in our application we focus on default -

risk as the sole driver of bond value changes under a transition scenario. Discount rates are 

kept constant across all scenarios. 

1) Estimating the probability of default under a transition scenario 

There are ma ny methods used calculate in credit risk, each require different assumptions and 

data, and ultimately have various forecasting accuracies (Tanthanongsakkun et al., 2009 ).

Commercial credit rating typically employs derivates of the Merton distance -to -defau lt model 

(e.g. Moody ’s KVM and Bloomberg ’s credit risks models). Nonetheless it is clear that bonds ’

probabilities of default are heavily correlated with the main financial ratios of their issuers 

(Tang & Yan, 2010 ).

For sake of computational convenience, we employ Zmijewski ’s bankruptcy model to calculate 

the change in probability of default at time t under a business as usual scenario and then over 

the range of “late & too sudden ” scenarios. We then apply this change in default probability 

to commercially published default probabilities at the security level. This helps to calibrate the 

results based on exogenous risks not captured within our framework and is assumed to 

compensate for some of our simplifications. 

(1)Chapter 19 

312 

To apply Zmijewski ’s model we assume that a change of a 𝑥 % in net income translates into 

an 𝑥 % change in NI/TA . In addition, we simplify to assume that both the total liabilities and 

current assets are assumed constant over time, and thus in accordance to Zmijewski, the bond 

defaulting at a cer tain time 𝑡 can be express ed as: 

𝑃 𝐷 𝑡 = φ(−4.336 − 4.513 𝑁 𝐼 𝑡  

> 𝑇𝐴

+ 5.679 𝑇𝐿  

> 𝑇𝐴

+ 0.004 𝐶𝐴 

> 𝐶𝐿

) (2) 

Where PD is the 1 -year probability of default, φ the standard normal cumulative distribution 

function, NI/TA net income over total assets, TL/TA total liabilities over total assets, and CA/CL 

current assets over current liabilities. 

Taking the limitations of Zmijewski ’s model into account, the changes in NI/TA over time are 

used to calculate the changes in PD over time: 

∆𝑃𝐷 𝑡 = 𝑃 𝐷 𝑡 − 𝑃 𝐷 𝑡 −1 (3) 

The probability of default for each bond in the market or index is then the product of ∆𝑃𝐷 𝑡 

and the bonds current probability of default in time t.

2) Estimating the value of a bond under a transition scenario 

The value of a bond is then given by pro bability weighted discounted cash flow represented 

by: 

𝑉 𝑗 = ∑ 𝑋 𝑡 𝑃 𝐷 𝑡 (∏ (1 − 𝑃 𝐷 𝑘 ))𝑡 −1 

> 𝑘 =0
> 𝑇
> 𝑡 =1

(4) 

With Vj being the value of bond j, T being the maturity date of the bond, X represent the net 

present value of a bond ’s cash flow (defined below), and PD t being the probability of default 

computed in Section 2.4.1. 

Where the net present value of the bonds future cash flows is given by: 

𝑋 𝑇 = ∑ 𝐶 𝑗 𝐹 𝑗  

> (1+𝑟 𝑗 )𝑡

+ 𝐹 𝑗  

> (1+𝑟 𝑗 )𝑇
> 𝑇
> 𝑡 =1

(5) 

Where Fj is the face value of the bond j, Cj is the coupon rate of the bond j, R is the recovery 

rate in case of default, rj is the discount rate for the cash flows. 

For a bond expected to mature in T time periods, with coupons paid every period, the present 

value of its cash flow stream, assuming no default, can be written as: 

𝑉 𝑗 = ∑ 𝐶 𝑗 𝐹 𝑗  

> (1+𝑟 )𝑡

(∏ (1 − 𝑃𝐷 𝑘 )) + 𝑅 𝑗 𝐹 𝑗 ∑ 𝑃𝐷 𝑡  

> (1+𝑟 )𝑡

(∏ (1 − 𝑃𝐷 𝑘 )) + 𝐹 𝑗  

> (1+𝑟 )𝑇
> 𝑡 −1
> 𝑘 =0
> 𝑇
> 𝑡 =1
> 𝑡
> 𝑘 =1
> 𝑇
> 𝑡 =1

∏ (1 −𝑇 

> 𝑘 =1

𝑃𝐷 𝑘 ) (6) 

In the example displayed in Section 3 below, we set R j = 38% 5, F j = 1000, C j = 5%, r = 5%. 

# 5 Illustrative results 

In this section, we display some results obtained using the GHG concentration driven stylized 

late & sudden scenarios developed in Annex A. Changes in the mean equity value of companies 

in key sectors under a “late & sudden ” transition scenario, assuming a sudden repricing due   

> 5Historical recovery rate of senior bonds (Moody’s, 2017) Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition

313 

to a market sentiment shock when the transition starts, are displayed in  Table 19 -4 (World 

average). As for corporate bonds,  Table 19 -5 illustrates the increase in the mean 1 -year 

probability of default of bonds tied to sensitive sectors, 1 year and 10 years after the beginning 

of a “late & sudden ” transition (World average).  Table 19 -6 displays the change in the value of 

an illustrative bond with a face value of 1000$, a 5% coupon rate, and a 38% recovery rate, 

depending on t he sector it is tied to, and depending on its remaining time to maturity after 

the “late & sudden ” transition starts (in 2025). 

We set 𝑟 = 5% ; 𝑡 0 = 2025 (i.e., we assume a sudden repricing of equity in 2025, date at 

which the TLTS transition starts, due to a market sentiment shock), 𝑡 𝑏 = 2040 , 𝑥 = 10% and 

α = 1 for all scenarios. 

Table 19 -5 Mean change in equity value compared to a B AU scenario under a “too 

late, too sudden” transition scenario for key sectors, assuming a sudden repricing in 

2025 (%) 

Change in equity value (%) 

Upstream Oil  -53.3% 

Coal mining  -57.0% 

Upstream gas  -30.8% 

Coal electricity  -80.1% 

Gas electricity  -20.3% 

Solar PV  19.2% 

Wind electricity  12.8% 

Nuclear  19.9% 

Crude steel  -52.0% 

Cement  -27.0% 

Automotive  -9.5% 

Aviation  -21.0% 

As expected, upstream fossil fuel industrials and fossil -based power producers, in particular 

coal electricity producers, are the most strongly hit by the transition, while listed renewable 

energy producer s enjoy a significant revaluation of their shares. 

It is worth noting that these results are sectoral averages, and thus do not consider the 

adaptive capacities of individual companies that the proposed model can and should produce. 

This aggregated impact on sectoral equity value might hide significant disparities between 

companies of a given sector. As, in the context of regulatory stress -testing, changes in the value 

of entire asset classes are of more interest than changes in individual asset values, th is isn ’t

much of a concern. Our flexible bottom -up approach to estimating changes in sectoral profits, 

detailed in Section 2.1, could however be adapted to uncover these disparities. Global 

production trends taken from the IEA could be broken down to compa ny level using a fair -

share approach, while indicators related to energy efficiency and operating margin could be 

estimated on a case -by -case basis, based on the CAPEX and R&D expenditures already 

engaged by the company. Such an approach would enable the assessment of the 

consequences of the transition on companies with mixed revenue streams (e.g. revenues from 

carbon intensive and renewable power production at the same time) (Röttmer et al., 2018 ).Chapter 19 

314 

Table 19 -6 Mean 1 -yr probabilities of default of bonds issued by climate -sensitive 

sectors under a “too late, too sudden” transition scenario (%) 

2018 (Baseline 6) 2026  2035 

Steel  0.03  0.03  0.06 

Cement  0.02  0.02  0.05 

Oil  0.01  0.03  0.06 

Coal  0.03  0.04  0.09 

Gas  0.02  0.02  0.05 

Coal power 

0.02 7

0.04  0.09 

Gas power  0.02  0.04 

Nuclear  0.02  0.00 

Solar PV  0.02  0.00 

Wind  0.01  0.00 

Airlines  0.03  0.04  0.06 

Automotive  0.01  0.01  0.02 

Table 19 -7 Mean change in bond values compared to baseline under a “too late, too 

sudden” transition scenario, depending on their remaining time to maturity, and 

assuming a sudden repricing in 2025 (%) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

Steel  -0.2%  -0.7%  -1.2%  -1.9%  -2.6%  -3.3%  -4.1%  -4.9%  -5.7%  -6.5% 

Cement  -0.2%  -0.5%  -1.0%  -1.5%  -2.2%  -2.9%  -3.8%  -4.7%  -5.6%  -6.6% 

Oil  -1.4%  -2.9%  -4.6%  -6.4%  -8.3%  -10.0%  -11.7%  -13.3%  -14.8%  -16.2% 

Coal  -0.8%  -1.9%  -3.2%  -4.6%  -6.2%  -7.7%  -9.2%  -10.6%  -12.0%  -13.1% 

Gas  -0.5%  -1.1%  -1.9%  -2.9%  -3.9%  -5.0%  -6.1%  -7.2%  -8.2%  -9.3% 

Coal power  -1.1%  -2.5%  -4.2%  -6.2%  -8.4%  -10.2%  -12.1%  -13.8%  -15.5%  -17.1% 

Gas power  -0.4%  -0.8%  -1.2%  -1.6%  -2.1%  -2.8%  -3.5%  -4.2%  -5.0%  -5.7% 

Nuclear  0.1%  0.3%  0.6%  0.9%  1.4%  1.8%  2.4%  3.0%  3.7%  4.4% 

Solar PV  0.4%  1.1%  2.2%  3.5%  4.6%  5.6%  6.6%  7.6%  8.5%  9.3% 

Wind  0.3%  0.9%  1.7%  2.8%  4.0%  5.1%  6.1%  7.0%  7.9%  8.8% 

Airlines  -0.2%  -0.6%  -1.2%  -1.9%  -2.6%  -3.4%  -4.2%  -5.1%  -5.9%  -6.7% 

Automotive  -0.2%  -0.5%  -0.8%  -1.1%  -1.3%  -1.5%  -1.8%  -2.1%  -2.4%  -2.7% 

As illustrated by  Table 19 -6 and  Table 19 -7, the b ond value that is put at risk by a “late & sudden ”

transition increases as a function of the time to maturity of the bonds, driven by a rise in their 

1-year probability of default as the transition progresses. As highlighted above for equity, Coal 

& Oil pr oducers, as well as Coal power producers are the most strongly affected by a late & 

sudden transition.      

> 6Bloomberg data, Q4 2018.
> 7Mean 1yr probability of default of p ower producers worldwide in Q4 2018 (Source: Bloomberg) Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition

315 

# 6 Caveats 

Although the approach developed above represents a valuable first step in the development 

of a “too late, too sudden ” transition scenario that c ould be used by financial supervisors as 

an input into climate stress -tests of regulated entities, there are several caveats to bear in 

mind. 

First, the methodology that we developed in Section 2.2 to estimate the impact of a late & 

sudden transition on s ectoral profits suffers some limitations – as detailed in Section 2.2.: it 

overlooks some possible interactions between sectors, it considers a simplistic price dynamic, 

and it neglects changes in net margins for some sectors. The approach developed in thi s study 

fills a gap – the absence of a proper late & sudden transition ‘stress -test ’ scenario including 

the indicators needed to estimate the changes in sectoral profits, but it shouldn ’t be 

considered sufficient. A proper “late & sudden ” scenario develope d by the energy -economy 

modelling community, granular both at geography and sectoral levels, would to take climate 

stress -testing a step further. The Inevitable Policy Response project, led by the PRI, will likely 

fill this gap. Multiple scenarios covering different potential outcomes and tools that enable 

easy assessment of both markets and portfolios should be developed further .

Second, the methodology that we developed to assess the changes in bond and equity value 

for companies in carbon -intensive secto rs doesn ’t consider potential mixed revenue streams, 

they apply to theoretical companies with all their revenues coming from only one carbon -

intensive sector. When applying the equity and bond shocks estimated above to investment 

portfolios, a solution wou ld thus be to compute an average shock for each company in the 

portfolio, weighed by the share of their revenues coming from each carbon -intensive sector. 

Alternatively, as mentioned pg. 12, our methodology could also be applied at company -level 

and direct ly factor mixed revenue streams into future profits calculations. 

Third, this study doesn ’t cover sovereign bonds. This is because contrary to Battiston et al. 

(2017) , we do not consider that a correlation between short -term GDP changes and sovereign 

interest rates is clearly established in the literature, either in developed or emerging 

economies (Poghosyan, 2014 ; Min, 1999 ). let alone did we find a value to use for th e sensitivity 

factor. Fiscal indicators, in turn, are designated by the literature as key drivers of sovereign 

bonds ’ interest rates, but the methodology developed in this study doesn ’t yet allow us to 

quantify the changes in a country ’s indebtedness under a late & sudden transition scenario. A 

next step would thus be to investigate the relationships between profits of carbon -intensive 

sectors and fiscal revenues and understand how shocks to the value -added of these sectors 

would impact a country ’s dept -to -GDP ratio. 

# 7 Conclusion 

To respond to the growing demand for supervisors to be able to answer questions on the 

materiality of transitions risks posed to financial markets in a late and sudden decarbonization 

of economies, this study first highlights the ina dequacy of current approaches. The shortfalls 

of applying traditional stress testing for assessing systemic risk, to assessing risk associated 

with sudden economic decarbonization, lie in the lack of use of available information on the 

future capital expen diture plans of non -financial companies, the inadequacy of the time 

horizon of traditional tests leading to implicit assumptions about the rebounding of sectoral 

value, and the lack of abrupt late & sudden scenarios to test against. Chapter 19 

316 

To combat this, the st udy proposes that risk assessment should be carried out via sensitivity 

analysis producing ‘impact tolerance ’ indicators. Assessing a range of possible futures could 

mitigate uncertainty around how market sentiment may respond to an inevitable policy 

respo nse. Given that this sort of test does not exist, nor the scenarios, we demonstrate how 

this could be done by: (1) building “late & sudden ” transition scenarios including all the 

indicators needed to estimate future changes in profits of carbon -intensive s ectors, that can 

also be calibrated to reflect the current climate trajectory of any investment portfolio, (2) 

demonstrating how a to price the risks associated with a late & sudden transition into equity 

and corporate bonds ’ value, and (3) and finally by empirically demonstrating the need, by 

estimating and showing the risk associated with a late & sudden transition might have a 

significant impact on equity and bond value of companies in carbon -intensive sectors, fossil 

fuels extraction and coal -based powe r production being the most threatened activities. 

Combining the methodology developed above with an analysis of the exposure of financial 

institutions to carbon intensive sectors would allow financial supervisors to assess the 

potential impact of a “lat e & sudden ” transition on financial stability. Such a combination of 

top -down stress -tests and exposure analysis through asset -level data has been pioneered in 

the Bank of England ’s 2019 insurance stress -test, which was informed in part by the results 

pres ented above. This methodology will also be applied by the 2°Investing Initiative in their 

partnership with the European Insurance and Occupational Pension Authority (EIOPA) in 2019. Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition 

317 

# ANNEX A: Detailed methodology for GHG concentration driven stylized 

# lat e & sudden production curves 

This annex outlines the assumptions used to derive an approximated production curves used 

to illustrate the general methodology of stress testing late & sudden scenarios. 

Production & efficiency: 

• For each sector, the additiona l emissions occurring before the start of the transition under 

a delayed action scenario compared to a smooth transition scenario (date at which the 

transition starts) need to be offset if the Minsky moment is intended to capture a market 

sentiment of actu alize the Paris Agreement ( i.e., limiting global warming by 2 degrees or 

less by the turn of the century). Thus, the timing of the Minsky moment is a key 

independent variable, and markets and portfolio should be tested across a range of time 

horizons. In o ur simulation, we chose to model production out to by 2040, and assumed a 

climate lag of 60 years (the temperature of 2100 is determined by the GHG emitted 60 

years before). 

• How these emissions are offset is dependent on the sector. Generally speaking off setting 

can be achieved through either reducing production, increasing efficiency, or offsetting by 

carbon removal activities will impact the relationship between production and profit. 

Which route emission reduction take is based on the function of each s ector the global 

economy. For example, cement being an essential material to build the infrastructures 

needed for the 10 billion humans expected by 2050, assuming a major drop in production 

would seem unlikely (as illustrative in IAM e.g. the IEA in ETP 20 17), a surge in energy 

efficiency due to sudden R&D efforts seems more realistic (or the development of a 

substitution product, but we didn ’t consider this possibility in the study). 

• The offsetting can either be done at economy level, i.e., considering t he emissions 

occurring in each sector before 2025 in the IEA New Policy Scenario (or any other global 

Business as Usual scenario of this kind) or done at the portfolio level, using tools such as 

the Paris Agreement Capital Transition Assessment (PACTA) Tra nsition Monitor .8 The tool 

quantifies the current exposure of investment portfolios to “climate -relevant ” sectors and 

technologies (Fossil fuels – Oil, coal, natural gas; Power – Coal, gas, renewables; and 

Automotive – Electric vehicles, hybrid vehicles, ICE vehicles) and provides a forward -

looking assessment of its alignment with 2°C scenarios (based on the producti on and 

investment plans of the companies financed by the portfolio). The emissions occurring 

before the start of the transition, which must be offset afterwards, will thus reflect the 

production that is currently funded by the portfolio, and its expected e volutions in the 

next 5 years. That way, the shocks applied to the portfolio are calibrated to its current 

trajectory. 

• The results displayed in this study are based on the “global market ” approach (i.e. , the 

production in each sector before the start of t he transition follows the NPS scenario). 

Figure 19 -1 below illustrate these principles for the coal mining sector:      

> 8See https://www.transitionmonitor.com/ for more details .Chapter 19

318 

Figure 19 -1 Illustrative trajectory of the coal production financed under a delayed 

transition scenario starting in 2025 

Prices and profit margins: 

• Fossil fuel prices under a delayed transition scenario evolve proportionally to demand; 

pr ices for other sectors slowly reach the levels of a “smooth ” transition once the “late & 

sudden ” transition starts. 

• No impact on gross or operating margins is assumed for building material industries (Steel 

& Cement), as the authors didn ’t find any reasonable way to estimate this under a delayed 

transition scenario. The impact that a delayed transition would have on profits for these 

sectors might thus be underestimated. 

• In line with literature, 9 carbon prices are a ssumed to be 1.5 times higher in 2040 under a 

“too late, too sudden ” scenario compared to a “smooth ” transition scenario, to foster 

quicker energy efficiency improvements once the late & sudden transition has started. 

Although the approach developed abo ve represents a valuable first step in the development 

of “too late, too sudden ” transition scenarios, there are several caveats to bear in mind. First, 

the approach overlooks possible interactions between sectors (in reality, emissions may 

decrease less t han needed in an industry and more than needed in another) – although it takes 

into account risk propagation across industries (e.g. an increase in oil prices impacts airlines 

expenses). Second, in the absence of alternative solutions, it features a very s implistic price 

dynamic. Finally, in the absence of alternative solutions, it neglects changes in net margins for 

some sectors.   

> 9See Advance_2020_Med2C ( “smooth” transition scenario) and Advance_2030_Med2C (slightly delayed transition scenario)
> (https://data.ene.iiasa.ac.at/iamc -1.5c -explorer/ )Factoring Transition Risk into Regulatory Stress -Tests for “Late & Sudden” Transition

319 

# Bibliography 

Bank of England. (2016). Stress testing of banks: an introduction. Retrieved from 

https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ -/media/boe/files/quarterly -

bulletin/2016/stress -testing -of -banks -an -introduction.pdf 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A climate stress -

test of the financial system. Nature Clim ate Change, 7 (4), 283 -288. 

Battiston, S., & Monasterolo, I. (2019). A climate risk assessment of sovereign bonds’ 

portfolio. University of Milan Bicocca Department of Economics, Management and 

Statistics Working Paper (420). 

Chenet, H., Thomä, J., Janci, D., Dupre, S., Hubert, R., Robins, N., & Cruickshank, P. (2015). 

Financial risk and the transition to a low -carbon economy. Towards a carbon stress 

testing framework. 

CISL. (2015). Unhedgeable risk .

Delis, M., Greiff, K., & Ongena, S. (2018). Being Strand ed on the Carbon Bubble? Climate 

Policy Risk and the Pricing of Bank Loans. SSRN Electronic Journal .

Dupré, S., Thomä, J., Dejonckheere, S., Fischer, R., Weber, C., Cummis, C., & Srivastava, A. 

(2015). Climate Strategies and Metrics: Exploring Options for Institutional Investors. 

A Joint Report from UNEP -Fi, GHG Protocol, and the, 2 .

Ecofys. (2018). Climate risks of 3 funds of Actiam .

ESRB. (2016). Too Late, Too Sudden: Transition to a Low -carbon Economy and Systemic Risk :

ESRB. 

ESRB. (2018). Adverse macro -financial scenario for the 2018 EU -wide banking sector stress 

test .

FED reserve. (2018). Dodd -Frank Act Stress Test 2018: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology 

and Results .

Gordon, M. J. (1959). Dividends, earnings, and stock prices. The Review of Econ omics and 

Statistics, 41 (2), 99 -105. 

IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. 

Min, H. G. (1999). Determinants of emerging market bond spread: do economic 

fundamentals matter? : The World Bank. 

Poghosyan, T. (2014). Long -run and short -run determinants of sovereign bond yields in 

advanced economies. Economic Systems, 38 (1), 100 -114. 

PRI. (2018). The inevitable policy response: Act now. 

PRI. (2019). Inevitable Policy Response: Policy Forecasts .

Regelink, M., Reinders, H. J., & va n de Wiel, M. V. e. I. (2017).  An exploration of climate -

related risks for the Dutch financial sector .

Röttmer, N., Brunke, J. -C., & Mintenig, J. (2018). Climate scenario analysis: cement’s financial 

performance under 2°c and 2.7°c .

Schoenmaker, D., & van Tilburg, R. (2016).  Financial risks and opportunities in the time of 

climate change. Bruegel Policy Brief 2016(02): 1 -8. 

Tang, D. Y., & Yan, H. (2010). Market conditions, default risk and credit spreads. Journal of 

Banking & Finance, 34 (4), 743 -753. 

Tanthanongsakkun, S., Pitt, D., & Treepongkaruna, S. (2009). A Comparison of Corporate 

Bankruptcy Models in Australia: The Merton vs. Accounting -based Models. Asia -

Pacific journal of risk and insurance, 3 (2). 

Thomä, J., & Dupre, S. (2017). Right Direction , Wrong Equipment: Why Transition Risks do 

not Fit into Regulatory Stress Tests .

Thomä, J., Murray, C., Hayne, M., & Hagedorn, K. (2017). Out of the fog: quantifying the 

alignment of Swiss pension funds and insurances with the Paris Agreement. In: 

Berlin. Chapter 19 

320 

UNEP FI, & Mercer. (2018). Extending Our Horizons: Assessing credit risk and opportunity in a 

changing climate: Outputs of a working group of 16 banks piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations .

Vermeulen, R., Schets, E., Lohuis, M., Kolbl, B., Jansen, D. -J., & Hee ringa, W. (2018). An 

energy transition risk stress test for the financial system of the Netherlands .

Weber, C., Hayne, M., Dupré, S., Thomä, J., & Braschi, T. (2017).  “Asset -level data and 

climate -related financial analysis: A market survey” available at:  https://2degrees -

investing.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/02/Asset -Level -Data -Market -Report.pdf 

(accessed 15 January 2018). 

Zmijewski, M. E. (1984). M ethodological issues related to the estimation of financial distress 

prediction models. Journal of Accounting research , 59 -82. ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

321 

# ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

by 

Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership 1

# Abstract 

Physical risks – such as rising temperatures, flooding, drought, sea level rise and water scarcity 

– are already being felt globally, and the associated fin ancial losses (both insured and 

uninsured) have significantly increased in recent years. The ClimateWise Insurance Advisory 

Council has developed the ClimateWise Physical risk framework (CISL, 2019 ), which 

demonstrates how the risk analysis tools of the in surance industry can inform other parts of 

the financial sector and demonstrate the role of adaptation in mitigating these risks. The 

framework offers real estate investors and lenders a means of understanding the potential 

physical risks of climate change on their portfolios. 

Physical risk exposure is likely to vary geographically both within and between portfolios but 

the impacts are significant across the board. For example, a 4°C warming scenario could see 

average annual losses caused by floods to UK mo rtgages more than double. While insurance 

will play an important role in managing the impact of climate change, the increase in risk could, 

in the most severe cases, make premiums unaffordable. 

Keywords: climate change , physical risk , infrastructure , scena rio analysis , catastrophe 

modelling , risk management , insurance industry , financial sector 

# 1 Introduction 

The changing climate poses new risks and challenges to investors and lenders. While much 

attention has focused on transition risks – the risks posed by rapid decarboni zation of the 

world economy – at present, political agreements to cut emissions have not been matched by 

equivalent action on the ground. Instead, the world is currently on track to see substantial 

climate change throughout the 21st century. The definition of physical risks applied here 

follows CISL (2016) , where physical risks arise from the impact of climatic ( i.e., extremes of 

weather) or geologic ( i.e., seismic) events or widespread changes in ecosystem equilibria, such 

as soil quality or marine ecology, and can be event -driven (‘ acute ’) or longer -term in nature 

(‘ chronic ’). 

Climate change will influence the likelihood and intensity of extreme weather events, which 

threaten the interests of investors and lenders in real estate and infrastr ucture assets in 

particular. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports that climate change       

> 1The authors of the chapter are Dr Bronwyn Claire and Dr Nina Seega from the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability
> Leadership. The Chapter is based on a report authored by the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership. The authors
> would like to thank Kajetan Czyz and Rachel Austin of CISL, Vivid Economics, Sayers and Partners, ETH Zurich, as well as
> the ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council and the Advisory Panel which was established for the project. All queries are
> to be directed to climatewise@cisl .cam.ac.uk. Chapter 20

322 

will result, for example, in increased frequency and intensity of heatwaves; more heavy 

precipitation events, leading to a greater risk of floodin g at the regional scale; and an increased 

frequency and intensity of extreme high sea levels, such as those caused by storm surges ( IPCC, 

2018 )2. The large year -to -year natural climate variability means that, even with further climate 

change, such events w ill not take place every year, even in more extreme scenarios. However, 

early signs of these risks materiali zing can be seen in more frequent heatwaves in most regions, 

a global increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy rainfall events and an increa sed risk 

of drought ( IPCC, 2018 ). These changes pose particular threats to both infrastructure assets –

for which global investment needs may exceed US$90 trillion by 2030 – and residential and 

commercial building stock – which is expected to grow by 13 pe rcent between 2017 and 2026 

(Navigant Research, 2018 ). For financial institutions lending against real estate and 

infrastructure assets, increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events 

might increase the likelihood of defaults due to the increased financial losses borrowers face. 

For investors in real estate and infrastructure assets, such changes might lead to asset 

devaluation and reduced yields. 

Insurance will likely play an important role in helping investors and lenders manage these 

increased risks, but insurance should not be used as a reason to ignore them. Insurance can 

play a key role in helping to manage physical risks, especially of the most extreme events. But 

growing physical risks will also influence the future affordability and availability of insurance 

protection. In their first -ever report on climate change, the UK ’s Bank of England (2015, p. 37) 

noted that “increasing levels of physical risks could present challenges, both to market -based 

risk transfer mechanisms and to t he underlying assumptions behind general insurance 

business models ”. As such, investors and lenders need to be directly empowered to 

understand how these risks might influence them. 

# 2 Overview of the ClimateWise transition risk framework 

ClimateWise 

This uni que framework was developed through the ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council 

and builds on existing work on physical climate change risks to the financial sector. 

ClimateWise is a global network of leading insurers, reinsurers, brokers and industry servi ce 

providers who share a commitment to reduce the impact of climate change on the insurance 

industry and society. In 2016, the ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council was established to 

lead research into ways the insurance industry can support the transiti on to a low carbon 

economy. The Council is formed of a group of C -suite executives from across the ClimateWise 

membership. The development of the ClimateWise Transition risk framework was guided by 

an Advisory panel of representatives of policy and the mar ket. 

Background of the ClimateWise Physical risk framework 

The purpose of the ClimateWise Physical risk framework is to show how investors and lenders 

can make use of insurance industry catastrophe modelling tools and metrics to improve their 

management of the physical risks of climate change, especially by encouraging adaptation 

measures in targeted areas ( CISL, 2019 ). The ClimateWise Physical risk framework shows how 

investors and lenders can use catastrophe modelling tools and associated metrics, refined by 

the insurance industry over decades, to better assess, manage, report , and reduce their 

exposure to physical risks, particularly those from extreme weather events. Catastrophe 

models have long been used by the insurance industry to assess and price ext reme weather 

event risk, and hence help them and their clients manage these risks. Recently, the Geneva  

> 2(IPCC) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2018). Global Warming of 1.5°C. ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework

323 

Association (2018) , a leading international insurance think tank, recommended that climate 

science projections should be used within natural catastrophe models to provide more 

forward -looking forecasts. The framework shows how, in practice, outputs from climate 

models and climate scientists can be used in combination with natural catastrophe models to 

assess risk under future climate scenarios. Used in th is way, the insurance industry ’s

catastrophe models are powerful tools that can be used by investors and lenders within their 

scenario analysis to help quantify the physical risks of climate change, while recogni zing the 

inherent uncertainty surrounding th e future incidence of climate events. 

The framework outlines a four -step process that investors and lenders can follow to use these 

tools, as set out in  Figure 20 -1:

• First, investors and lenders need to collect data on the physical assets (‘ exposure ’) they 

are concerned about. As a minimum, this should include their geographic locations 

and some information on asset class, such as whether they are residential or non -

residential property. The more detailed that property -level information can be – in 

terms of construction type and year, roof type, number of floors, occupancy and 

square footage – the more robust the associated results will be. 

• Second, they need to decide which natural catastrophe model(s) to use for their 

analysis. Several factors will play into this choice. A critical one will be whether the 

modelling will be undertaken in -house or sub -contracted to a commercial model 

vendor. The forme r would require use of an open source model. This may allow for 

more bespoke analysis to be undertaken and provide greater understanding of what 

drives any results, but these models may not have received as much investment and 

will also require reasonable technical skills to be confident that the work is being 

undertaken accurately. The advantages and disadvantages are reverse d for vendor 

models. For models supplied by vendors, the extent and transparency of model 

documentation is another important factor, since this will enable investors and lenders 

to understand and review the assumptions that have been made in the modelling. 

• The third stage involves choosing the climate scenarios to model and defining how 

those climate scenarios might influence the probab ility and severity of extreme 

weather events. In order to account for uncertainty about the extent of global action 

on reducing emissions, scenarios chosen should cover a wide range of plausible 

futures. The scope of potential ranges in temperature increas es, typically expressed in 

terms of temperature increases by 2100 above a preindustrial baseline, might range 

from 1.5°C, the temperature target ‘aimed for ’ in the Paris Agreement, to 4°C or more, 

which broadly reflects the temperature increases that would be expected given the 

current trajectory of emissions. The relationship between these temperature changes 

and the severity and frequency of disaster events within a region should incorporate 

the latest peer -reviewed developments in climate science and ack nowledge/account 

for the uncertainty around these relationships. Some models already include effects 

of climate change on the frequency and intensity of the perils within their models .

Otherwise, collaborations with academics or specialist climate change impact 

modelers may need to be sought out in consultation with the model developer. As 

climate models continue to develop, for example in their geographic fidelity, these 

developments can be incorporated into this stage of the analysis. 

• The final stage is model execution and interpretation of the associated results. 

Catastrophe models can provide a wide range of different results of interest. Two of 

the most common outputs are Average Annual Loss (AAL) – the average losses from Chapter 20 

324 

property damage experienced b y a portfolio per year – and annual probability of 

occurrence – the probability that, over the period of one year, a given asset 

experiences an event of a given magnitude. Any results should be compared against a 

‘present day ’ climate scenario baseline and , where possible, these baseline results 

should be compared with and scrutini zed against historical loss data. Forward -looking 

results should also be benchmarked against those from comparable studies, where 

available. When there is confidence that these re sults are robust, investors and 

lenders then have the option to convert the changes in expected losses into potential 

changes in asset values. They can also use the natural catastrophe model(s) to analy ze

how adaptation measures might reduce losses and ass et value impacts. 

Figure 20 -1 Key steps for investors and lenders to follow in modelling the physical 

risks of climate change 

Source: CISL (2019) 

# 3 Applying catastrophe models to infrastructure 

Catastrophe m odels estimate risks from extreme weather events. Catastrophe models are 

sophisticated computer models used to estimate the risk of physical damage and the financial 

costs of such damage (‘ losses ’) to a geographically specified portfolio of physical assets ,

typically buildings, caused by extreme weather events including tropical cyclones 

(hurricanes/typhoons), earthquakes, hail, winter wind storms, floods , and wild fires. Typically, 

the key output of a natural catastrophe model will be the distribution of p ossible losses, 

expressed in financial terms, to the portfolio. 

Catastrophe models vary in detail but typically share the same key hazard, vulnerability and 

financial modules that are applied to a set of physical assets, referred to as exposures. As 

shown in  Figure 20 -2, these components work in combination to estimate the risk of financial 

losses to a portfolio of exposures. Where information is available, most models can also 

incorporate attributes about building type (modifiers) in relation to the exposures, and details 

on insurance arrangements for the purposes of calculating financial losses. ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

325 

Figure 20 -2 Model of the effects of climate change and adaptation measures on a 

given set of assets (exposures) 

Source: Based on Figure 8 of CISL (2019) 

The minimum data required by investors and lenders for input into catastrophe modelling is a 

set of phy sical assets (‘ exposures ’), their geographic locations and some information on asset 

class, such as whether they are residential or non -residential property. Modern natural 

catastrophe models run at a high spatial resolution and benefit from precise locati on data for 

each of the exposures. Flood models typically have a spatial resolution of between 2 and 50 

mete rs, reflecting the geographic specificity of flood events; other perils might be modelled at 

lower resolutions. Most models require exposure locatio n data to be provided in co -ordinate 

(latitude and longitude) form. Where co -ordinate data is not already available, ‘geocoder ’

software can be used to convert a street -level address to co -ordinates. By looking up the 

address in a database, the geocoder co nverts the address ‘10 Downing Street, London, United 

Kingdom ’ to the co -ordinates 51.5034, 0.1276. Some natural catastrophe models have a 

geocoder built in; where they do not, there are several commercial services available. Since 

addresses are sometimes incomplete or ambiguous, it is often necessary to undertake a 

manual check of the plausibility of geocoder outputs. At minimum, this might involve checking 

that all co -ordinates returned by the geocoder are within the expected country/area. A more 

thorough review would ‘reverse geocode ’ the co -ordinates returned by the geocoder back to 

addresses and make sure these match the original addresses provided. 

The hazard element of a catastrophe model assesses the physical extent and intensity of 

physical perils – for example, hurricane or flood events. In order to provide a comprehensive 

view of future risk, a natural catastrophe model needs to model possible future extreme 

weather events. One method for generating this is to take a catalogue of historical events, and 

make small, plausible modifications to each historical event ’s location or intensity to reflect 

what might happen in the future. At this stage, understanding of the impact of climate change 

on physical perils can be used to make modifications to the p ossible future extreme weather, 

for example, by incorporating any expected increases in intensity. Chapter 20 

326 

Climate models can be used to predict how climate change will influence the likelihood and 

severity of extreme weather events, although modelling some perils still represents a 

challenge. Drawing on evidence from the IPCC ’s Fifth Assessment Report,  Table 20 -1 shows 

how the scientific understanding of the phys ical relationship between climate change and 

perils varies. In general, extreme events related to temperature, such as extreme cold or heat, 

are better understood than complex meteorological phenomena such as storms and cyclones. 

Table 20 -1 The impact of climate change is better understood for some perils than 

for others. 

Likelihood of further 

changes by late 21st 

century 

Region 

Warmer and/or more 

frequent hot days and nights 

over most land areas 

Virtually certain (99 –100%)  Over most land areas 

Increase in precipitation  Very likely (90 –100%) 

Arctic, Northern Europe, 

North America and 

Southern Hemisphere 

Increases in intensity and/or 

duration of drought  Likely (66 –100%)  On a global scale 

Increase in intens e tropical 

cyclone activity 

More likely than not (50 –

100%) 

In the western North Pacific 

(affecting e .g. China, Hong 

Kong, Macau, Japan, Korea, 

Philippines, Taiwan and 

Vietnam) and North 

Atlantic Ocean basins 

(affecting for example the 

Atlantic coast of the United 

States and Central America) 

Increased incidence and/or 

magnitude of extreme high 

sea level 

Ve ry likely (90 –100%)  Global 

Small increases in winter 

wind speed extremes 

(European winter wind 

storms) 

Likelihood not provided 

“Medium confidence ” in 

change 

Central and Northern 

Europe 

Source: IPCC (2013) 

The vulnerability element estimates the physical damage caused by an extreme weather event. 

This normally uses damage curves, which relate the intensity of a hazard at a particular 

location to damage caused to assets at that location. For example, a damage curve for flood 

events describes the damage whi ch would occur to assets at various flood depths. Damage is 

normally expressed in terms of a damage ratio, with a damage ratio of 100 percent indicating 

total destruction of an asset. Damage curves are generated either using observed data from 

historical e vents, or using analytic or experimental estimates. In the latter case, detailed 

characteristics such as building age, structural characteristics , and building occupancy can be 

used to select an appropriate damage curve for a given exposure. Uncertainty ar ound damage 

curves is a major source of uncertainty in natural catastrophe models. ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

327 

The vulnerability element can be used to model impacts of adaptation. Many adaptation 

measures involve physical changes to real estate assets so as to reduce the damage done to 

assets by hazards of given intensities. This, in turn, reduces expected financial losses. Inside 

natural catastrophe models, the effects of this type of adaptation measure can be modelled 

by selecting a damage curve with a lower damage ratio at given intensities. A comparison of 

losses with a ‘baseline ’ and ‘adaptation ’ damage curve provides an estimate of the effect of 

adaptation. 

The financial element transforms physical damage to economic loss. By combining distribution 

of dama ge ratios with input data on replacement costs and any possible insurance contracts, 

the financial implications of the physical damage done by the event can be calculated. In many 

modelling approaches, this process is then repeated many thousands of times to help 

understand different scenarios of future losses. 

Although natural catastrophe models vary in their implementations, they typically produce a 

common set of outputs, including the following: 

• Average Annual Loss (AAL): This expresses the average losse s from property damage 

experienced by a portfolio per year. If insurance is available and priced commensurate 

with risk, the AAL provides a lower -bound estimate of the premium required to insure 

against the risk. For illustration,  Table 20 -2 shows the calculation of AAL over a ten -

year period for two scenarios. In both scenarios, total losses over ten years amount to 

£620 million, yielding an AAL of £62 m illion. However, the AAL metric provides no 

indication of whether losses are expected to be concentrated in a small number of 

years (as per Scenario 2) or spread more evenly through time (as per Scenario 1). 

• Annual probability of occurrence: This measures the probability that, over the period 

of one year, a given asset (exposure) experiences an event of a given magnitude. For 

example, an asset might be at a 1 percent chance of flooding at a depth of one mete r

or more in any given year. 

• Annual exceedance pro bability curve: This shows the probability that any given 

threshold of losses will be exceeded in any given year. For example, the hypothetical 

exceedance probability curve in  Figure 20 -3 shows there is a 1 percent chance of the 

portfolio experiencing a loss of £100 million or higher in any given year. AAL can be 

derived from an exceedance probability curve. 

• Return periods: These are ways of describing th e magnitude of an event. A flood with 

a 100 -year return period has a 1 percent chance of being exceeded by a higher -

magnitude event in any year. Such a flood is expected to occur approximately, but not 

exactly, every 100 years.  Table 20 -3 shows the relationship between return period and 

probability of exceedance at some frequently used values. Chapter 20 

328 

Table 20 -2 Comparison of two scenarios where in both scenarios, the Average 

Annual Loss is £62 million but the pattern of losses in the two scenarios is very 

different 

Year  Scenario 1 loss 

(£ million) 

Scenario 2 loss 

(£ million) 

2001  7 0

2002  0 0

2003  194  620 

2004  125  0

2005  9 0

2006  21  0

2007  0 0

2008  14  0

2009  250  0

2010  0 0

Source: CISL (2019) 

Table 20 -3 Probability losses and return periods 

Probability losses are 

exceeded 

Approximate return 

period 

0.5%  200 

1%  100 

1.3%  75 

2%  50 

5%  20 

10%  10 

20%  5

Source: CISL (2019) ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

329 

Figure 20 -3 Annual exceedance probability 

Source: CISL (2019) 

# 4 Illustrative results 

The following provides an illustrative analysis of 12 real estate asset portfolios, consisting of 

assets in the UK, Europe, North America, South America and Asia. Seven of these portfolios 

consist of UK residential mortgage assets held by large UK retail b anks and building societies, 

whilst five are real estate investment portfolios held by ClimateWise members. The latter 

portfolios mostly comprise offices and shopping cente rs, with assets across Europe, North 

America, South America and Asia. The analysis c ompares present day losses of the portfolios 

from extreme weather events to their expected losses in the 2050s. Financial institutions with 

long -term investments, including banks and building societies providing new 35 -year 

mortgages today, will have expos ure to risks in this time period. 

The results derive from two natural catastrophe models that are characteristic of those used 

in the insurance industry. The application uses CLIMADA ( Aznar Siguan & Bresch, 2019 ), an 

open source model developed by ETH Zuri ch, to explore European winter wind storm and 

tropical cyclone risks. A strong attraction of CLIMADA is that it is an open source model, which 

means that all assumptions behind the model are visible and, with modifications to the source 

code, can be adapte d by advanced users. However, the sophistication of the modelling does 

not match that of the commercial vendors. The application also uses Future Flood Explorer 

(FFE), developed by an international team of academics and experts, to explore UK flood risk. 

The FFE was previously used as part of the 2017 Climate Change Risk Assessment for the UK 

government ’s Committee on Climate Change ( Sayers and Partners, 2015 ). 

The application explores expected losses in the 2050s in two climate change scenarios 

(acknowledg ing that this is just a sample of possible future climate change scenarios): 

• The first scenario is consistent with 4°C of global warming by the end of the century, 

an outcome in line with the warming implied by current trajectories of climate action. 

• The second scenario reflects the possibility that aggressive mitigation action and 

technological innovation leads to rapidly decreasing emissions levels and the global 

temperature rise being limited to 2°C by the end of the century. Chapter 20 

330 

The illustrative analysis u ses results from climate models to map these changes in global 

average temperature increases into expected changes in the frequency and severity of floods 

and storms. It is recogni zed that this is an area subject to ongoing scientific enquiry, with the 

eff ects of climate change better understood for some extreme weather events such as UK 

flood s, those for others such as European wind storms. Furthermore, the changes in these 

events represent just a subset of future climate impacts. 

The results show that, fo r these particular portfolios, climate change could have large impacts 

on the losses that investors and lenders face from floods in the UK and tropical cyclones in 

North America and the Pacific Rim, but that their increases in losses from European winter 

wind storms are likely to be lower. Under a 4°C warming scenario, the modelling suggests the 

AAL caused by UK floods to residential mortgage assets could increase by 130 percent . It also 

suggests a 40 percent increase in the number of residential properties exposed to significant 

flood risk (defined as a 1.3 percent or 1 in 75 annual probability of flooding or above), 

equivalent to 180,000 properties within the portfolios examined. These results are for large, 

geographically well -diversified portfolios; more regionally concentrated lenders may see larger 

increases. For investment portfolios, in a 4°C warming scenario, the increase in AAL from flood 

risk across four UK portfolios is modelled to be 70 percent higher in the 2050s than today. 

Across the two portf olios with assets in North America and the Pacific Rim, the analysis based 

on best evidence suggests that the equivalent expected increase from tropical cyclone risk is 

80 percent . The portfolios examined face much smaller increases in risk from European w inter 

wind storms. 

The analysis also suggests that losses faced by investors and lenders are lower, but still 

substantial, if global efforts to reduce emissions are successful. For the UK residential 

portfolios, AAL from floods would increase by only half the amount of a 4°C scenario, while 

the modelling suggests that the number of properties within the portfolios at risk of significant 

flooding (1.3 percent or 1 in 75 annual probability or above) might only increase by 25 percent .

For investment portfolios in the UK, the increase in AAL is 40 percent , which is similar to the 

potential increase in AAL from tropical cyclone risk ( Table 20 -4). These results reinforce that it 

is paramount for governments, business and society to try and keep warming as low as 

possible, as underlined by the most recent IPCC analysis. 

Table 20 -4 Expected losses for two scenarios 

Peril  Asset type  Risk metric 

2°C warming 

by end of 

century 

4°C warming 

by end of 

century 

UK flood risk  Residential 

mortgages 

% increase in AAL 

by 2050s  61%  130% 

UK flood risk  Investment 

portfolios 

% increase in AAL 

by 2050s  40%  70% 

North America and 

Pacific Rim tropical 

cyclones 

Investment 

portfolios 

% increase in AAL 

by 2050s  43%  80% 

European winter 

wind storms 

Investment 

portfolios 

% increase in AAL 

by 2050s  6.3%  3.6% 

Source: CISL (2019) ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

331 

These findings align with those from earlier studies, including those from the insurance sector. 

For instance, JBA Risk (2018) found a 25 –30 percent increase in AAL for UK residential 

properties in the 2040s, while the UK ’s Climate Cha nge Risk Assessment ( Sayers and Partners, 

2015 ), also using the Future Flood Explorer as in this analysis, found a 30 –62 percent increase 

in AAL in the 2050s for UK residential properties. The smaller increases in AAL found in these 

previous analyses are l ikely to reflect differences in assumptions around community -based 

adaptation and in the portfolios examined, while in the case of the JBA analysis, also 

differences in model set -up and time horizon. Similarly, the relatively modest increases in AAL 

from w ind storms match the findings of research carried out on behalf of the Association of 

British Insurers regarding the effect of climate change on wind storm losses to UK assets 

(Association of British Insurers, 2013 ). The ABI modelling exercise found the AA L from UK wind 

storms was expected to increase 11 percent by the end of the century under a 1.5°C scenario 

and 25 percent by the end of the century under a 4.5°C scenario. It is likely that differences to 

our analysis are largely attributable to the differ ent time horizon and scenarios considered, as 

well as some differences in the model set -up and the underlying climate models used to drive 

the results. 

The potential increases in risk, especially in a 4°C scenario, raise important questions for 

investors, lenders, insurers , and policymakers as to how they can be managed in the most cost -

effective manner. In cases where commercially provided insurance policies are held in relation 

to these perils, policyholders might expect to see, on average, increases in p remiums and 

insurance companies would need to purchase substantially more reinsurance to ensure 

solvency and in line with any increases in modelled uncertainty. For assets that have no 

insurance cover (such as some commercial properties), all of any increa se in risk will be faced 

by investors and/or lenders. This also has important implications for the strategy of 

organi zations set up to help address the insurance protection gap. In the specific case of the 

UK residential mortgage market, this applies parti cularly to Flood Re, whose role is to provide 

an affordable market for home insurance for properties built before 2009 that are at risk of 

flooding ( Flood Re, 2018 ). Flood Re achieves this by offering fixed premiums according to 

council tax banding, with t he funding gap between the premiums it charges and the risk -based 

price for insurance met through a levy imposed on the insurance industry (and, ultimately, its 

policyholders). This analysis suggests its funding gap could increase, reinforcing previous 

con cerns about the sustainability of these arrangements. For example, although a formal 

assessment of when insurance availability for residential properties through normal market 

arrangements may become challenging has not been undertaken, a typical rule of t humb is 

that it can be challenging to provide affordable insurance in cases where the annual probability 

of flooding is 1.3 percent or above. The modelling shows that, in a 4°C warming scenario, by 

the 2050s, the number of residential properties falling in to this category could increase by 40 

percent to 180,000 properties across the portfolios examined. Scaled to the UK mortgage 

portfolio as a whole this could amount to an additional 250,000 properties, and compares with 

approximately 150,000 who were benef iting from the Flood Re scheme during the most 

recently reported financial year ( Flood Re, 2018 ). Moreover, Flood Re is, by statute, to 

transition the UK residential market back to risk -reflective pricing, meaning that after 2039 

premiums and excesses shou ld, as well as being risk -reflective, remain affordable without the 

benefit of the levy: careful investigation will be required of whether and how Flood Re can 

achieve this in light of the projected increased risks arising from climate change. 

In the absen ce of Flood Re or for UK residential properties excluded from Flood Re (those built 

after 2009), the implications for both homeowners and mortgage providers could be more 

profound. It is possible that, in some cases, this increase in risk will mean that bu ildings 

insurance for residential properties may no longer be available for some homes at an 

affordable price (recogni zing that what is seen as an affordable premium can vary by Chapter 20 

332 

household). A lack of access to affordable insurance would have adverse implic ations for 

homeowners living in those properties who may find that their properties suffer significant 

decreases in value, potentially leaving them in negative equity and either unable to sell their 

homes and/or unable to re -mortgage. This could have signi ficant personal costs, as well as 

disrupting the liquidity and efficiency of the housing and mortgage markets. In turn, lenders 

may need to consider the increased risk of mortgage default, which is likely to be 

geographically concentrated, and ensure that their business strategies are robust to this risk. 

A crucial next step from this work should be for national regulators to explore in more detail 

the interlinkages between flood risk, insurance availability and the residential property market 

– with a part icular focus on how these interlinkages could evolve over time. In the UK, this 

would build on the concern expressed by the Bank of England regarding the possible 

crystalli zation of financial risks from greater flood risk to the UK residential mortgage mar ket 

if flood insurance would become unaffordable ( Bank of England, 2018 ). 

While a substantial overall elevation in physical risks is expected in a 4°C scenario, not all 

lenders and investors are likely to be equally exposed. Especially in a 4°C warming scenario, 

the modelling finds significant differences in the risk of differen t portfolios of mortgage and 

investor assets. Under a 4°C warming scenario, the range of increase in expected losses across 

the seven UK residential mortgage portfolios varies between 108 percent and 132 percent . For 

the two portfolios of assets at risk of tropical cyclones in North America and the Pacific Rim, 

the range in the increase in losses is 17 percentage points, with much of this difference driven 

by the location of just a small number of assets. The modelling suggests that the spread in risk 

acros s different portfolios is substantially smaller if emission reductions are successful in 

moving the world onto a 2°C warming trajectory. 

Property -level adaptation measures can materially reduce climate change induced losses, and 

this is most effective when combined with global efforts to reduce emissions. The increase in 

losses identified above assumes relatively limited efforts to adapt to the impacts of climate 

change. In the UK, the modelling suggests that, under a 2°C scenario, around two thirds of the 

additional losses might be offset if half of at -risk households install flood protection measures. 

This includes measures to prevent flood ingress and measures to reduce damage if flood water 

does ingress, such as resilient flooring. Further reductions in losses, and a reduction in the 

number of properties at significant risk of floods (annual probability of flooding above 1.3 

percent ), could be secured by increased community -level flood adaptation measures. The 

analysis of tropical cyclone risk suggests th at, in a 2°C temperature scenario, roof upgrades to 

properties at risk of tropical cyclones might offset around half of the increase in AAL. However, 

adaptation measures offset a smaller proportion of the increases in losses in higher 

temperature scenarios , when extreme weather events are expected to be more severe. In 

other words, rather than considering adaptation as an alternative to efforts to reduce 

emissions, it is best thought as a complement to these efforts. 

There are several reasons why the estima tes of losses by the current framework might 

underestimate the true increase in physical risks faced by investors and lenders. The analysis 

focuses on future changes in the likelihood and intensity of extreme weather events, 

overlooking other chronic chang es or multiple acute events. Also, climate models which drive 

predictions of extreme weather events may also not be capable of capturing tipping points in 

the climate system. The modelled portfolios are large and diverse, while smaller or regionally 

concen trated lenders might have higher risk than these. As well, increased urbani zation and 

demand for new housing might result in new buildings in high -risk locations. Indirect impacts 

from extreme weather events and the financial losses associated with that da mage are 

excluded. Physical damage to assets is also likely to cause business interruption and supply ClimateWise Physical Risk Framework 

333 

chain interruptions, as well as potentially increase rates for labor and materials required to 

repair damage to assets. 

# 5 Conclusions and outlook 

The potent ial increases in risk, especially in a 4°C scenario, raise important questions for 

investors, lenders, insurers and policymakers as to how they can be managed in the most cost -

effective manner. In cases where commercially provided insurance policies are he ld in relation 

to these perils, policyholders might expect to see, on average, increases in premiums and 

insurance companies would need to purchase substantially more reinsurance to ensure 

solvency in line with any increases in modelled uncertainty. For as sets that have no insurance 

cover (such as some commercial properties), all of any increase in risk will be faced by investors 

and/or lenders. This also has important implications for the strategy of organi zations set up to 

help address the insurance prote ction gap. 

A crucial next step from this work should be for national regulators to explore in more detail 

the interlinkages between flood risk, insurance availability and the residential property market 

– with a particular focus on how these interlinkages could evolve over time. While a substantial 

overall elevation in physical risks is expected in a 4°C scenario, not all lenders and investors are 

likely to be equally exposed. The modelling suggests that the spread in risk across different 

portfolios is sub stantially smaller if emission reductions are successful in moving the world 

onto a 2°C warming trajectory. Property -level adaptation measures can materially reduce 

climate change induced losses, and this is most effective when combined with global efforts 

to reduce emissions. 

There is a powerful opportunity for investors, lenders, the insurance industry and policymakers 

to target the uptake of adaptation measures in the most beneficial areas. Although it allows 

for rapid repricing of risk, the short time h orizons created by the insurance industry ’s practice 

of one -year insurance contracts limits the ability for insurers to incentivi ze adaptation 

measures. However, investors and lenders, combined with policymakers, may find it easier to 

take a longer -term pe rspective. They could work in concert with insurers to encourage the 

uptake of adaptation measures, for instance, by making both loans and insurance contingent 

on the installation of relevant adaptation measures. These efforts could help overcome ‘first -

mo ver risks ’ whereby households may be unwilling to introduce adaptation measures that 

similar households do not have, for fear that their abnormality, and the signal that the 

property may be exposed to physical risks, might reduce the value of the property. A further 

area to explore is the role of adaptation at the municipal level to demonstrate the potential 

value of municipal adaptation measures and the implications for the availability and design of 

insurance products. Chapter 20 

334 

# Bibliography 

Association of Britis h Insurers. (2013). Revised Statement of Principles on the Provision of 

Flood Insurance. 55 -60. 

Aznar Siguan, G., & Bresch, D. N. (2019). CLIMADA v1: a global weather and climate risk 

assessment platform. Geoscientific Model Development, 12 , 3085 -3097. 

Bank of England. (2015). The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector – A

Climate Change Adaptation Report by the Prudential Regulation Authority. 

Prudential Regulation Authority. 

Bank of England. (2018). Transition in thinking: The impact of cli mate change on the UK 

banking sector s

CISL. (2016). Environmental risk analysis by financial institutions: a review of global practice. 

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership .

CISL. (2019). Physical risk framework: Understanding the impacts of climate change on real 

estate lending and investment portfolios. the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability 

Leadership. 

Flood Re. (2018). Annual Report and Financial Statements. 

Geneva Association. (2018). Managing Physical Climate Risk: Leveraging Innovations in 

Catastrophe Risk Modelling: Research Brief .

IPCC. (2013). Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Contribution of working group 

I to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, 

1535 .

IPC C. (2018). Global Warming of 1.5◦C - Summary for Policymakers. . Technical Report 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 

JBA Risk. (2018). New UK Climate Change Model. Retrieved from 

https://www.jbarisk.com/news -blogs/new -uk -climate -change -flood -model/ 

Navigant Research. (2018). Global Building Stock Database .

Sayers and Partners. (2015). Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Projections of future 

flood risk in the UK. Pages 125. Sayers and Partners LLP report for the Committee on 

Climate Change. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

335 

# ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

By 

Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership 1

# Abstract 

Global efforts to tackle climate change by reducing carbon emissions will result in a transition 

to a low carbon economy. This transition, already underway, presents both risks and 

opportunities for the financial sector. The ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council has 

developed the ClimateWise Transition risk framework ( CISL, 2019 ), an open -source model 

which explores how to quantify these risks and opportunities within infrastructure investment 

portfolios. 

The framework is set out in three steps, which ca n be used independently or combined to 

explore transition risks and opportunities. Specifically, the framework is designed to help 

investors 1) to assess the breadth of asset types exposed to transition risk at portfolio level 

(across different subsectors, regions , and timeframes ; 2) to d efine the potential financial 

impact of the low carbon transition down to asset level ; and 3) to i ncorporate transition 

impacts into asset financial models. 

Each of the three steps highlights practical actions investors mig ht take in order to manage 

risks and capture opportunities. The framework applies this analysis to an array of global 

infrastructure asset types. 

Keywords : climate change , transition risk , infrastructure , scenario analysis , catastrophe 

modelling , risk mana gement , insurance industry , financial sector 

# 1 Introduction 

The commitment to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C 

above pre -industrial levels lies at the heart of Paris Agreement ( United Nations, 2016 ). 

Achieving that object ive will require a significant change in global energy consumption across 

all sectors. This brings material financial implications for companies, governments , and the 

wider global economy. 

In particular, markets are required to reallocate global capital i n line with a pathway of low 

greenhouse gas emissions and climate -resilient development ( United Nations, 2016 ). In order 

to limit global warming to below 2°C, the remaining global carbon budget must remain below 

1,000 GtCO2 ( World Resources Institute, 2014 ). However, the carbon potential of the earth ’s

known fossil fuel reserves is more than 2,860 Gt CO 2. Consequently, if global action on climate 

policy accelerates, or the target of 2°C is enforced, many carbon intensive reserves will become 

unburnable, wit h implications for the infrastructure that serves them. Under current estimates,      

> 1The authors of the chapter are Dr Bronwyn Claire and Dr Nina Seega from the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability
> Leadership. The Chapter is based on a repo rt authored by the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership. The authors
> would like to thank Kajetan Czyz and Rachel Austin of CISL, ERM , as well as the ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council
> and the Advisory Panel which was established for the pr oject. All queries are to be directed to climatewise@cisl.cam.ac.uk. Chapter 21

336 

this could cut the revenues of upstream oil and gas companies by US$20 trillion, and coal 

companies ’ revenues by US$5 trillion ( The CO -Firm & Kepler Cheuvreux, 2014 ). This wil l result 

in a considerable knock -on impact along the value chain, ranging from transportation to 

manufacturing and chemicals to power. 

# 2 Overview of the ClimateWise transition risk framework 

ClimateWise 

ClimateWise is a global network of leading insurers, r einsurers, brokers and industry service 

providers who share a commitment to reduce the impact of climate change on the insurance 

industry and society. In 2016, the ClimateWise Insurance Advisory Council was established to 

lead research on transition risk m anagement in insurance industry. The Advisory Council is 

formed of a group of C -suite executives from across the ClimateWise membership. The 

development of the ClimateWise Transition risk framework was guided by an Advisory panel 

of representatives of poli cy and the market. 

Background of the framework 

The ClimateWise Transition risk framework aligns with recommendations from the Task Force 

on Climate -related Financial Disclosures ( TCFD, 2017 ). The ClimateWise Transition risk 

framework ( CISL, 2019 ) provides an open -source, step -by -step guide that captures risks and 

opportunities emerging from the low carbon transition to infrastructure investments ( Figure 

21 -1). The definition of transition risks applied here follows CISL (2016) , where transition risks 

arise from efforts to address climate change, including but not limited to abrupt or disorderly 

introduction of public policies, technological changes, invest or sentiment and disruptive 

business model innovation. The framework is intended to provide real and practical value for 

chief investment officers (CIOs), asset managers, regulators and the wider financial community. 

The objectives of the framework are to :

1. provide a structural framework to understand and measure financial implications of 

transition risks with the focus on infrastructure assets ;

2. identify scenarios and time horizons in which exposure to low carbon transition risks 

will materialized ;

3. demonstr ate a transparent, adaptable and robust methodology for assessing 

transition risks .

Investors can use the framework in multiple ways. The framework can serve as a basis for a 

high -level assessment of risk exposure across their portfolios. Alternatively, i nvestors can use 

the framework to complete a deep -dive into a particular sector. Finally, investors can 

incorporate the quantifiable impacts of transition risks into their own financial models. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

337 

Figure 21 -1 Cl imateWise Transition risk framework 

Source: CISL (2019) 

Assessing risk exposure of infrastructure investments 

Across the global investment community, investors hold a wide variety of infrastructure 

portfolios. This results in a range of diverse needs to manage the exposure of portfolios to the 

risks and opportunities presented by a low carbon transition. This framework is adaptable and 

therefore accommodates the diversity of investors ’ needs. 

Financial driver analysis 

At the core of the framework is the analysis of the financial drivers of transition risks. It allows 

users to assess financial impacts from different transition scenarios and across a range of time 

horizons. For each asset type, the financial cost and reve nue drivers (e.g. typical inputs for the 

financial model of that asset type) are identified and assessed for any potential impact from 

transition risks. The framework can also be used as a starting point for building customised 

scenarios by allowing users to sense check the underpinning financial drivers within the low 

carbon scenarios and tailor these in line with in -house views on the direction and speed of the 

transition. 

Each step of the framework can be used independently to inform various stages of ri sk 

mitigation and investment strategy. If all three steps are completed, the framework can 

provide a more thorough assessment and measurement of financial exposure to transition risk: 

Step 1 – Portfolio risk and opportunity exposure 

Step 1 of the framewor k enables investors and regulators to quickly identify where there could 

be exposure to material financial risks or opportunities, across a large portfolio of assets. This 

consists of applying the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix, a tool developed to qu antify the Chapter 21 

338 

transition impact on asset financial drivers. The matrix is also used as a starting point for Steps 

2 and 3 of the framework to define the potential transition impact at an asset specific level 

and to incorporate asset -specific financial drivers into a financial model. 2

The process followed to leverage and adapt the matrix is summarised as follows: 

• Set the scope and select scenarios: scenarios provide plausible alternative views of how 

the future could evolve – in this instance, the transition to a low carbon economy. The 

scenarios are not a ‘what if ’ exercise for one uncertainty, and neither do they assess 

outcome probability. But rather, they provide a holistic view of potential risk impacts on 

future investments in infrastructure. A variety of transition risk factors (as defined by TCFD 

(2017) ) are considered, including market and technology shifts, regulatory and policy 

changes, reputational impacts and investor sentiment. Scenarios can be developed either 

in -house or in leveraging publicly ref erenced scenarios. The latter provides greater 

transparency to investor stakeholders and potential for shareholder disclosure, and is 

therefore recommended in the TCFD guidelines. 

• Identify financial drivers: the next stage is to identify which revenue and cost drivers could 

be materially impacted by TCFD -defined transition risks. For each asset type, financial cost 

and revenue drivers are first identified based on typical inputs for a financial model of 

that asset type; and where transition risks could sign ificantly impact future asset revenues 

and costs. Transition risks have been defined in line with the TCFD transition risk 

categories: market and technology shifts, emerging policy and legal requirements, 

mounting reputational pressures and investor sentim ent. The impacts on the financial 

drivers are assessed by comparing the trajectory of a business -as -usual baseline to the 

transition scenarios. 

• Assess financial drivers: for the identified financial drivers, next analyse the change in 

trajectory between bu siness -as -usual baseline and a low carbon transition scenario. Then 

assess the potential impact on each asset type ’s financial driver (e.g. one revenue driver 

for a coal -fired power plant is plant utilisation) by calculating the difference in the 

trajector y between a business -as -usual baseline and the low carbon transition scenarios 

using the scenario indicators and data sets. The potential impact is then defined against 

the scale of positive/negative impact on each financial driver, based on changes to the 

scenario indicator, and assigned a risk weighting on the estimated relative contribution of 

each financial driver to the financial performance of each asset type. 

• Estimate impact on asset type: finally , the potential impact of each financial driver on 

ass et financial performance is weighted. This means classifying the overall exposure from 

transition risks and opportunities on the asset financial performance, based on 

cumulative net impact of the drivers associated with each asset type, for each region, 

sc enario , and timeline. 

Finally use the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix to determine which asset types within the 

investor portfolio are likely to be exposed to the highest degree of transition risk and/or 

opportunity, and identify the assets from the po rtfolio that are highlighted as having high 

financial risk or opportunity accounting for transition risks and material value in the portfolio. 

The results can be used to: (1) inform future portfolio investment strategy – including   

> 2See the www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/transition -risk , provided with open -source access to all investor practitioners. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework

339 

allocation of funds or di vestments, and (2) select assets for more granular assessment in Steps 

2 and 3 of the framework. 

Step 2 – Asset impact identification 

Transition risks vary within asset types, down to an asset -specific level due to an asset ’s specific 

location, competitive positioning, carbon intensity and exposure to low carbon technologies. 

The Asset Impact Identification Methodology provides asset managers and owners with an 

approach to define financial impact on an asset and to identify options to improve asset 

resilien ce. This step requires additional resources for the more granular analysis but is 

particularly useful for highly exposed assets or for direct application to a smaller, less -

diversified investment portfolio. Risks vary considerably between assets of the sam e type, 

depending on their geography, carbon intensity, technology (e.g. solar versus wind), and 

competitive positioning in the local market. Therefore, investors gain significant benefit in 

conducting asset -level specific analysis. 

Firstly, identify the s pecific assets from the portfolio for assessment based on having high risk 

or opportunity, and/or making up a significant part of the portfolio in terms of financial value. 

The methodology outlined in Step 1 is reapplied to assess the impact on financial d rivers for 

the specific asset, taking into account particularly the: 

• local geography (e.g. country, or state/province) 

• asset carbon intensity (particularly for asset types where the matrix highlights carbon 

reduction as a key factor) 

• technological factors that may come into play (e.g. solar versus wind in the 

renewable sector) 

• competitive positioning in the market (e.g. lowest cost provider, government -

regulated asset) 

Where available for the specific assets, consider publicly referenced scenarios that can provide 

more asset -specific insights to analyses potential impact on the financial drivers. For instance, 

if the asset is in the UK power sector, the UK National Grid and UK Fifth Carbon Budget 

scenarios could be applied – considering technology -driven and specific government policy 

scenarios. Once this is complete, the user can identify which financial cost and revenue drivers 

for the asset could be most financially impacted. Referencing the key underlying factors from 

the selected scenario data sets, the user can use this insight to inform investment options to 

improve asset resilience or improve portfolio management processes to monitor for emerging 

risks and opportunities. 

Step 3 – Financial modelling analysis 

In Step 3, the asset impact assessment is us ed to build risk and contingency scenarios within 

in -house asset financial models. This will enable stress testing and opportunity identification 

through quantifying the potential financial impact from transition risks directly within financial 

models. Inv estors are then able to assess transition risk drivers on asset financial performance, 

helping to identify investment options for improving asset resilience or for an exit strategy, as 

well as supporting delivery of the TCFD recommendations. The portfolio or lending manager 

can then use the matrix to update their valuation models (e.g. net present value or discounted 

cashflow models) by inputting the estimated scale of the transition risk driver into their models. Chapter 21 

340 

For example, they could increase the expect ed revenues from their gas distribution network 

by X percent by 2030 in a low carbon scenario where a swifter shift to gas as a bridge fuel is 

likely to occur. 

The potential risk impact on each financial driver in a low carbon transition scenario can be 

estimated on an annual basis, referring to the methodology provided in the Infrastructure Risk 

Exposure Matrix and refined where possible to an asset -specific level based on the Asset 

Impact Identification Methodology. Leveraging the methodology provided an d scenario data 

sets, investor practitioners can incorporate the financial drivers most materially impacted by 

the transition scenarios directly into their own financial models. 

Once the financial drivers are incorporated into the model, a key output is th e ability to assess 

the financial materiality of transition risks (and opportunities) for a specific asset. Asset 

managers and owners could then assess how the low carbon transition could impact a variety 

of the asset ’s financial metrics; and leverage the work to consider exit strategies where risk is 

high or develop investment options to improve asset resilience. 

Baselines and sources 

Low carbon transition scenarios: the key enabler 

The framework leverages a scenario -based approach, as introduced by the T CFD. This helps to 

assess the potential financial impacts transition risk may have for an asset ’s financial drivers 

and future financial performance. Companies typically use scenarios to test a variety of 

alternative views of the market. This ensures a rob ust future investment strategy. These 

scenarios provide plausible alternative views on how the transition to a lower carbon economy 

could evolve over time, including a more rapid, disorderly transition. 

Aligned with the TCFD recommendations, the framework relies on scenario data sets to assess 

potential impacts from the low carbon transition. While the framework is adaptable to a 

variety of scenarios being applied, the approach is demonstrated with scenarios from the 

International Energy Agency (IEA). This is due to their transparency as a publicly referenced 

source, as well as a potential emerging benchmark for investors and the TCFD. Further, the IEA 

scenarios provide a holistic view on global market demand, supply, prices and technology 

shifts across the broad range of energy -intensive sectors. 

While a variety of transition scenarios could be applied to the framework to assess financial 

impacts, the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix tool uses the Nationally Determined 

Contributions (NDCs) submitted at C OP 21 in 2015 (which currently falls short of the Paris 

Agreement ’s ambition) and the 2°C consistent scenarios from the IEA ’s World Energy Model. 

This provides a range of plausible climate outcomes aligned with the signatory country 

governments ’ current ND Cs submitted at COP21, as well as the Paris Agreement ’s ultimate 

target. 

Where required, any gaps in the scenario data sets have been supplemented with other 

publicly referenced sources. This includes the World Bank and government policy -driven 

scenarios. 

Some investors may also choose to stress test against a 1.5°C scenario to ensure the robustness 

of their portfolios. They may also consider alternative pathways to a 2°C scenario which focus 

on specific technological advances (e.g. energy storage, carbon capture and storage) rather 

than policy changes or carbon taxes. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

341 

Time frames 

Investment time frames typically vary: 5 years for banks, 10 to 15 years for infrastructure 

investment companies, 20 years or more for governments, depending on asset life. While the 

framework can be adapted to cover any year (as scenario data sets typically cover a year -by -

year basis), the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix focuses on 2020, 2030 and 2040 to cover 

as broad a range of investment horizons as possible. 

Infrastructur e asset types 

A variety of asset types were selected to demonstrate the breadth of potential transition risks. 

Selected sectors were chosen based on primary and secondary research on key infrastructure 

investments across Organisation for Economic Co -operat ion and Development (OECD) and 

non -OECD economies. Asset types were split into subcategories, to untangle all sector -specific 

transition risk issues. For instance, power assets were divided into sub -categories from coal to 

renewable power generation: 

• Power Assets – Coal power plants, Gas power plants, Nuclear power plants, 

Renewables (utility scale) 

• Fuel Infrastructure – Oil pipelines & midstream infrastructure, Gas pipelines & 

midstream infrastructure 

• Transport – Rail networks, Airports, Toll roads, Ports 

• Social – Public buildings 

• Water – Water utilities 

• Telecommunications – Telecommunications infrastructure 

Geographies: The US, EU and India 

Geographies were chosen to illustrate how transition risks could vary in different parts of the 

world. This ensures r elevancy for all investment portfolios. The geographies chosen focused 

on: (1) governments with an interest in infrastructure aimed at supporting economic growth; 

(2) countries that are amenable to foreign investment and (3) countries offering substantial 

investment potential. Two OECD markets and one non -OECD market were selected: the US, 

EU and India. These geographies cover three of the largest markets in the world. Each varies 

greatly from the other in how the low carbon transition will take hold (e.g. US shale gas 

displacing coal -fired generation, the broad uptake of renewables in the EU and India ’s

conundrum of coal versus solar). 

# 3 Illustrative results 

The practicality and robustness of the framework has been validated by applying it to three 

separate c ase studies based on investors ’ real -life portfolios – including two of the world ’s

largest insurance companies and one of the global top five investors in infrastructure. 

Examples for Step 1 portfolio risks and opportunities exposure results, Step 2 asset impact 

identification results for a UK airport and Step 3 financial modelling analysis results for a 

German gas distribution pipeline are presented in the following. Chapter 21 

342 

Step 1: Portfolio risk and opportunity exposure 

Step 1 allows investors to quickly identi fy the material financial impacts from transition risks 

across a large portfolio, by applying the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix ( Figure 21 -2). This 

tool helps to assess potential exposure to transition risks across a breadth of asset types, 

geographies, climate scenarios and time frames. The Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix 

prov ides insights on the infrastructure asset types most exposed to the low carbon transition: 

• The most significant risk is coal -fired power generation globally and oil & gas 

infrastructure in the US and EU. These risks are more pronounced in the 2°C scenario 

compared to the Paris Agreement (NDC) scenario. 

• There is minimal risk associated with gas -fired power generation in India, as well as 

globally in telecommunications, ports and water utilities (excluding physical climate 

change risk). 

• The greatest opportuni ties exist in the renewables sector globally, and to a lesser 

extent in mass transit. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

343 

Figure 21 -2 Summary of the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix for the 

infrastructure asset types considered 

Source: CI SL (2019) 

An investor would use the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix to determine which asset types 

within the investor portfolio are likely to be exposed to the highest degree of transition risk 

and/or opportunity. Overlaying the matrix with a company ’s portfolio of assets (risk level and 

asset value) shows how the potential risk and/or opportunity exposures could significantly 

increase through time and with the pace of change in a low carbon transition scenario (as seen 

in  Figure 21 -3 below). Chapter 21 

344 

Figure 21 -3 Example of an investment portfolio facilitating analysis of exposure to 

transition risks and opportunities across infrastructure asset types 

Source: CISL (2019) 

Identifying the assets in the portfolio that are highlighted as facing high financial risk or 

opportunity due to transition risks, the results can be used to: (1) inform a future portfolio 

investment strategy – including allocation of funds or divestments – and (2) select assets for 

more granular assessment in Steps 2 and 3 of the framework. 

Step 2: Asset impact identification 

Step 2 allows investors to assess the financial impact from the low carbon transition at an 

asset -by -asset level, which provides ins ights on ways to improve asset resilience. Risks vary 

considerably between assets of the same type, depending on their geography, carbon intensity, 

technology and competitive positioning in the local market. Therefore, investors gain 

significant benefit in conducting an asset -level specific analysis. 

Depending on an investor ’s portfolio size and risk appetite, the Asset Impact Identification 

Methodology can be re -applied asset -by -asset to an entire portfolio, or to the most exposed 

assets identified by over laying the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix. Additionally, stress 

testing of the portfolio under different time frames and scenarios will produce a more holistic 

understanding of transition risk and opportunity. For example, using asset -specific data, a gas 

distribution business in Germany was found to have a medium financial risk in 2030 and low 

risk in 2040 under the Paris Agreement (NDC) scenario, but a low risk in 2030 and medium risk 

in 2040 under the 2°C scenario – these were driven by shifts in th e local market from coal to 

renewables. 

Leveraging the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix and the Asset Impact Identification 

Methodology, investors can identify how a specific asset, and its cost and revenue drivers, 

could be impacted by transition risk (or opportunity). While an asset may be identified as 

having high exposure due to the sector or geography it operates in, it could be impacted in 

different ways due to the asset ’s specific location. 

Take for example an airport in Europe ( Table 21 -1 and  Table 21 -2). If the generic scenario shows 

a fall i n aviation demand in the EU driven by an uptake in high -speed electric rail infrastructure, 

then an airport could diversify more into long -haul versus short -haul flights (with the latter ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

345 

more risk exposed). Alternatively, an airport ’s competitive positioni ng could drive a gain in 

demand, as other airports more focused on short -haul flights are potentially driven to closure. 

Table 21 -1 Example of impact assessment of financial drivers for a specific airport in 

the UK compared to generic EU airport 

Source: CISL (2019) 

Table 21 -2 Example of investment strategy implications from impact assessment for 

a specific airport in the UK compared to generic EU airport 

Source: CISL (2019) Chapter 21 

346 

Step 3: Financial modelling analysis 

Step 3 allows investors to incorporate the potential impacts of transition risk directly into their 

own financial models. Using such a granular approach to defining asset impact enables 

investors to develop an in -house view based on their opinion of the probabilities linked to the 

key transition drivers outlined in the framework. This is done by integrating the financial 

drivers identified in Steps 1 and 2 into investors ’ in -house financial models. R eferring to the 

relevant scenario data sets, the potential impact on asset revenue and costs can be quantified. 

Leveraging this analysis, asset managers and owners can: 

• evaluate investment profiles required under different scenarios; 

• determine impacts on key revenue and cost drivers under different scenarios, with the 

resulting impact on cash flow, valuation, return on equity and other metrics as required; 

• explore investment options to improve asset resilience or exit strategies. 

In this instance, a gas di stribution company in Germany is less impacted by the low carbon 

transition than the rest of the EU, thus altering the risk profile for the asset. The Infrastructure 

Risk Exposure Matrix ( Table 21 -3) indicates a risk to gas demand in the EU, with a potential 

decline of more than 25 percent by the early 2030s compared with the base case, according 

to the IEA ’s 2°C scenario. Assuming a direct relationship be tween demand and asset utilisation, 

this suggests declining asset revenues. However, German gas demand will fall at a slower pace 

than the rest of the EU, as a substantial coal market is still being phased out in the near term. 

Thus, the impact in Germany is lower than in the rest of the EU, due to local market conditions 

and government policies on specific assets. 

Table 21 -3 Example of an impact assessment of financial drivers for a gas 

distribution pipeline i n Germany 

An asset manager or owner investing in this gas distribution company, could quantify the 

potential financial impact at an asset level by incorporating the outputs of the Infrastructure 

Risk Exposure Matrix or Asset Impact Identification Methodology in thei r own financial models. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

347 

The financial drivers affected by the low carbon transition, specific to the gas distribution 

company, are listed in the Infrastructure Risk Exposure Matrix ( Table 21 -4). 

Table 21 -4 Example of the impact on asset financial drivers is determined using 

scenarios 

Taking the approach outlined above, the outputs and the suggested scenario data sets, asset 

managers can interpolate potential changes in revenue and cost ( Table 21 -4), incorporate 

them into an asset financial model and quantif y the potential impact on the value or returns 

of the asset ( Table 21 -5). Accounting for potential increases in costs and a decline in asset 

utilisation , financial modelling indicates that earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) for the 

specific asset could fall by more than 70 percent against the base case, under a 2°C scenario 

(Figure 21 -4 and  Figure 21 -5). 

Table 21 -5 Interpolation of financial drivers into the asset financial model Chapter 21 

348 

Figure 21 -4 Example of transition risk effects on asset returns and costs 

Figure 21 -5 Example of transition risk effects on asset net present values 

Inform investment strategy and risk management 

The framework has been developed to empower investors to take practical actions to mitigate 

their exposure to transition risks, capture opportun ities and disclose their exposure to key 

stakeholders. Across the three case studies, each step of the framework was applied to inform 

investment strategy and risk management. Insights were provided on how the framework 

could inform investment decisions an d guide strategic responses to transition risks. 

Take for instance the EU gas distribution company case study: 

• Step 1 identified this asset as one of the more exposed assets in the investor ’s portfolio 

in 2040 – highlighting options for specific risk moni toring as part of the portfolio 

investment strategy. 

• Step 2 defined the impact of transition risk on the asset ’s key revenue and cost drivers. 

This included a fall in pipeline utilisation, and a rise in capital and operation expenditure 

due to emission re duction and carbon pricing – and options for asset managers and 

owners to improve the asset ’s resilience to transition risk. 

• Step 3 integrated the analysis through a financial model to determine the impact on the 

asset ’s financial performance in line with the Paris Agreement (NDCs) and 2°C scenario –

and explored investment options to improve asset resilience. ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework 

349 

# 4 Conclusion and outlook 

The ClimateWise Transition Risk Framework can support investors and regulators to assess the 

financial impact of transition ri sks. It enables a quantification of potential impacts, as called 

for by the TCFD. It enhances investors ’ and regulators ’ ability to manage risk and capture 

opportunity. Transition risk could increase significantly by 2030. The framework demonstrates 

that t he low carbon transition could financially impact a variety of infrastructure asset types. 

However, it also unpacks transition risk according to sector, geography , and time horizon. 

Investors and regulators can enhance their understanding of how the financ ial performance 

of their infrastructure portfolios and assets could be affected. The framework provides them 

with the ability to: 

• assess portfolios for risk and opportunity exposure ;

• define potential financial impact down to an asset -specific level ;

• incorporate transition risk directly into asset managers ’ and owners ’ own financial models. 

Across the global investment community, investors hold a variety of infrastructure portfolios, 

and therefore, have a range of diverse needs to manage exposure to tr ansition risk. The 

framework has been designed to allow for this variation in investors ’ needs, by providing an 

open -source and adaptable methodology. CIOs, asset managers and owners, and the wider 

financial community can take practical actions to mitigate transition risks, capture transition 

opportunities and communicate their strategic response plans to key stakeholders. Each step 

of the framework provides opportunities to inform investment strategies from a large portfolio 

down to asset -specific levels. Likewise, this methodology can be leveraged by regulators to 

inform future risk mitigation approaches and policies. The framework has been developed to 

empower investors and deliver real value. 

Further pilot testing of the framework is being undertaken to gather insights as to how it could 

be improved. Feedback from this process will be pooled and used to produce a second version 

of the framework. While the scope of the initial project was constrained, the aim was to 

demonstrate the robustness of the frame work ’s approach and its potential wider application 

using infrastructure assets worldwide as a case study. As part of a next phase of work, it would 

be beneficial to expand coverage to more geographies and asset types. Significant differences 

can exist wit hin asset types, and across national boundaries, for example for renewable power 

in different European countries. Asset types not yet covered include district heating systems 

and electricity transmission infrastructure. 

In terms of future development, the framework application in this report focuses on 

infrastructure, but could equally be adapted to any type of asset and serve as a tool for a broad 

range of investors. The approach could also be expanded to wider applications across the 

financial community, incorporating physical risks and a variety of low carbon transition 

scenarios. In line with TCFD recommendations, investors may wish to adapt this framework 

and embed it in the organisation ’s risk management processes, metrics and targets, and 

governance f ramework. Chapter 21 

350 

# Bibliography 

CISL. (2016). Environmental risk analysis by financial institutions: a review of global practice .

CISL. (2019). Transition risk framework: Managing the impacts of the low carbon transition 

on infrastructure investments .

TCFD. (2017). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures .

The CO -Firm, & Kepler Cheuvreux. (2014). Stranded assets, fossilized revenues .

United Nations. (2016). Paris Agreement: Article 2. 

World Resources Institute. (2014). The Carbon Budget [Infographic]. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

351 

# MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

By 

MSCI ESG Research LLC 1

# Abs tract 

The Climate Value -at -Risk (Climate VaR ) metric offered by MSCI ESG Research provides a 

forward -looking and returns -based measure of climate -related risks for financial institutions. 

The methodology is designed to closely align with the Task Force on Climate -related Financial 

Disclosures (TCFD) recommendations for conducting scenario analysis on investment 

portfolios. Climate VaR includes both low -carbon transition and physical climate -modelling 

methodologies. Both methodologies use top -down and bottom -up modelling techniques. All 

Climate VaR me trics are quantitative, forward -looking and focused on either the risks or 

opportunities that climate change may pose to a company ’s securities due to low -carbon 

transition or physical effects of climate change. The primary applications of Climate VaR 

incl ude engagement, investment decision -making, risk analysis, monitoring and compliance, 

and TCFD reporting. 

Keyword s: climate VaR, low -carbon transition, physical climate risks, Task Force on Climate -

related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), engagement, investme nt decision -making, risk analysis, 

monitoring and compliance 

# 1 Introduction 

MSCI ESG Research firmly believes that climate change presents clear and pressing risks and 

opportunities to financial markets . 2 In addition to risks to livelihood from increasing 

te mperatures and rising oceans, climate change also highlights the economic and investment 

risks and opportunities associated with the world ’s transition to a low -carbon economy. An 

extensive body of scientific evidence has established that man -made factors are driving 

climate change on our planet. Citizens are demanding action from governments, companies 

and investors, because humans face a catastrophic future unless remedial actions are taken 

swiftly. Investors everywhere need to incorporate this new realit y into their investment 

practices. 

To address these needs, our Climate Value -at -Risk (Climate VaR) metric provides a forward -

looking and returns -based impact metric for financial institutions. This metric was developed 

using an integrated approach, incorpo rating the latest academic findings from climate science 

as well as input from the financial services industry. 3 Climate VaR can be used to inform               

> 1This chapter is written by Josip Spec ,email: josip.spec@msci.com ;Bruno Rauis ,email: bruno.rauis@msci.com ;and David
> Lunsford ,email: david.lunsford@msci.com .
> 2For more information, see The MSCI Principles of Sustainable Investing, www.msci.com/esg -investing
> 3In 2019, Carbon Delta (an MSCI company) together with twenty institutional investors and UNEP FI piloted a metric for
> determining the value at risk for equity, bond, and real estate portfolios. https ://www.unepfi.org/investment/tcfd/

Chapter 22 

352 

investors on appropriate action with regards to climate related investment risks, e.g., whether 

to diversify, divest, or engage. 

As extreme weather events manifest themselves more frequently and intensely, we have seen 

the investment industry undergo a sea change. 4 Policy makers around the world have also 

begun to forge robust and decisive climate -change regulat ions. 5 Evaluating companies ’ climate 

change resilience has become a preeminent investment issue. 

Broadly speaking, there is growing evidence that tangible actions are being taken. More 

companies have disclosed the carbon -intensities of their operations, 6 more shareholder 

resolutions have urged company management to address climate change -related issues and 

investor pledges, 7 and widely publicized divestments have redirected money to more 

environmentally benign assets. 8

We believe that readying a business mo del for a decarbonized future goes beyond reporting 

and marketing in response to green initiatives; it requires a fundamental transition. Against 

this background, identifying business models with resilience to the low -carbon transition and 

physical climate risks associated with climate change has emerged as a financial need. By 

providing financial institutions with a climate finance metric that helps distinguish assets 

based on how much climate risk they are exposed to, we seek to support the transition to a

low -carbon economy. A portfolio that is effectively resilient to climate change should not see 

its value fluctuate significantly from either the physical changes associated with climate 

change or when action is taken to prevent damaging climate change f rom occurring. 

# 2 Purpose 

Climate Value -at -Risk is designed to provide a forward -looking and return -based valuation 

assessment to measure climate -related risks and opportunities in an investment portfolio . The 

overall methodology of Climate VaR is designed to be closely aligned with the Task Force on 

Climate -related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) 9 recommendations scenario analysis on 

investment portfolio Key features of the modeling approach are summarized within the box 

below:                     

> 4TCFD. “Second TCFD Status Report Shows Steady Increase in TCFD Adoption,” June 2019. https://www.fsb -tc fd.org/wp -
> content/uploads/2019/06/Press -Release -2019 -TCFD -Status -Report_FINAL.pdf
> 5For a list of climate change pledges by country, see MSCI ESG Research, “Who will lead the race to cut carbon?” February
> 2019. https://www.msci.com/who -will -lead -the -race -to -cut -carbon
> 6
> In 2019, over 8,400 companies disclosed through CDP –a 20% increase on the previous year. Reporting companies now
> represent over 50% of global market capitalization a ccording to CDP: https://www.cdp.net/en/companies/companies -
> scores
> 7
> WSJ. “Show Us Your Climate Risks, Investors Tell Companies,” February 2019. https://www.wsj.com/articles/show -us -
> your -climate -risks -investors -tell -companies -11551349800
> 8
> In 2018, nearly 1,000 institutional investors with USD 6.24 trillion in assets have committed to divest from fossil fuels, up
> from USD 52 billion four years ago: Arabella Advisors, “The Global Fossil Fuel Divestment and Clean Energy Investment
> Movement,” September 2019. https://www.arabellaadvisors.com/wp -content/uploads/2018/09/Global -Divestment -
> Report -2018.pdf
> 9TCFD, https://www.tcfdhub.org/scenario -analysis/ MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

353 

The fully quantitative model offers deep insights into how climate change could affect 

company valuations. Our software -based and modular modeling approach enables a fast 

and flexible adaptation fit to the needs of institutional investors. The Climate VaR 

methodology integrates the following elements: 

Computations of policy - and technology -related transition risks under 1.5°C, 2°C and 3°C 

scenarios. 

Computations of physical risks due to numerous extreme weather events, such as extreme 

heat, cold, wind, prec ipitation, snowfall, coastal flooding and tropical cyclones. 

Scope 1 GHG footprints for all companies in the database along with intra - and inter -

portfolio analysis. 

Warming potential of individual securities and guidance on a 2°C alignment at the portfol io 

level. 

Low carbon patent analysis articulating potential future technology opportunities on a 

company enterprise and portfolio level. 

A performance -based methodology of computing costs resulting from climate change, 

providing a simple mechanism to integ rate risks directly into standard financial reporting 

frameworks. 

Typical use cases 

We have seen a wide range of applications from financial institutions using our analysis and 

data. The main themes we observed are below. 

• Engagement : clients such as pension funds have used the Climate VaR metric in their 

discussions with portfolio companies to make them aware of the risks of climate 

change to their business operations, e.g., transition risk from regulations, physical 

damage to assets , and business interruptions. Such clients often take the view that 

divestment is the last course of action and engagement is preferable. The 

quantification of costs under different scenarios can be used during company 

engagements to communicate the potent ial operational risks posed by climate change. 

• Investment decision -making: clients such as asset managers have used the 

technology opportunity component of Climate VaR to identify companies that may 

have been overlooked by the market. The ‘green ’ patent an alysis provides extra -

financial information that can be integrated into investment decision -making 

processes. Product development is another avenue that has been actively explored by 

clients, utilizing the Climate VaR metric in dedicated ESG products as a quantitative 

model input in universe selection or screening processes. 

• Risk analysis: Climate VaR metrics can be aggregated across portfolios, so that 

investment managers  can understand portfolio -wide climate risk levels. Some risk 

departments have set Cli mate VaR targets or risk tolerance levels for portfolio 

managers. 

• Monitoring & compliance: some jurisdictions such as France have introduced 

mandatory reporting requirements for investors. Notably, France ’s Article 173 

requires investors in the country to comply or explain their portfolio ’s alignment with Chapter 22 

354 

the 2°C warming target set out in the Paris Agreement in the United Nations 

Framework Convention on Climate Change. 10 

• TCFD reporting: our analysis is closely aligned with the TCFD 11 . We support clients 

wit h their reporting disclosure requirements and our analysis can be used to 

communicate the risks of assets and portfolios. 

# 3 Methodology 

Policy risk 

Methodological approach 

We employ a top -down and bottom -up hybrid methodology to calculate potential risks fro m

future climate change policies. The modelling begins with the quantification of country -level 

greenhouse gas (GHG) emission -reduction targets within policies proposed under the 

Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 12 of the Paris Agreement. Country -level emission 

reduction targets are then broken down into sector -level targets based on details within the 

NDCs as well as recently proposed climate regulations at the national level. With our 

production facilities database (further described in section 3. 3 below), sector -specific 

emission -reduction targets are then assigned to each company ’s production facilities, based 

on each facility ’s emission level, which gives us insights into the emission -reduction 

requirements for facilities owned and operated by c ompanies globally. Using Integrated 

Assessment Models (IAMs) 13 and estimates of future carbon prices under specific policy 

scenarios, it is then possible to estimate the potential costs associated with such emission -

reduction targets and compute “Policy Cli mate Value -at -Risk ” metrics for approximately 9,000 

companies and their securities.        

> 10 https://www.unpri.org/climate -change/french -energy -transition -law -global -investor -briefing -on -article -
> 173/295.article
> 11 https://www.fsb -tcfd.org , see https://www.msci.com/tcfd for more information.
> 12
> All NDCs are public, and can be found in a public registry maintained by the UNFCCC Secretariat a t
> https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NDCStaging/Pages/All.aspx
> 13 Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) are used to evaluate the technological and economic feasibility of climate goals
> such as the Paris Agreement’s long -term temperature goal to hold global warming well below 2˚C and pursue efforts to
> limit this warming to 1.5˚C above pre -industrial level. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

355 

Figure 22 -1 Overview of the policy risk methodology 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC. 

The modelling steps to compute the Policy Climate Value -at -Risk are: 

• Quantifying forward -looking company -level GHG emissions reductions; 

• Quantifying the company -level costs associated with those reductions; 

• Quantifying the impact on the valuation of the companies and their securities. 

Quan tifying company -level GHG reduction requirements 

189 countries have prepared and submitted NDCs to the United Nations Framework 

Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Secretariat each pledging a contribution to the 

Agreement ’s goal of limiting global warmin g to below 2°C by 2100, as of the time of writing. 

Together, the 189 NDCs represent the largest body of international climate policies to be 

assembled under any single agreement to date. NDCs are required to be updated and 

resubmitted to the UNFCCC Secreta riat every five years, with the next round due in late 2020. 

NDCs reflect countries ’ individual circumstances in terms of (among others) climate mitigation 

and adaptation objectives, climate vulnerability, level of development, resource availability 

and in stitutional framework. 

As the NDCs differ based on each country’s individual reduction requirement, their direct 

comparison can be difficult. 14 However, they typically contain some common elements 

relevant for our modelling activities, including: 

• A baseline “business -as -usual ” emissions pathway that underpins the NDC; 

• A commitment to reduce GHG emissions by a certain amount; 

• Details about the pathway to achieve this commitment, such as specific policies to be 

implemented, technology needs, financing needs and sometimes explicit sectoral 

breakdowns of the emission reductions.    

> 14 For a tool that makes all the NDCs comparable, see: https://www.msci.com/who -will -lead -the -race -to -cut -carbon Chapter 22

356 

We use the information in the NDCs to estimate the sectoral “burden sharing ” of the national 

targets. In some cases, the NDCs include an explicit sectoral breakdown of the emissions 

red uctions; in other cases, the sectoral burden -sharing must be inferred from the details of 

the policy initiatives included in the NDC. 

Once in -country sectoral GHG emission reduction targets are established, the Climate VaR 

model allocates these targets to companies active in those sectors. Each company in the 

database has a GHG emission reduction target based on the countries and sectors in which it 

is active. 

The NDCs as currently set are insufficient to achieve the stated goal of the Paris Agreement of 

li miting global warming to below 2°C by 2100, as the emission cuts they represent are not 

ambitious enough. In order to compute company -level GHG emission reduction requirements 

for 2°C and 1.5°C scenarios, we increase the scale of emission reductions, in li ne with carbon 

budgets for those temperature targets. 

Quantifying company -level policy costs 

To calculate a company ’s costs associated with reaching emission -reduction targets, we use 

carbon price estimates from global IAMs. The carbon price estimates are consistent with 

different scenarios, each represented by different technology and policy pathways. The model 

computes the GHG emissions reduction requirements per company on an annual basis and 

then multiplies the reduction amount by scenario -specific yea rly estimates of emission 

reduction prices. The formula for calculating the costs associated with reaching an emission 

reduction requirement is: 

Total Cost = Required GHG Emissions Reduction Amount * Price per tCO2e 

We run many different scenarios – some of which are characterised by smoother or more 

disruptive transition narratives, and each with its own “trajectory ”. In general, as we move 

from less ambitious to more ambitious scenarios, the annual costs of inaction increase for two 

reasons: the emission reduction targets increase, and so do the carbon prices (reflecting 

increasing marginal cost of abatement). 

Quantifying company - and security -level valuation impacts 

In this last step, the forward -looking timeseries of policy costs are processed through f inancial 

models. Specifically, we use discounted cash -flow and Merton -inspired models of capital 

structure in order to compute the valuation impact of the future costs on companies and their 

issued securities. This valuation impact is the Policy Climate Va lue -at -Risk. 

For each scenario, the model computes a Policy Climate Value -at -Risk at the level of the 

company as well as at the level of its issued securities. The security -level Policy Climate Value -

at -Risk distinguishes between equity and bond securities – and among bond securities, 

differentiates by bond maturities. 

Technology opportunity 

Methodological approach 

The transition to a low -carbon economy can also present opportunities, including growth 

potential for investors. The solar industry is one of ma ny areas that had vastly underestimated 

growth potential over the past decade. Looking into the future, one may wonder which 

companies will emerge as the innovators of tomorrow and take advantage of these high -

growth opportunities through the successful de velopment and deployment of key low -carbon 

technologies. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

357 

Our low -carbon technology opportunity assessment is based on a combination of a company ’s

current green revenues and its specific patent data. Recently published patent databases allow 

an evidence -ba sed view into the strategic research and development investment of companies, 

which suitably complements the policy risk analysis on GHG reduction requirements. Our 

model currently covers 95 million unique patents granted by 40 patent authorities worldwide .

Using granted patents as a proxy for low -carbon innovative capacity, our model provides an 

indication of which companies will be the likely beneficiaries if/when 3 °C, 2 °C or 1.5 °C climate 

policies are implemented on a global level. 

The modelling steps to compute Technology Opportunities are as follows: 

• Quantifying the company ’s current low -carbon revenue; 

• Quantifying company -level low -carbon patent scores; 

• Quantifying the company ’s future low -carbon revenue and profits; 

• Quantifying the impact on the valu ation of the company and its issued securities. 

Quantifying company -level current low -carbon revenue 

The first step is to understand a company ’s exposure to clean technology products and services 

through their current green revenues. We provide estimates f or the following categories: 

• Alternative Energy: products, services or infrastructure projects supporting the 

development or delivery of renewable energy and alternative fuels; 

• Energy Efficiency: products, services, infrastructure or technologies that proa ctively 

address the growing global demand for energy while minimizing effects on the 

environment; 

• Green Building: design, construction, redevelopment, retrofitting and management of 

‘green ’ certified properties; 

• Sustainable Water: products, services and projects that attempt to address water 

scarcity and water quality issues, including minimizing and monitoring current water 

use and demand increases, improving water supply quality and improving the 

availability an d reliability of water; 

• Pollution Prevention: products, services or projects that support pollution prevention, 

waste minimization or recycling as a means of alleviating the burden of brown waste 

generation. 

Quantifying company -level low -carbon patent score 

This process starts with a careful matching of the information contained in the patent 

databases with the legal entities of companies that are part of the MSCI Climate VaR universe. 

The next step is separating patents pertaining to low -carbon technol ogies. The patent 

databases operate a classification system defined by the European Patent Office (EPO), the 

International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD) and the UNFCCC: The 

Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system. Introduced i n 2013, the system is based on the 

International Patent Classification (IPC) system and divided into nine sections, A through H and 

Y, with Section Y categorizing new emerging technologies, including more than 400 groups of 

low -carbon technologies. Chapter 22 

358 

With th is process, we can determine for any given company, on a yearly basis, how many 

patents it filed, how many were granted, and how many of those pertained to low -carbon 

technologies, from the late 1990s to today. 

Since not all patents are equally valuable, a mere count of low -carbon patents can be a poor 

predictor of a company ’s innovative potential or the market potential of the technologies such 

patents pertain to. To improve on this analysis, we perform a quality scoring of the patents on 

four statistical measures well accepted by academic literature and practitioners: 

Figure 22 -2 Summary of patent score methodology 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Forward citations 

When a patent is cited by other patents th is is known as a forward citation. The number of 

forward citations received by a patent is often used as a measure of a patent's significance. 

New patents rarely earn many forward citations because it takes time for a patent to be 

recognized and cited by n ewer patent documents. In other words, forward citations build up 

over time and a strict citation analysis will favour older patents. 

Backward citations 

Backward citations are the opposite of forward citations, i.e., when the patent is citing other 

paten ts pertaining to established older patent technologies. A higher number of backward 

citations decreases the overall patent score. 

Market coverage 

Market coverage refers to the size of the market in which a patent was granted protection. We 

calculate thi s by looking at the cumulative GDP of all countries covered by a granted patent 

filing. The higher the cumulative GDP, the higher the patent score. 

The Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system 

This classification system is based on the IPC system, as mentioned above. It is divided into 

nine sections, A through H and Y. The sections are further sub -divided into classes, sub -classes, 

groups and sub -groups. The Y codes classify new emerging technologies, such as low carbon. 

Overall, there are approxim ately 250,000 classification entries in the database 15 . The more CPC 

codes a patent is classified in, the higher the patent score. 

These four measures are normalized and aggregated into a unique score for each patent. 

Figure 22 -3 below illustrates the methodological steps for calculating a company ’s low -carbon 

patent score:   

> 15 For more information, see www.epo.org MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

359 

Figure 22 -3 Patent matching and sc oring process 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Quantifying company -level future low -carbon revenue and profits 

At the company level, to go from current green -revenue share and low -carbon patent share to 

future low -carbon profits, we follow the following six steps: 

1. Calculate the total future low -carbon revenue in each sector. We assume that within 

a sector, the total future low -carbon revenue equals the total future policy costs, given 

that low -carbon revenues are in essence a transfer of the emission redu ction costs by 

some companies to others that license or produce low -carbon technologies. As a 

result, the ambition of the transition scenario considered impacts the low -carbon 

revenue afforded to a sector – i.e., more ambitious temperature targets result i n

higher policy costs and therefore also higher low -carbon revenue. 

2. Calculate the company ’s share of the total current green revenues in each sector. The 

company ’s share is simply the ratio of its current green revenues in that sector to the 

cumulative cur rent green revenues (of all companies in the universe) in that sector. 

3. Calculate the company ’s share of the total score of granted low -carbon patents in each 

sector, derived from calculating the ratio of its cumulative granted patent score in that 

sector a s a percentage of the sector overall. 

4. Step 1 above yields scenario -specific projections of future low -carbon revenue in 

different sectors, while the next two steps provide an indication of how much of these 

sector low -carbon revenues a company might be exp ected to claim based on its share 

of the sector ’s current low -carbon revenues (step 2) and low -carbon patents (step 3). 

In step 4, we combine the two shares found in steps 2 and 3 in a single overall “share ”

applicable to future low -carbon revenue. 16 We use this combined share to calculate 

the company -level low -carbon revenue by multiplying it by the total future low -carbon 

revenue in the sector.   

> 16 The combination function gives more weight to the share of current low -carbon r evenue in earlier years and more weight
> to the share of low -carbon patents in later years .95 Million
> Patents
> 400+
> Low Carbon
> Patent
> Categories
> Patent
> Quality
> Score
> Forward
> citations
> Backward
> citations
> Market
> coverage
> CPC & IPC
> coverage Chapter 22

360 

5. Calculate the company -level low -carbon profits in each sector by multiplying the 

company ’s low -carbon revenue by a profit margin (profit margins assumptions vary by 

sector). 

6. Calculate the total future low -carbon profits for any given company in any given 

scenario by summing the low -carbon profits across the sectors to which their 

technologies relate. 

Quantifying co mpany - and security -level valuation impacts 

This last step is very similar to the last step applied to policy risks: the forward -looking 

timeseries of low -carbon profits are processed through discounted cash flow and capital 

structure modelling in order t o calculate the valuation impact of these future profits, yielding 

the Technology Opportunities Climate Value -at -Risk metrics at the levels of both the company 

as a whole and the securities they issue. 

Physical risks & opportunities 

Methodological approac h

Physical climate risk scenarios define possible climatic consequences resulting from increased 

levels of GHG emissions, and the ensuing financial burden (or opportunity) shouldered by 

businesses and their investors. With the observed weather patterns ove r the past 40 years set 

as a historical baseline, we bring both acute and chronic climate developments into 

perspective. As with the transition risk/opportunity analysis, costs/profits and 

risk/opportunity can be aggregated at regional, sectoral, or compan y levels, meaning that we 

can assign portions of risks or opportunities to several asset classes that have been integrated 

into our model. The physical climate risk model is hybrid in nature, meaning that it has both 

top -down and bottom -up elements within the calculations. 

MSCI ESG Research actively collaborates with climate scientists at scientific institutes, such as 

the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) and ETH Zürich, and has acquired a 

wealth of physical climate change data. Develope d through a close collaboration with these 

groups, MSCI ESG Research ’s physical risk framework is highly modular, meaning that new 

hazards can be added easily into the model. All physical risk modelling has global coverage and 

is based on our proprietary d atabase of approximately 370,000 company locations and 23,500 

publicly traded companies. The typical model resolution is that of a global 0.5 ° grid or finer, 

depending on the physical hazard assessed. 

Forecasted costs can be integrated into standard invest ment metrics. As is custom practice in 

the insurance industry, most risk models follow this mathematical modeling approach: MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

361 

Figure 22 -4 A high -level overview of MSCI ESG Research’s physical risk calculation 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

“Exposure ” (also Assets or Inventory) is to be understood as the presence of people, 

livelihoods, resources, and other assets in places and settings that could be adversely affected 

by an extreme weather event. 

“Vulnerabili ty ” (also Sensitivity or Susceptibility) means the propensity or predisposition of an 

asset to be affected by an extreme weather event, including vulnerability to financial harm (or 

opportunity) and the capacity to cope and adapt. An example is the reducti on of labor 

productivity in the construction sector due to high temperatures, or the impact of heavy 

snowfall on transport companies. 

And “Hazard ” (also Risk or Impact) defines present and future climatology, including the 

probability of occurrence and int ensity of extreme weather events. Examples are the increase 

of extremely hot days or the measure of water stress in a certain region. 

Asset level assessment 

It is essential to understand the geographical and structural characteristics of an asset in order 

to model the effects of an extreme weather event. Accordingly, our proprietary Asset Location 

Database (ALD) is at the heart of the physical risk assessment. The database covered 

approximately 370,000 asset locations for around 23,500 companies as of April 30, 2020, 

ranging typically between 1 and 100 worldwide locations per company. For each covered 

company, this location data is combined with fundamental financial data, for example sector 

activity and sectoral revenue breakdown by country, to generate a l ocation specific analysis of 

possible facility risk. This combined data constitutes our exposure data for physical risk 

modelling. 

Illustrated below is a graphic example of the asset -level data for a specific company, Renault 

SA. The blue squares denote l ocations of infrastructure assets for the company. The database 

contains detailed and high -resolution coordinates that allow for a comprehensive 

understanding of the risks associated with the location of an asset. Chapter 22 

362 

Figure 22 -5 Infrastructure asset locations of Renault SA 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC; data as of June 2020 

The database was created using several data sources, such as manual data collection, 

commercially available databases, or open -source dat abases. It is updated on every release of 

data, which currently occurs every three months. 

Hazard modelling 

We model climate impacts via two distinct approaches: 

• Statistical extrapolation of historical data 

• Use of physical climate models 

We use these appro aches to model two types of physical climate risk: 

• Chronic climate risks : these risks manifest slowly over time, such as extreme heat, 

cold, precipitation, snowfall and wind gusts. This modelling is based on statistical 

extrapolation of historical data. 

• Acute climate risks : these occur from relatively rare natural catastrophes such as 

tropical cyclones and floods in distinct time intervals. Such risks are modelled using 

physical climate models. 

Quantifying facility -level future extreme weather costs – deri ving vulnerabilities 

Vulnerability with respect to loss modelling refers to the quantification of the costs related to 

a unit of physical impact. Location -specific vulnerabilities are assessed for each individual 

climate hazard according to the risk exposu re at every company facility each year. Every level 

of risk exposure corresponds to a level of vulnerability, on what are often referred to as 

“damage curves ” or “damage functions ” in loss modeling. A change in the level of exposure 

each year corresponds to a unique cost along the damage function. The resulting costs are 

summed up each year. It is important to note that vulnerability information is scarce and there 

are few available data sources. One of the main reasons is that vulnerability research typ ically 

relies on proprietary insurance data, bearing relevance for the pricing of insurance premiums 

and hence not available for commercial use. In order to classify vulnerability for different 

businesses, we have developed a specific sector system of 37 d ifferent business activities 

grouped by the impact that extreme weather may have on them. These vulnerabilities were MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

363 

derived from scientific publications and augmented by media reports for each hazard and 

extreme weather. 

Quantifying company - and security -level valuation impacts 

Finally, the last step is again very similar to the last step for transition Climate Value -at -Risk 

metrics, i.e., the forward -looking timeseries of extreme weather costs are discounted and fed 

into a capital structure model in orde r to calculate the Physical Risks and Opportunities Climate 

Value -at -Risk metrics. 

# 4 Case study: Managing climate risks in investment portfolios 

Introduction 

In this case study, we selected a sample portfolio representative of a global actively -managed 

fund in terms of risk -return characteristics and used the MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk (“ Climate 

VaR ”) model to examine the different dimensions of climate -related risks. We show how 

Climate VaR can be used to measure climate risks for the portfolio as a whole, as well as further 

explore which sectors, countries and securities were driving these risks in the portfolio. 

We also considered some approaches which a portfolio manager might follow in order to 

manage these risks. Specifically, we tested four simple exclusion strategies based on the worst -

performing decile of the portfolio on the following measures: 

• Aggregated Climate VaR 

• Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR 

• Physical Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR 

• Carbon intensity 

For each exclusion strategy, we investigated the impact on climate risks as well as on the risk 

and return characteristics of the sample portfolio, including sector, country and style 

exposures. We show that while these exclusion strategies had substantial impacts on the 

measures of climate risks for the sample portfolio, they had minimal impact on the sample 

portfolio ’s conventional risk, return and market exposures. We conclude that, in the case of 

the sample portfolio chosen, it was possible to substantially redu ce the portfolio ’s climate risk 

exposures without significantly altering the portfolio ’s conventional risk and return 

characteristics or its market exposures, such as to sectors, countries and styles. 

Portfolio climate risk assessment 

Sample portfolio 

We s elected a sample portfolio from the Lipper database of mutual funds focusing on the peer 

group of global developed market funds .17 The goal of the selection process was to have a 

“typical ” fund in the sense that it has a 5 -year active performance relative t o the fund ’s own 

benchmark which is close to the median fund active performance in that peer group. We also 

aimed for a fund that has more than 50 holdings to reduce concentration. The “typical ” fund    

> 17 We started with all global funds available in the Lipper database and selected all the funds that have at least 75% invested
> in equity and filtered out funds with assets under management below US$1mm or above US$500bln. We also filtered out
> funds with larger than 15% exposure to emerging markets and then excluded 5% of funds with largest and smallest tracking
> error and funds with reference to index tracking in thei r name. Chapter 22

364 

selected was representative of a global actively -managed fund in terms of risk -return 

characteristics: its 5 -year return (10.71%) and volatility (12.76%) were in line with the median 

of global actively -managed funds in the database, as of December 2019. 

Figure 22 -6 shows the country and Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS ®) Industry 

Group 18 breakdowns of the sample portfolio. 

Figure 22 -6 Sample portfoli o country and GICS Industry Group breakdowns 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Portfolio -level Climate VaR 

Figure 22 -7 displays a Climate VaR report snapshot for the sample portfolio. 

Figure 22 -7 Climate VaR portfolio report snapshot 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC  

> 18 GICS is a global industry classification standard jointly developed by MSCI and Standard & Poor’s. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

365 

The Aggregated Climate VaR is -7.75%, resulting in a US$7.75m monetary risk contribution for 

a US$100m investment. 19 This means that, under the scenarios considered, climate risk and 

opportunities were estimated to represent a downside valuation impact of 7.75% of the 

portfolio. 

This risk can be further broken between Transition Risks and Opportunities and Physical Risks 

and Opportunities: 

• Under the 2°C scenario considered, Transition Risks and Opportunities amounted to 

a downside valuation impact of -0.59%. This number is in fact comprised of two effects: 

-4.43% downside coming from Policy Risks, and +3.84% upside stemming from 

Technology Opportunities. 

• On Physical Risks and Opportunities , the overall risk of -7.16% was largely driven by 

Coastal Floodi ng ( -6.15%) and Extreme Heat ( -1.44%). We also observe that some of 

the Physical Risks and Opportunities Climate VaRs were positive – i.e., representing an 

upside. This was the case for Extreme Cold (+0.22%) and in this case stems from the 

fact that, in th e scenario considered, in many locations around the globe the number 

of days with temperatures reaching below 0°C are likely to decrease, resulting in fewer 

business interruptions. 

For a more robust climate risk assessment, it is useful to look beyond the portfolio risk 

measures and into what drives them – be it at the level of sectors, countries or individual 

securities. 

Sectors 

The three GICS Industry Groups in the sample portfolio with the highest Transition Risks are 

Real Estate, Materials and Food & Staples Retailing ( Figure 22 -8) – activities with substantial 

carbon footprints and, in the case of the companies in this portfolio, also operating in 

jurisdictions with substantial regulatory oversight (we also note that t he risk in the Real Estate 

GICS Industry Group was somewhat inflated by the fact that one company classified in this 

group owns an airline). 

Looking at Transition Opportunities , we found that the upside of the low -carbon transition 

came from the stocks in the sample portfolio in Technology Hardware & Equipment and Capital 

Goods – activities with comparatively lower direct GHG -emissions or with a focus on 

developing new technologies.    

> 19 This case study is based on a hypothetical USD 100 million investment. The monetary contribution is calculated as the
> product of the Climate VaR contribution and the portfolio value. Chapter 22

366 

Figure 22 -8 Climate VaR by GICS Industry Group – Transition Risks and 

Opportunities 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Turning to Physical Risks and Opportunities ( Figure 22 -9), th e three highest risk sectors were 

Real Estate, Materials, and Consumer Durables & Apparel. This mostly reflected the location 

of the facilities of the companies classified in these sectors as well as how their facilities were 

subject to different hazards. In the case of the companies in this portfolio, coastal flooding and 

extreme heat were the main drivers of the physical risks. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk 

367 

Figure 22 -9 Climate VaR by GICS Industry Group – Physical Risks and Opportunities 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Countries 

We then investigated the countries showing the highest level of climate risks in the sample 

portfolio. For this analysis, the Climate VaR model looks through to a company ’s activities, 

identifying the different countries in which companies operate. Doing so is necessary, as 

transition and physical risks (e.g. climate policy, extreme weather events) are likely to have 

local impacts on compan ies ’ international operations. 

The country with the highest downside in Transition Risks and Opportunities was Canada 

(Figure 22 -10 ), accounting for ove r a third of the sample portfolio ’s Policy Risks ( -1.49% out of 

-4.43%). The United States and China were also among the highest contributors to Policy Risks, 

an intuitive result given the large portfolio weights the two countries represent (70% and 11%, 

respectively) and the importance of those markets in the global economy, meaning that many 

companies incorporated elsewhere also tend to have operations there. Chapter 22 

368 

Figure 22 -10 Countries representing the most Pol icy Risks 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

China and the United States also contributed substantially to the portfolio ’s Physical Risks and 

Opportunities ( Figure 22 -11 ), with the two countries representing by far the largest 

contributions. They were followed by the Netherlands, Japan , and India. 

Figure 22 -11 Countries representing the most Physical Risks 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

Portfolio climate risk management 

Having used Climate VaR to review the climate risks of the sample portfolio, we then 

considered the approaches which a portfolio manager might follow to manage these risks and 

we investigated the impact that such approaches would have on the risk and return 

characteristics of th e sample portfolio. 

One approach to managing climate risks is to exclude the portfolio constituents that contribute 

the most to the risks. In this section, we adopted this approach and, starting with the holdings 

of the sample portfolio, excluded the “wors t” decile (8 stocks) of the sample portfolio. We 

performed this exercise four times, each time excluding the “worst ” decile on the following 

criteria: 20      

> 20 For Climate VaR, the “worst” performers were those with the lowest Climate VaR (which in many cases means the most MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

369 

• Aggregated Climate VaR 

• Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR 

• Physical Risks and Opportunities C limate VaR 

• Carbon intensity 

Doing so, we obtained four new portfolios (A through D), which we could compare with the 

original sample portfolio (“ Original ”). 

Impacts on climate risks 

Figure 22 -12  displays the impact that the four exclusion strategies had on climate risks. 

Figure 22 -12 Climate risk impacts of the different exclusion strategies 

Source: MSCI E SG Research LLC 

All exclusions tended to improved Climate VaR and reduce the portfolio ’s carbon intensity, 

albeit to varying degrees: exclusion strategies A through C improved Climate VaR the most, 

and exclusion strategy D reduced the carbon intensity the most. This is, of course, by design –

but it is worth noting that the reductions achieved by the exclusions were substantial: strategy 

A reduced the Aggregated Climate VaR by 74% (from -7.75% to -2.04%); strategy B changed 

the sign of Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR (from -0.59% to +2.03%); strategy 

C reduced the Physical Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR by 65% (from -7.16% to -2.48%); 

and strategy D reduced the Weighted Average Carbon Intensity (“ WACI ”) of Scopes 1 and 2 

(“ S12 ”) by 89% ( from 185.87 to 20.67 tCO2e/US$m sales). 

The four strategies had different impacts: 

• Strategy A improved not just the Aggregated Climate VaR but also both the sub -

components of Climate VaR and the carbon intensity; 

• On the other hand, excluding on the basis of a single component of Climate VaR 

seemed to exacerbate the other component of Climate VaR in this sample portfolio: 

strategy B improved Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR, but did not have 

much impact on the Physical Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR, (a small 

improvement from -7.16% to -6.34%). The opposite was true for strategy C ;

• In strategy D , exclusions on the basis of carbon intensity not only reduced the WACI 

but also improved the Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR. This result is 

intuitive, considering that the transition is likely to compel companies to reduce their          

> negative Climate VaR). For carbon intensity “worst” performers were those with the highest carbon intensity. carbon
> intensity was defined in this analysis as the amount of Scope 1 and 2 GHG -emissions, in tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2e)
> per US$ of sales.

Chapter 22 

370 

carbon emissions – hence, companies with higher carbon intensities would, on 

average, face more transition risks. For the same reason we can also see that s trategies 

A and B, which substantially improved the Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate 

VaR, also substantially reduced the carbon intensity. However, these results also 

highlight that carbon intensity and transition risks are not one and the same, as the 

exclusions in strategies A, B and D were not identical; for example, Northland Power 

Inc. was excluded in strategy D on account of its carbon intensity (1,294 tCO2e/US$m 

sales), but it was not excluded from strategy A or B because it had a relativel y small 

Transition Risks and Opportunities Climate VaR, thanks to having 59.1% of its total 

revenue generated in alternative energy. 

Impacts on traditional risk / return profile 

The above analysis showed that it was possible to reduce the climate risks in the sample 

portfolio, as measured by four different criteria. Of course, this is only one part of the story, as 

a portfolio manager would also want to know the impact each exclusion approach might have 

on the sample portfolio ’s risk/return characteristics .

We investigated this question and show the results in  Figure 22 -13 , which compared the 5 -

year simulated performance of the five strategies. 21 Interestingly, although exclusion 

strategies A through D substantially improved the various measures of climate risks, the 

traditional risk/return characteristics of the five strategies remained largely similar to the 

original strategy: all strategies had 5-year simulated returns in the mid to high 10% range 

(compared to 10.71% in the original strategy), and volatilities in the mid 12% range (compared 

to 12.76% in the original strategy). All exclusion strategies showed tracking errors to the 

original strat egy of approximately 1%. 

Figure 22 -13 Risk/return impacts of the different exclusion strategies 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

We also investigated the impact that these exclusions had on the sector, country, style and 

other exposures of the strategy using MSCI ’s Global Total Equity Market Factor model. The 

high -level contributions from the factor groups are shown in  Figure 22 -14 . In general, the 

factor profile of the original strategy was only slightly modified by the exclusion strategies. 

Industry factors and stock -specific ret urns tended to have a higher impact than styles,      

> 21 We use a 5 -year simulation period based on the availability of historical data.
> This report may cont ain analysis of historical data, which may include hypothetical, backtested or simulated performance
> results. There are frequently material differences between backtested or simulated performance results and actual results
> subsequently achieved by any inve stment strategy.
> The analysis and observations in this report are limited solely to the period of the relevant historical data, backtest or
> simulation. Past performance —whether actual, backtested or simulated —is no indication or guarantee of future
> per formance. None of the information or analysis herein is intended to constitute investment advice or a recommendation
> to make (or refrain from making) any kind of investment decision or asset allocation and should not be relied on as such. MSCI Climate Value -at -Risk

371 

countries and currencies, but overall the contributions of all five sources of return remained 

very small when compared to the overall simulated returns of these strategies. 

Figure 22 -14 High -level contributions from factor groups 

Source: MSCI ESG Research LLC 

# 5 Conclusion and outlook 

Globally there is an increased drive to encourage the widespread adoption of climate scenario 

analysis among companies and financ ial institutions. Most leading climate change frameworks 

– TCFD, HLEG, TEG, etc. – base their recommendations and policy advice on a range of 

accepted scenarios developed by climate change scientists. Scenarios provide a forward -

looking assessment of clima te change risks, giving insights into the order of magnitude for 

which assets and investments are threatened and how their return prospects are affected. 

Crucially, they also indicate which assets and investments might stand to profit from a low -

carbon tra nsition – insights that can be leveraged into both building up portfolio -level 

resilience vis -à-vis climate change and signaling to the wider community that climate change 

risks are actively managed. In analyzing the risks and the costs of climate change i n a proactive 

and forward -looking way, the management of companies can mitigate and avoid a plethora of 

possible threats ranging from class -action lawsuits, significant remediation costs, and 

irreversible damages to the reputations of corporations and thei r executives. 

The merits of scenarios are that they provide organizations with a method of forward -looking 

assessment to understand the strategic implications of climate -related risks, while at the same 

time informing investors, lenders, insurance provider s and other stakeholders of how a 

particular organization might perform under different transition and physical risk pathways. 

Hence, scenario analysis provides an invaluable lens through which to assess a company ’s

targets, strategy and governance of sust ainability issues and take a view on whether they are 

fit for purpose in a changing world. 

For all its benefits, scenario analysis also has certain drawbacks, the most obvious being that 

it is inherently unclear which scenario will eventually occur. Also, most climate reference 

targets delivered by scenario analysis come in the form of optimal energy mixes, a format ill -

suited for conducting company - or asset -level analysis, complicating the integration into 

portfolio -construction procedures which focus on individual holdings. 

To compute the Climate VaR metric, we evaluate data underpinning a particular climate 

scenario and then quantifies the potential future cost for the scenario and company in 

question. A calculation is then made  to understand by how much a company ’s financial 

valuation is poised to decrease or increase in the face of those climate related costs. To achieve 

this, the methodology relies on a discounted cash flow model that calculates the present -day 

value of future climate -related cost. By basing the financial impact calculation on traditional 

valuation techniques used in the financial industry, we attempt to bridge the disparate fields Chapter 22 

372 

of academic climate science and the day -to -day tools used by financial practitioners to create 

resonance w ith the finance industry. As a result of this process, climate risks become 

embedded into an output in a format that can be processed and integrated into further 

financial analysis, so that climate risks can become a part of the fundamental analysis. 

We ha ve seen numerous applications of Climate VaR in investment management practices. 

Most often, investors use Climate VaR for: 

• Engagement; 

• Investment decision -making; 

• Risk analysis; 

• Monitoring & compliance; 

• TCFD reporting. 

A portfolio ’s Climate VaR can vary greatly depending on the detailed holdings contained 

therein. Investors need to understand security and portfolio level climate risks in order to start 

incorporating these risks into their investment practices. This is a first step for portfolios, 

compani es, assets, governments, benchmarks, etc., to become resilient to the impacts that 

climate change may cause. Understanding, quantifying and managing these risks should 

become normal practices in financial management in years to come. Climate VaR is one of the 

new and innovative metrics that investors can use to help them establish the climate change 

resilience needed within investment portfolios. 

While Climate VaR is quickly becoming a recognized metric for assessing climate risks within 

and across portfol ios, it is also time to take important steps forward to deliver deeper and 

more wide -ranging assessments of climate risks. For example, the Climate VaR methodologies 

outlined above can currently be used to assess direct impacts from climate change, but new 

methodologies are being explored to include indirect impacts as well. Climate VaR is also 

currently applied to equities and corporate bonds, but soon will be offered for additional asset 

classes, such as private equity and loans. This will allow for users to cover a larger portion of 

their portfolio(s) with Climate VaR analysis and also evaluate additional forms of risk via the 

assessment approach. We believe the use of Climate VaR will expand as climate risk analysis 

becomes more embedded within general r isk management and reporting practices. Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers 

373 

# Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for 

# Asset Owner and Managers 

By 

Aviva 1

# Abstract 

Aviva ’s Climate Value at Risk measure enables the potential business impacts of climate -

related risks and opportunities to be assessed taking into consideration different scenarios and 

assumptions regarding policies, technologies, demand , and various other macroeconomic 

factors, as well as extreme weather . This measure looks at the evolution of climate -related 

risks and opportunities over the next 15 years, but with the ability to consider shorter time 

periods ( 3 to 5 years) where appropriate. Aviva was awarded the Climate Risk Initiative of the 

Year 2020 by InsuranceERM, because the “Climate value -at -risk (VaR) initiative shows the 

practical benefits that can be achieved when insurers focus resources, time and expertise on 

climate risk management, as well as collaborating with other knowledge partners ”. 2

Keyword s: Climate Value at Risk, climate -related risks and opportunities, transition risks, 

physical risks, climate risk management 

# 1 Introduction 

Aviva included the results of scenario analysis in its 2018 and 2019 Climate -related Financial 

Disclosures. The scenario analysis is based on the Climate Value at Risk or “Climate VaR ”

measure 3 we have developed in conjunction with the United Nations Environment Programme 

Finance Initiative (UNEP FI) Investor pilot and Carbon Delta, an environmental FinTech (See 

UNE P FI Changing Course report for further details). 4 This scenario analysis provides a forward -

looking view of climate -related transition and physical risks and opportunities. Transition risks 

and opportunities include the projected costs of policy action re lated to limiting greenhouse 

gas emissions as well as projected profits from green revenues arising from developing new 

technologies and patents. Physical risks cover the financial impact of acute weather events as 

well as chronic impacts. 

Aviva has exten ded this Climate VaR approach with Elseware, a risk management and 

quantification expert consultancy, to enable it to be applied to its whole balance sheet. In 

order to support this initiative, an inter -disciplinary team has been created with 

representatio n from across the business and an expert panel has been set -up to review and        

> 1This chapter is written by Ben Carr, RCAM Director at Aviva, email: ben.carr@aviva.com. The authors would like to thank
> Finn Clawon, Loubna Benkirane, Tom Tayler and Paddy Arber.
> 2https://www.insuranceerm.com/content/galleries/insuranceerm -annual -awards -2020 -uk -and -europe -
> winners/climate -risk -initiative -of -the -year -aviva.html
> 3For further details on Aviva’s Climate VaR methodology, please see Aviva’s Climate -related Financial Disclosure at
> http://www.aviva.com/TCFD
> 4https://www.unepfi.org/publications/investment -publications/changing -course -a-comprehensive -investor -guide -to -
> scenario -based -methods -for -climate -risk -assessment -in -response -to -the -tcfd/ Chapter 23

374 

challenge the main assumptions made in the selection, development and modelling of the 

scenarios. The panel includes internal experts as well as external experts 5.

Aviva ’s use of the Climate VaR approach described in this case study demonstrates the value 

of innovation and scenario analysis in climate risk modelling. It also shows the importance of 

collaboration and sharing of best practice with peers. Outputs and evaluations of th is 

methodology are intended as a first step in incorporating the TCFD recommendations on 

scenario -based risk assessment in financial disclosures. We will continue to work internally 

and with external partners to develop best practice in this area. 

# 2 Methodo logy description – Climate VaR modelling approach 

Aviva developed a Climate VaR measure that enables the potential business impacts of future 

climate -related risks and opportunities to be assessed in each of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change (I PCC) scenarios and in aggregate. 

Climate scenarios considered 

The IPCC scenarios aim to measure the effect on the energy balance of the global climate 

system due to changes in the composition of the atmosphere from sources like greenhouse 

gas emissions, other air pollutants (Vallero, 2014 ) and changes in land use. The four IPCC 

scenarios represent different Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) which describe 

the composition of the atmosphere at the end of the 21st century.  Table 23 -1 summarises the 

link between the RCPs, potential temperature rises by 2100 and the level of mitigation 

required, which we will use to describe the scenarios in this ch apter. 

Table 23 -1 Mapping for RCPs, potential temperature rises and levels of mitigations 

RCP  Temperature rise  Description 

RCP2.6  1.5°C  Aggressive mitigation 

RCP4.5  2°C  Strong mitigation 

RCP6.0  3°C  Some mitigation 

RCP8.5  4°C  Business as usual (BAU) 

Source: TCFD 

The TCFD graphic “The choice we face now ” (see case study below) sets out implications for 

greenhouse gas emissions and potential temperature rise by 2100 for each scenario. The 

aggressive mitigation scenario is the only one where it is more likely than no t that the 

temperature change in 2100 will be less than 2°C. Aviva developed this Climate VaR measure 

in conjunction with the UNEP FI investor pilot project, which developed models and scenario 

analysis tools to assess the potential impact on corporate ass ets and real estate of the four 

IPCC scenarios in conjunction with MSCI (Carbon Delta). 

MSCI (Carbon Delta) is using the AIM/CGE model 6 from the Japanese National Institute for 

Environmental Studies (NIES). 7 Whilst these scenarios reflect current scientif ic research and         

> 5Dr Simon Dietz, Dr Nick Robins & Dr Swenja Surminski from the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the
> Environment at the L ondon School of Economics, Dr Paul Pritchard –an independent sustainability advisor –and Dr
> Katharina Dittrich from Warwick Business School.
> 6The AIM/CGE model is a multi -regional, multi -sectoral, computable general equilibrium (CGE) model.
> 7NIES is a Japanese research institute that undertakes a broad range of environmental research in an interdisciplinary and
> comprehensive manner. Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers

375 

the Paris agreement, there clearly remains significant uncertainty regarding future climate 

trajectories as well as political risk with respect to implementation of the Paris agreement and 

Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 8 It is important to note that the four scenarios 

all assume a gradual path, in which temperatures slowly rise but climate policy is ramped up 

at varying speeds with a fairly high degree of global coordination. They do not consider the 

transition risk in a more ch aotic policy environment, where there is lack of global coordination 

and policy action is taken too late and too suddenly. This may result in an understatement of 

transition risk. The MSCI (Carbon Delta) model and scenario analysis tools also allow 

conside ration of the five Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs). These consider socio -

economic characteristics including things such as population, economic growth, education, 

urbanisation and the rate of technological development. Within SSPs, scenarios can also be 

selected that represent early policy action or late policy action. The timing of climate action 

can represent orderly and disorderly transition pathways. 

Time horizon considered for each scenario 

In conjunction with the UNEP FI investor pilot project, it was agreed to use a single 15 -year 

time horizon for the Climate VaR measure to analyse the impact of the different scenarios on 

our business but with the capability to consider transition effects o ver shorter time horizons 

depending on the business decision being considered. Consideration was given as to whether 

a longer time horizon was needed to capture the worst physical impacts of climate change, as 

these are not likely to manifest themselves un til the second half of the century ( Figure 23 -1). 

To address this point in a decision -useful way and ensure consistency with the 15 -year time 

horizon fo r transition risk, it was agreed to look at a higher, 95th percentile of physical risks as 

well as the expected outcome in the BAU scenario over the 15 -year horizon.  Figure 23 -2 shows 

large dispersion around the mean from the impact of climate change on coastal flooding over 

the next 15 years. 

Figure 23 -1 Global average surface temperature change 

Source: I PCC   

> 8Intended NDCs is a term used under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change for reductions in greenhouse
> gas emiss ions that all countries that signed the UNFCCC were asked to publish in the lead -up to COP21. Chapter 23

376 

Figure 23 -2 Example of coastal flooding 

Source: MSCI (Carbon Delta) 

Risks and opportunities covered 

The modelling of transition and physical risks and opportunities specifically covers the 

projected costs of policy action related to limiting greenhouse gas emissions as well as 

projected profits from green revenues arising from developing new technologies and patents. 

In addition, it captures acute weather impacts such as coastal flooding and tropical cyclones 

as well as chronic impacts from gradual changes in extreme heat and cold, heavy precipitation 

and snowfall, or wind gusts. Regional sea level rise is an important input to the risk model and 

constitutes a key driver of coastal flooding impacts. It is important to note that the changes in 

acute and chronic impacts can also have a positive as well as negative effect on individual 

companies or instruments ( Figure 23 -3). 

Figure 23 -3 Risks and opportunities covered 

Source: MSCI (Carbon Delta) 

Building Block Approach 

To assess these risks and opportunities, a building block approach has been adopted ( Figure 

23 -4). Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers 

377 

Figure 23 -4 Building Block Approach 

Source: MSCI (Carbon Delta) 

When assessing the imp act of climate -related risks and opportunities associated with each 

scenario, different financial indicators need to be used and assumptions made. To assess the 

impact on market value of investments and the impact on reserves or premiums, for example, 

the following assumptions need to be considered: 

1. The extent to which asset valuations, reserves and premiums already take account of the 

climate -related risks and opportunities in each scenario; 

2. The likely timing of future changes to asset valuations, where not all these climate -related 

risks and opportunities are currently considered; 

3. Changes in our asset portfolio over time and the timing of such changes relative to the 

timing of any future market corrections to take account of these climate -related risks and 

opportunities; 

4. The extent to which changes in costs over the next 15 years will be passed on to 

policyholders and/or sales volumes could reduce or increase for specific lines of business; 

and 

5. The impact on reinsurance market capacity and pricing, as w ell as the creditworthiness 

of reinsurers, and the implications for our reinsurance strategy. 

Finally, to assess the overall impact of climate -related risks and opportunities across all 

scenarios, the relative likelihoods or probabilities of each scenario need to be assigned. To do 

this Aviva considered amongst other things the current scientific analysis of the likely 

trajectory of emissions as well as policy commitments made by countries to reduce emissions 

(Figure 23 -5). 

Figure 23 -5 Most Likely outcome based on where we are 

Source: Aviva Chapter 23 

378 

Transition risks and opportunities 

The financial impact of transition risks and opportunities are calculated relative to the BAU 

scenario ( i.e., there are assumed to be no transition costs or opportunities in the BAU scenario, 

where current emissions are presumed to continue to rise at the current rate). The calcu lation 

covers both emission reduction prices and revenues from new technologies. 

Figure 23 -6 Emission Reduction Prices (2010 US$/tCO2e) 

Source: MSCI (Carbon Delta) 

2.5.1 Investments 

The following high -level methodology is used to assess the potential downside risk from 

different transition scenarios on our investments ( Figure 23 -7). For both corpo rate bonds and 

equity securities the difference between the market value and the adjusted value after 

factoring in future climate change costs and/or revenues is measured ( i.e., the impact relative 

to current climate conditions and emissions trajectory). To estimate the impact in a consistent 

way when a company has issued both shares and bonds, the Merton model is used. 9 This 

model enables the impact on a business as a whole to be translated into a change in value of 

its corporate bonds and equity securiti es. As both costs and opportunities are covered, the 

Climate VaR can be either negative or positive depending on the balance of future anticipated 

carbon -related costs and revenues for individual companies or instruments.  

> 9Analysts and investors utilise the Merton model to understand how capable a company is at meeting financial obligations,
> servicing its debt, and weighing the ge neral possibility that it will go into credit default. Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers

379 

Figure 23 -7 High level methodology overview 

Source: MSCI (Carbon Delta) 

Carbon Delta has also developed a methodology for estimating the transition exposure of 

property assets which we have used for both direct real estate and real -estate -linked debt 

holdings. For infrastructure assets, Aviva plans to use the ClimateWise Transition Risk 

Framework to identify the key risk exposures across our portfolio of assets, taking into account 

how transition risk and opportunities vary by geography, s ector and sub -sector to assess the 

potential impact in different climate scenarios. For example, a recent review of transport 

infrastructure highlighted strong potential opportunities. 

2.5.2 Insurance liabilities 

Aviva has assessed the impact on life ins urance reserves from the potential reduction in 

mortality rates resulting from less air pollution in the aggressive and strong mitigation 

scenarios. This reflects an anticipated reduction in carbon emissions and an increase in electric 

vehicles replacing v ehicles with internal combustion engines. For each transition scenario, 

there is potential for fewer deaths relating to air pollution, although we note that this is very 

much dependent on the fuel mix generating electrical power for the grid. Whilst waste -to -

energy plants have similar particulate outputs to gas -fired power stations, biomass plants such 

as wood pellet fired facilities, for their many positives, produce significantly more particulates 

than gas -fired power stations for example ( Hajat et al., 2 014 ). 

On the general insurance side, transition risks and opportunities may also arise. For example, 

the wider adoption of electric vehicles and the rise of car -sharing and automated cars might 

decrease the pool of vehicles to be insured leading to a decre ase in claims frequencies but 

also premiums. However, these affects have not been included to date. We plan to extend our 

modelling to cover general insurance transition risks and opportunities over time. 

Physical risks and opportunities 

The financial im pact of physical risks and opportunities is based on an assessment of both the 

expected costs in the BAU scenario and the costs at a higher 95 th percentile arising from 

hazards such as: extreme heat and cold, heavy precipitation and snow, coastal flooding, wind 

gusts and tropical cyclones. We use the expected costs and the costs at a higher percentile to 

define a distribution of physical risk outcomes for each scenario and thus capture some of the 

more extreme potential physical effects of climate change wh ilst using a consistent 15 -year 

time horizon as that used for transition risk. Chapter 23 

380 

2.6.1 Investments 

The physical risks on investments are generally going to be driven by the exposure of the 

facilities (buildings, plant, infrastructure) owned or used by the company who has issued the 

financial instrument, their “facilities ”, and the supply chain they rely on for producing their 

end product. We use the following high -level methodology to assess the potential physical risk 

from different scenarios on our investments in this regard. The cost in  Figure 23 -8 is built up 

by mapping the facilities onto a world map, with measures that define the facility ’s exposure 

to different extreme weather hazards, and then combining this with a vulnerability function 

that con verts the exposure and an assessment of the physical hazard impact in each scenario 

into an estimated monetary cost, per facility. 

Figure 23 -8 Impact modelling and expected cost estimate 

Source: MSCI (Carb on Delta) 

For both corporate bonds and equity shares, the difference between the market value and the 

adjusted value after factoring in aggregated facility costs and/or revenues is measured. The 

costs and/or revenues to a business are measured relative to an assessment of physical risks 

under current conditions as these are assumed to be already factored into the market value. 

This business impact is then translated into a change in the value of its corporate bonds and 

equity securities using the Merton mo del. 

Aviva recognises that the current approach does not capture the impact on companies ’ supply 

chains nor necessarily demand for its products and services or potential mitigating impact of 

insurance. For example, in the case of a major car manufacturer their real assets will mainly 

include their factories and machinery and possibly their dealerships. Their supply chain will be 

broad, complex and potentially geographically diverse and if disrupted it could adversely 

impact companies ’ costs and/or revenues . We will continue to work internally and with 

external partners to develop best practice in this area. For directly held real estate assets, real 

estate loans and infrastructure assets, we use the same approach described above. For directly 

held real esta te the impact is carried directly against the property valuation. For real estate 

loans, we assess the physical climate change risk impact by running the stressed property value 

through our debt valuation models. 

For sovereign bonds, the impact on the mar ket value of a security is measured by assessing 

how a sovereign ’s rating could change as a result of the occurrence of different extreme 

weather hazards in each scenario. The following climate -related factors may impact sovereign 

debt: exposure and vulner ability to climate change; readiness and adaptation; ability to raise 

money for mitigation and post -disaster repair; ability to raise money via taxation and debt; Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers 

381 

reliance on foreign aid and support of the International Monetary Fund and other supra -

nation al bodies. To assess a sovereign ’s vulnerability to climate change and readiness, the 

Notre -Dame University ’s Notre Dame -Global Adaptation Index (ND -GAIN) measure for 

country climate change risk has been used. We note that the assessment of sovereign debt is 

difficult because sovereigns are exposed to climate change via several vectors: government 

buildings and government owned infrastructure, cost of emergency relief to areas effected by 

climate -related disasters, aid and rebuilding costs and the cost of a cting as insurer of last resort. 

So, the ND -GAIN data has been used to help support expert judgements about the appropriate 

stresses to apply to different sovereign bonds in our modelling at this stage. We will continue 

to work internally and with external partners to develop best practice in this area. 

2.6.2 Insurance liabilities 

The Climate VaR for life insurance risks calculates the impact on reserves of a change in 

mortality rates as a result of the occurrence of different extreme weather hazards in each 

scenario based on a review of academic literature linking climate change to potential changes 

in mortality rates ( Gasparrini et al., 2017 ). For higher temperature scenarios, where climate 

change has dramatically taken hold, the picture is complicated. For example, it is possible that 

both summers and winters will be warmer or that seasons will in fact be more extreme. The 

latter is more lik ely to have an adverse impact and for the UK could plausibly result from the 

Gulf Stream changing its path and missing the UK. 

On the general insurance side, the Climate VaR calculates the impact on premiums as a result 

of the occurrence of different extr eme weather hazards in each scenario. The impact on 

premiums is then used to determine the impact on our business, considering the impact on 

pricing, sales volumes and our reinsurance strategy. During 2019 we have extended the scope 

of physical risks cover ed to different regions (UK, Canada and France) and various perils (flood, 

freeze, subsidence, wildfire, winter storm, hail and severe convective storm) noting that the 

precise list of perils is region dependent. We have worked with internal and external e xperts 

to consider how climate change could change the frequency and severity of UK Flood and 

leveraged our existing catastrophe modelling capability to assess the impact of this on 

premiums. 

Aggregation of climate -related risks and opportunities 

In conj unction with Elseware, a risk management and quantification expert consultancy, we 

have used a Bayesian Network 10 methodology to aggregate all the component parts of our 

exposure to derive an aggregate view of the impact of climate -related risks and opportu nities. 

The attraction of this approach is that we can combine a set of beliefs, expert judgements, 

internal data and external data to assess the potential impact of these risks, on an aggregated 

basis. We can then determine an overall Climate VaR for each scenario ( Figure 23 -9). 

The impact distributions of each climate scenario are then combined to give a fully aggregated 

result across all four scenarios. This final step of aggregation uses the assigned likelihood given 

to each scenario taking into consideration amongst other things the current scientific analysis 

of the likely trajectory of emissions as well as policy commitments made by countries to redu ce 

emissions ( Figure 23 -10 ).   

> 10 A Bayesian Network is a probabilistic graphical model that represents a set of variables and their conditional
> dependencies via a directed acyclic graph. Chapter 23

382 

Figure 23 -9 Aviva’s aggregation process for each scenario 

Source: Aviva 

Figure 23 -10 Overall assessed climate change impact 

Source: Aviva 

# 3 Case study 

Data inputs 

Data inputs for the Climate VaR can be broadly split into data to derive exposure and data to 

support assessing the impact of climate change. The model takes a holistic view of Aviva ’s

balance sheet and as such requires internal exposures for our assets and liabilities. Asset and 

liability data have been sourced from regulatory reporting systems (or the systems that fe ed 

into those). For assets the exposure is based on shareholder exposure (rather than Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers 

383 

policyholder exposure), for life insurance exposure is based on reserves and for general 

insurance exposure is based on premiums. 

For assets (equity, credit and property) the physical and transitional impact of the different 

climate scenarios are provided by MSCI (Carbon Delta). This model incorporates various 

datasets (some of which we have discussed above) including but not limited to output from 

an Integrated Assessment Model. For sovereign bond exposures a key input is the ND -GAIN, 

which measures a countries potential vulnerability to climate change and readiness to adapt. 

The impact for both life and general insurance has been driven by expert judgement based on 

input from internal and external experts. 

Scenario analysis 

The Climate VaR measure allows four potential future scenarios with respect to climate change 

developed by the IPCC to be analysed ( Figure 23 -11 )( IPCC, 2013 ). Each scenario describes a 

potential trajectory for future levels of greenhouse gases and other air pollutants and can be 

mapped to potential temperature rises and levels of mitig ation required: 1.5°C (aggressive 

mitigation), 2°C (strong mitigation), 3°C (some mitigation) and 4°C (Business as usual). It is 

important to note that the four scenarios all assume a gradual path, in which temperatures 

rise slowly but climate policy is ra mped up at varying speeds with a fairly high degree of global 

coordination. They do not consider the transition risk in a more chaotic policy environment, 

where there is lack of global coordination and policy action is taken too late and too suddenly. 

This may result in an understatement of climate -related risks. 

Figure 23 -11 The choice we face now 

Source: TCFD 

The initial results from Aviva ’s Climate VaR analysis compare a plausible range of outcomes 

(5th to 95 th Percentile) from the different scenarios considered. Aviva is most exposed to the 

business -as -usual 4°C scenario where physical risk dominates, negatively impacting long -term 

investment returns o n equities, corporate bonds, real estate, real estate loans and sovereign Chapter 23 

384 

exposures. The aggressive mitigation 1.5°C and 2°C scenarios are the only scenarios with 

potential upside. Physical risk impacts are more limited but there is still downside risk on long -

term investment returns from carbon intensive sectors (for example utilities) as a result of 

transition policy actions. This is offset partially by revenues on new technologies from some 

sectors (for example automotive). 

Figure 23 -12 Aviva’s Climate VaR output by scenario for shareholder funds as at 

30/11/2019 

Source: Aviva 

Note: The grey bars represent the range of outputs between the 5th percentile and 

the central estimate for each scenario and the orange bars represent the range 

between the central estimate and the 95th percentile. 

When aggregated together to determine an overall impac t of climate -related risks and 

opportunities across all scenarios, the plausible range is dominated by the results of the 3°C 

and 4°C scenarios, reflecting that neither existing nor planned policy actions are sufficiently 

ambitious to meet the 1.5°C Paris Agreement target. In the 1.5°C scenario, transition risk is 

larger than physical risk even after considering mitigating technology opportunities ( Figure 

23 -3). In the 2°C scenario, transition and physical risks are somewhat balanced, whereas in the 

3°C and 4°C scenarios physical risk dominates. 

Figure 23 -13 Physical versus transition risks by scenario for Aviva’s shareholder 

funds as at 30/11/2019 

Source: Aviva Aviva’s Analysis of Climate Value at Risk for Asset Owner and Managers 

385 

In all scenarios the impact on insurance liabilities is more limited than on investment returns. 

However, there is potential for some impact on li fe and pensions business as a result of 

changes in mortality rates in different scenarios either from physical effects such as more 

extreme hot and cold weather or transition effects related to changes in pollution levels. The 

impact on general insurance l iabilities is relatively limited because of the short -term nature of 

the business and the ability to re -price annually and mitigation provided by our reinsurance 

programme. However, the physical effects of climate change will result in more risks and peril s

becoming either uninsurable or unaffordable over the longer term. 

# 4 Limitations and outlook 

Aviva will continue to develop and incorporate Climate VaR into its overall strategy, risk 

management and reporting frameworks. In particular, it will refine and i mprove the Climate 

VaR approach in the light of new research and data as well as emerging best practice including 

using output from the UNEP FI Insurance TCFD pilot. In addition, litigation risk could be 

explicitly modelled as could transition risk for sov ereign bonds or physical risk modelling 

extended to cover wider factors such the supply chain, demand for products or services and 

access to capital. We could also consider how adaptation measures could be incorporated. Chapter 23 

386 

# Bibliography 

Gasparrini, A., Guo, Y ., Sera, F., Vicedo -Cabrera, A. M., Huber, V., Tong, S., . . . Correa, P. M. 

(2017). Projections of temperature -related excess mortality under climate change 

scenarios. The Lancet Planetary Health, 1 (9), e360 -e367. 

Hajat, S., Vardoulakis, S., Heaviside, C., & Eggen, B. (2014). Climate change effects on human 

health: projections of temperature -related mortality for the UK during the 2020s, 

2050s and 2080s. J Epidemiol Community Health, 68 (7), 641 -648. 

IPCC, I. (2013) . Fifth assessment report (AR5).  IPCC: Geneva, Switzerland , 10 -12. 

Vallero, D. A. (2014).  Fundamentals of air pollution : Academic press. Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

387 

# Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help 

# Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

By 

Risk Management Solutions (RMS) 1

# Abstract 

Catastrophe risk models are widely used by the insurance industry to quantify risk from 

climate -related events. They can also be used to quantify physical climate risk impacts beyond 

insurance – as companies, investors, governments , and regulators look for answers. This 

chapter discusses how catastrophe risk models work, what the key components are that make 

up a risk model, and how different organizations are using these models to assess physical 

climate change risk. 

Keyword s: catastrophe risk models, physical climate change risk 

# 1 Introduction 

The impact of physical climate change risk on our world is the source of many questions. Wh at 

could be the possible extent of the exacerbated damage caused to communities around the 

globe in 10, 20 or 50 years ’ time or more due to climate change? What will be the financial 

cost of the buildings and infrastructure made unusable by continual flood ing? How will asset 

prices be affected, or for interconnected, global supply chains, what will the cost of recovery 

be? 

For future development, we need to build to mitigate what climate change could have in store, 

through directly tackling carbon emission s to put us on a different path, to transition to cleaner 

industries for instance, or adaptation – adjusting construction methods and standards to cope 

with new extremes. 

There is an urgent need to quantify physical climate change risk, as warning after wa rning 

comes from the scientific community about how climate change is already impacting the earth, 

and what the future has in store unless radical action to curb carbon emissions is taken very 

soon. Recent catastrophes such as Hurricane Harvey in 2017, wil dfires in California during 

2017 -18 and the 2019 -20 Australian bushfires have been attributed to some extent to climate 

change by climate scientists. Sea level rise, changes to sea ice formation, retreating glaciers, 

warming and acidifying oceans, rising t emperatures and record levels of carbon dioxide and 

other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, are all measurable aspects of climate change. 

The speed of the change is causing concern. Central banks and regulators such as the Bank of 

England Prudential Reg ulation Authority have issued new stress tests, with consultations 

starting for new tests in 2021. New climate change reporting standards for businesses such as 

the Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) are                   

> 1This chapter is written by Ben Brookes, man aging director –Capital and Resilience Solutions of RMS, email:
> Ben.Brookes@rms.com .Chapter 24

388 

ro lling in – TCFD has more than 1,000 members – asking businesses, governments to start to 

quantify physical, liability and transition risks associated with climate change, and to start 

drawing up action plans to manage them. 

The climate models themselves re present a fast -evolving science, scenarios such as the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) ’s Representative Concentration Pathways 

(RCPs) shape trajectories of greenhouse gas emissions reflecting various actions taken by 

society to either redu ce or even ignore climate warnings. With all this, how can the probability 

of different scenarios be calculated, how can the dollar value of action or inaction be assessed, 

and in terms of the losses incurred as a result of future climate change events, wh at is in store 

for us all? 

This confluence of science, risk distribution, on -the -ground reality, and financial loss has been 

tackled before. Many of these questions have been grasped by catastrophe risk modeling, and 

physical climate change risk represents another risk to analyze and manage. 

Models for measuring catastrophe loss have been developed since the late 1980s; as growing 

computer power helped link previously disparate areas such as scientific studies of natural 

hazards, historical event datasets and geographic information systems (GIS) together. 

Historical, actuarial -based risk modeling approaches, reliant on an empirical data set of actual 

events, which might only reliably go back less than 100 years, do provide a rich, vital 

foundation for a ris k model, and a means of validation. 

But these historical -based approaches were found wanting in the early 1990’ s. Hurricane 

Andrew, a Category 5 storm that hit Florida in 1992 stood out as a turning point for more 

sophisticated risk modeling techniques. A s we face a similar turning point with physical climate 

change risk, it is interesting to examine what happened to the risk community before and after 

Andrew, as the community learned how to better manage the risk and move forward. 

Hurricane Andrew 

Florida had never experienced a Cat 5 strength hurricane before and for an event of this 

strength, the potential level of losses had been underestimated. Before Hurric ane Andrew, a 

projected loss estimate for an event of this size was US$4 to 5 billion (1992 valu es) . In the end 

the economic losses reached US$26.5 billion with insured losses of US$15.5 billion. It was the 

costliest natural disaster to ever hit the United States. Eight insurance companies became 

insolvent, and a number of insurers left the state res ulting in the setting up of an involuntary 

insurance market (state pools). 

Similar to financial institutions now, faced with quantifying the cost of physical climate change 

risk, the insurance industry recognized that its approach to risk modeling and mana gement 

had to change. Catastrophe risk modeling companies, such as RMS which was founded in 1989, 

began to pioneer this new approach of probabilistic risk modeling. At their core, catastrophe 

models have helped insurance companies ensure they have the capi tal needed to pay the 

anticipated losses and support the fundamentals of the business. These models have helped 

to create a standardized “currency of risk ” that allow risk data to be transferred and 

understood from one party to another. 

As the 1990s progr essed and through to the present day, risk modeling has expanded to more 

perils and regions, and introduced new forms of capital into the market, such as insurance -

linked securities (ILS), and catastrophe bonds to assist nation states with rebuilding after a

disaster. Models continue to grow in their scope and sophistication, covering “human -made ”

perils such as terrorism and cyber, and their usage outside of the insurance industry has grown. Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

389 

Catastrophe risk models have also acted as a catalyst for action . The ability to calculate the 

potential financial loss from perils for a country, region, through to a single structure is helping 

all stakeholders who plan, build or finance these assets. Through this understanding of a risk, 

it is possible to start to m anage it – whether it is through actions such as mitigation, risk 

transfer, or effective capital management for those who hold an asset or a risk. 

Risk models have been used to begin to assess the financial impact of climate change, such as 

sea level rise. Examples from RMS include studies with the OECD in 2007 looking at the risk of 

sea level rise to port cities around the world; in 2014, RMS partnered with the Risky Business 

initiative to examine the effect of sea level rise along the East Coast of the U. S., projected 

through to 2100. These projects and others looked to establish the economic cost of the effects 

of climate change. Through modification of catastrophe risk models to attempt to reflect 

future events influenced by climate change, it is possibl e to make the breakthrough and 

equate the costs and impacts from a micro local level to nation states, and to examine the 

potential of mitigation. 

How do the modular components within a risk model work? 

Looking at the basics and the original principles of catastrophe risk modeling, models, by 

definition, attempt to provide a representation of complex physical phenomena and their 

impact on portfolios of assets, whether they are owned or insured. This probabilistic approach 

lies at the heart of modeling the c omplexity inherent in catastrophes, but the approach is 

complex itself. Probabilistic modeling requires simulating thousands of these representative, 

or stochastic, catastrophic events in time and space; compiling detailed databases of building 

inventories and estimating physical damage to various types of structures and their contents. 

The physical damage then needs to be translated to monetary loss; and, finally, totaling this 

for a portfolio – from a single building to millions of structures in a country as big as the U.S. 

It would be impossible to include or replicate absolutely every aspect required to deliver a 

completely precise result. So, from the modeler ’s perspective, the task is to simulate, 

realistically and adequately, the most important aspect s of this very complex system and the 

associated uncertainty. Risk managers who use a model need to familiarize themselves with 

the underlying assumptions of the models and understand the implications and limitations of 

their output in order to utilize the results effectively. 

Catastrophe models require substantial amounts of data for model construction and validation. 

Over time, the volume of data has increased dramatically, as more data sources have been 

introduced to give more rich, granular detail from millions of data points in a wind -field or 

storm surge hitting a shore through to finite descriptions of an individual structure. 

Collaboration across many disciplines is required, as the reliability of a risk models depends 

heavily on an understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms that control the 

occurrence and behavior of natural hazards. While no single individual would claim to have a 

complete understanding of all the intricacies of these physical systems, scientists and 

engineers, aided by inc reasingly sophisticated instrumentation and computing capabilities, 

have accumulated vast amounts of information and knowledge in these areas. By 

incorporating this information, the sophisticated theoretical and empirical models currently 

being developed c an reasonably simulate these complex phenomena. 

The basic framework for modeling the impacts of natural hazards on exposures can be broken 

down into the following four modules ( Figure 24 -1): Chapter 24 

390 

• Stochastic Event Module 

• Hazard Module 

• Vulnerability Module 

• Financial Analysis Module 

Figure 24 -1 Main modules used with catastrophe risk models 

Stochastic Ev ent Module: Defining the Hazard Phenomena 

The first stage of catastrophe modeling begins with the generation of a stochastic event set, 

which is a database of scenario events. Each event is defined by a specific strength or size, 

location or path, and prob ability of occurring or event rate. Thousands of possible event 

scenarios are simulated based on realistic parameters and historical data to probabilistically 

model what could happen over time. 

Hazard Module: Assessing the Level of Hazard 

The hazard compon ent of catastrophe models assesses the level of physical hazard across a 

geographical area at risk. For hurricanes for instance, a model calculates the strength of the 

winds around a storm, considering the region ’s terrain and built environment ( Figure 24 -2). 

Figure 24 -2 Typical framework for catastrophe modeling 

Vulnerability Module: Quantifying the Physical Impact of Hazard on Properties at Risk 

The vulnerability component calculates the amount of expected damage to the properties at 

risk. Vulnerability functions are region -specific and vary by a property ’s susceptibility to 

damage from earthquake gr ound shaking or hurricane winds, for example. Parameters 

defining this susceptibility include a building ’s construction material, its occupancy type, its 

year of construction, and its height. Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

391 

In catastrophe models, different vulnerability curves are used to estimate damage for a 

structure, its contents, and time element coverages such as business interruption loss or 

relocation expenses. Damage is quantified as a mean damage ratio, which is the ratio of the 

average anticipated loss to the replacement value of the building. This module also includes 

critical estimates of uncertainty around expected damage ( i.e., standard deviations). 

Together, the stochastic event, hazard and vulnerability modules comprise what is traditionally 

known as a probabilistic risk analysis. 

Financial Module: Measuring the Monetary Loss from Various Financial Perspectives 

Catastrophe loss models can be thought of as one application of probabilistic risk analysis, 

characterized by their refinement of the financial analysis module. Thi s module translates 

physical damage into total monetary loss. For insurers, estimates of insured losses are then 

computed by applying policy conditions (e.g. deductibles, limits) to the total loss estimates. 

Losses from a catastrophe run much deeper than j ust the immediate physical damage, and 

modeling will also examine the longer -term losses due to the need to restore both social and 

physical infrastructure. Power, water, sanitation, healthcare, education – through to transport, 

supply chains, law and orde r, each factor is interlinked to each other in terms of restoration 

after a disaster. Business interruption, common in many business insurance policies, looks to 

help as a business suffers a loss of trade – whether it is without power, supplies or customer s. 

Pressure on both construction labor and materials pushes up prices and slows down recovery. 

These factors can be as detrimental as the initial losses. 

Business interruption is calculated by estimating downtime based on the physical damage to 

a building itself, as well as to critical lifelines required to support use of the building (e.g. water 

and power) for its operational purpose. Economic factors inflating losses following an event 

are captured within our post -event loss amplification model which adju sts losses upwards 

depending upon the level of demand surge, claims inflation and other secondary effects, such 

as containment failures or long -term evacuation anticipated from a particular event. 

Modeled output 

The main output of a probabilistic catastrop he model is the Exceedance Probability (EP) curve, 

which illustrates the annual probability of exceeding a certain level of loss. Typically, EP curves 

are displayed graphically, but they can also be summarized by key return period loss levels. For 

example, a 0.4 percent annual probability of exceedance corresponds to a 250 -year return 

period loss (i.e., 1/250 = 0.4 percent). The data for this is derived from the Event or Period Loss 

Table, which contains a database of all possible independent events for a g iven peril, and a 

calculation of the frequency and severity of individual events – all these events are used to 

total up the average annual loss (AAL). Chapter 24 

392 

Figure 24 -3 Exceedance Probability (EP) curve 

The AAL is a key risk metric – an estimate of the annual excepted losses from the modeled 

peril(s) over time, assuming that the exposure remains constant. AAL is used in EP curves (see 

Figure 24 -3), calculated as the area under the EP curve or as the sum product of the mean loss 

and the annual likelihood of occurrence ( i.e., the event rate) for each event in the event set, 

and can be used to evaluate the catastr ophe load portion of an insurance rating function. 

Using modeled losses 

Modeled loss results provide valuable insight into the potential severity and frequency of 

catastrophic losses, and into the volatility of the analyzed risks. The quantification of th ese 

components can then be used to assist risk managers with critical decisions around key issues 

such as portfolio management, individual risk assessment, and – for insurers in particular –

pricing. By using AAL, commonly used by insurers to understand th e changes in loss drivers, 

an asset manager, for instance, can understand how losses could grow over time, make 

judgments on the potential effects on asset prices, ensure diversification and take decisions 

on whether to add or divest to a portfolio. 

# 2 Using catastrophe risk models to assess physical climate change 

# risk 

As mentioned previously, many organizations are using catastrophe risk models to get an 

understanding of the impact of physical climate change risk for regions that they cover or a 

portfolio of liabilities or assets, for example. Developed based on physical principles to reflect 

the current risk, catastrophe models can be modified to capture forward looking projections. 

Hazard model components can be adjusted to reflect future climate change sce narios, 

vulnerability adjusted to account for population, exposure and construction changes, making 

catastrophe models a valuable tool in examining physical climate change risk. 

While catastrophe models use historical data for calibration during developmen t, the 

stochastic events contained within them are not confined to history, representing the Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

393 

complete range of physically possible events under the current climate. These include 

currently rare events which may become much more frequent under future climat e change 

scenarios. As a result, many of the effects of future climate change can be captured through 

an adjustment to the frequency of existing events within the model. Changes to severity such 

as sea level rise may not so easily be captured via frequency adjustments, but can be 

represented through changes to the hazard of existing events within the model, for instance 

increasing the inundation extent and depth of a storm surge event to represent the greater 

hazard that would occur under higher sea levels. In this section, we examine three recent 

applications of catastrophe risk models to help assess physical climate change risk. 

Sea level rise action plan for San Francisco 

In 2013, the City of San Francisco appointed a Sea Level Rise (SLR) Technical Commit tee to 

address the SLR vulnerability with a focus on the city -owned assets contained in its 10 -year 

capital plan. In the twentieth century, sea levels had risen by eight inches around the San 

Francisco Bay and Pacific Coast, and by the end of the twenty -fi rst century, sea levels were 

most likely to rise by an additional 36 inches. Tidal activity – King Tides or extreme tides caused 

by storms or El Niño, for instance, can reach up to 42 inches (100 -year extreme tide) above the 

average daily tide. 

In a ground breaking study started in 2015, coordinated across several San Francisco 

departments and asset owners from the public and private sector, the then Major Ed Lee, set 

about to produce a Sea Level Rise Action Plan. The plan would use the latest climate scienc e

and would help set an aggressive agenda for further analysis, adaptation, planning and 

implementation. Given the current understanding of SLR potential, San Francisco needed to 

identify the best course of action to prepare for the future. The decision -ma king process 

required balancing risks and costs, to be able to answer the question: If no special actions are 

taken to prepare for SLR, what would be the financial impact on public and private property? 

Taking an upper -end projection of SLR of 66 inches by the year 2100, RMS completed an 

analysis to quantify the economic risk to San Francisco property from future sea level rise. 

When discussing flooding in this context, it was important to distinguish between permanent 

flooding that will occur due to SLR an d temporary flooding that will occur as a result of extreme 

tide events. The permanent inundation of a building will render its entire value completely 

unusable, while temporary flooding will cause damage that can potentially be repaired and 

will likely be far lower than the full value of the building. For this study, it was assumed that 

property located within the upper -range, 66 -inch scenario will be permanently lost if nothing 

is done to protect against SLR; property within the 108 -inch scenario includes these properties 

plus those that will be at risk to some level of flooding under a 100 -year extreme tide. 

2.2.1 Data Requirements 

RMS used a proprietary, industry -standard valuation model and property data to create a 

building -by -building exposure dataset for privately owned properties ( i.e., private property) 

within the SLR Vulnerability Zone, which was then overlaid onto the inundation footprints. This 

dataset is used as the basis of an analysis of the value of the exposed private property. 

In ad dition to the replacement cost, the private property data contained information used for 

catastrophe risk modeling, such as the occupancy type, number of stories, construction type, 

and year built, to give a more granular view of the type of properties in San Francisco that will 

be affected by SLR. Viewing total exposure in each scenario broken down by the property ’s

primary use, for example, reveals that the majority of vulnerable buildings currently contain 

commercial or industrial uses. Further, when the 100 -year extreme tide is added to permanent Chapter 24 

394 

SLR flooding conditions, a significant amount of additional property will be at risk, almost 

doubling the exposure value. 

For public building data, this was derived by combining building information from the RMS 

exposure dataset with value information provided by San Francisco. Information about 

impacted infrastructure, certain Port of San Francisco facilities, and the San Francisco Airport 

was provided based on independent asset analyses carried out by San Franc isco, and exposure 

estimates were provided for each asset, as well as each asset category and each scenario. 

Figure 24 -4 Sea -level Projections for San Francisco Relative to the Year 2000 

Source: San Franci sco Sea Level Rise Action Plan – National Research Council (NRC) 

statistics 

RMS found that US$55 billion of private and public sector property in the low -lying coastal 

areas around San Francisco would be permanently inundated by the end of the century –

within a SLR vulnerability zone ( Table 24 -1 and  Table 24 -2). The calculation assumes that no 

measures are put in place to increase th e city ’s resilience and reflects present day costs to 

rebuild the affected buildings and infrastructure, rather than the market values in 2100. 

Table 24 -1 Total property value at risk by 2100 in San Francisco by category. Value 

expressed in 2016 US Dollar value of property replacement value and does not take 

into account any planned or anticipated adaptation efforts 

Source: San Francisco Sea Level Rise Action Plan/RMS Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

395 

Table 24 -2 Total value of private property at risk by 2100 in San Francisco by 

category. Value expressed in 2016 US Dollar value of property replacement value 

and does not take into account any planned or anticipated adaptation efforts 

Source: San Francisco Sea Level Rise Action Plan/RMS 

RMS also calculated the property loss estimates for a 1 -in -100 -year extreme storm surge 

temporarily pushing up sea levels further to 108 inches. In this scenario, an additional US$22 

billion of prope rty assets would be at risk, bringing the total exposure to US$77 billion. Public 

assets including San Francisco International Airport were in the vulnerability zone. 

Regulators look to assess climate change risk 

There is a great deal of interest from fina ncial regulators across the globe to include climate 

change risk factors into their regulatory regimes. One example of this is the U.K. Prudential 

Regulation Authority (PRA). In 2013, the Bank of England was given new duties in respect of 

insurers and is r esponsible for the prudential supervision of all authorized insurers in the U.K. 

In 2017, the Bank published an article in its Quarterly Bulletin recognizing that climate change, 

and society ’s responses to it, present financial risks which impact upon the Bank ’s objectives. 

It identified that these risks arise through two primary channels: the physical effects of climate 

change and the impact of changes associated with the transition to a lower carbon economy, 

and it set out its response which had two core elements. First, to engage with firms which face 

current climate -related risks, such as segments of the insurance industry. Second, enhancing 

the resilience of the U.K. financial system by supporting an orderly market transition. 

The Bank believes that fo rming a strategic response to the financial risks from climate change 

will help ensure it can fulfil its mission to maintain monetary and financial stability, both now 

and for the long term. The Bank has acted on many fronts, including a close interest in the 

Financial Stability Board ’s TCFD and co -chairing the G20 Green Finance Study Group on behalf 

of the United Kingdom. 

The PRA is a member of the Sustainable Insurance Forum with other like -minded regulators 

looking to strengthen the understanding and res ponse to sustainability challenges in 

regulation. One of the first major actions by the U.K. PRA was the introduction of Climate 

Change Scenarios into its biennial General Insurance Stress Test (GIST). As part of the GIST, the 

PRA asked the largest U.K. re gulated general insurers and Lloyd ’s syndicates to respond to a 

set of climate change scenarios. An exploratory exercise, it was designed to provide additional 

market impetus in this area. 

The exercise comprised three climate change scenarios, some based o n IPCC scenarios, looking 

at the potential impact of climate change: Chapter 24 

396 

• Scenario A: In 2022 based on a disorderly transition 

• Scenario B: In 2050 based on an orderly transition in line with the Paris Agreement, 

with a maximum temperature increase well below 2 degrees 

• Scenario C: In 2100 based on failed future improvements in climate policy, with a 

temperature increase in excess of 4°C 

Table 24 -3 Selected climate change scenarios used by the U.K. Prudential 

Regulation Authority for its 2019 General Insurance Stress Test exercise 

Assumption  Scenario 

A

Scenario 

B

Scenario 

C

U.S. Hurricane 

Percentage increase in frequency of major hurricanes  5%  20%  60% 

Uniform increase in wind speed of major hurricanes  3%  7%  15% 

Percentage increase in surface run -off resulting from 

increased tropical cyclone -induced precipitation 

(Cumecs) 

5%  10%  40% 

Increase in cm in average storm tide sea -levels for U.S. 

mainland coastline between Texas and North Carolina. 

Figures exclude wave set -up and run -up 

10cm  40cm  80cm 

U.K. Weather 

Percentage increase in surface run -off resulting from 

increased preicpitation (Cumecs)  5%  10%  40% 

Uniform increase in cm in average storm tide sea -

levels for U.K. mainlande coastline  2cm  10cm  50cm 

The PRA requested (re)insurers to report on the physical risks and potential losses for their 

liabilities and the transition and physical risks to their investments under these scenarios, 

together with “assumptions ” – a range of examples of how climate cha nge may impact 

particular aspects of U.S. hurricane and U.K. weather frequency and severity. The PRA 

specified different percentage or absolute changes for the assumptions associated with each 

of the three scenarios. 

To assist clients, RMS offered two pote ntial routes to calculate the increased gross annual 

average losses and a 100 -year return period aggregate exceedance probability (AEP) loss as a 

result of these scenarios, and developed internally adjusted views of its RMS North Atlantic 

Hurricane Model, RMS U.S. Inland Flood HD Model, RMS Europe Windstorm Model, and RMS 

Europe Inland Flood HD Model. 

From a modeling perspective, for U.S hurricane RMS developed internal views which reflected 

increased frequencies of U.S. hurricanes through modification of long -term rates and 

adjustments to the hurricane strength categories; increases in uniform wind speeds and 

surface water run -off and average storm tide sea levels. For U.K. flood, surface run -off was 

increased together with uniform increases in average sto rm tide sea levels. Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk 

397 

Clients could multiply their own AAL and 100 -year return period AEP by predetermined 

“industry factors ” calculated by RMS which reflect the percentage loss changes for an overall 

view of the change, or use a bespoke service where RMS w ould run the adjusted models for a 

client ’s specific portfolio. The latter approach gave a more tailored assessment that better 

reflects a client ’s book of business. 

The exercise provided useful insight into where the direction of travel could be in terms of 

increased losses, with significant differences between the three scenarios. It provides 

awareness about the potential future risk and has acted as kick -start for insurers to include 

climate change risk assessment into their strategy. Other regulators ac ross financial services 

and insurance are looking to follow suit. 

Modeling the impact of severe drought for corporate lenders 

Drought is often overlooked when examining the physical risk of climate change, even though 

it is a significant potential source of shock to the global financial system. There is also a 

common misconception that sustained lack of water is primarily a problem for agriculture and 

food production. But, in Europe alone, it is estimated that around 40 percent of total water 

extraction is used for industry and energy production (cooling in power plants) and 15 percent 

for public water supply. Globally, the main water consumption sectors are irrigation, utilities 

and manufacturing. 

In essence, practically every industry in the world has som e reliance on water availability in 

some shape or form, and in this increasingly interconnected world it means that the impact of 

drought on one industry sector or one geographic region can have a material impact on 

adjacent industries or regions, regardle ss of whether they themselves are impacted by that 

phenomenon or not. Corporate lenders need to be able to quantify the default losses they 

would expect if severe drought events were to occur. 

In 2016, the Natural Capital Finance Alliance, which is made up of the Global Canopy Program 

and the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative, teamed up with Deutsche 

Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH Emerging Markets Dialogue on 

Finance (EMDF) and several leading financial institution s to launch a project to pilot scenario 

modeling for drought. Funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 

Development, RMS was appointed to develop a first -of -its -kind drought model. The aim was 

to help financial institutions and wid er economies become more resilient to extreme droughts. 

RMS adapted its risk modeling frameworks frequently used by insurers with help from a 

consortium complemented by the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford – to build a tool for 

banks to stress test the impact of drought. As part of this work, RMS investigated the likelihood 

of having a severe drought event, and the extent to which climate change has modified this 

likelihood. Although in this project, scenarios were devised, it would be possible to adapt the 

modeling further to make it fully probabilistic 

Some of the findings show that extreme droughts could increase loan defaults ten -fold for 

institutions with specific portfolios that are most exposed to drought risks. Even when exposed 

to drought scenarios of medium severity, most companies see their credit ratings downgraded. 

The most affected sectors are water supply, agriculture and power generation, particularly in 

countries that are heavily reliant upon hydroelectric power. Significant impacts are also found 

in water -dependent sectors such as food and beverages. 

Some of the largest losses seen in some of the scenarios were not necessarily a result of an 

industry sector not having access to water, but because other industry sectors didn ’t have Chapter 24 

398 

access to water, so demand dropped significantly and those companies were therefore not 

able to sell their wares. This was particularly true for petrochemical businesses that are heavily 

reliant on the health of the broader economy, with the model providing a broad framework 

that incorporates domestic interconnectivity and trade, as well as global macroeconomic 

effects. 

There is significant scope to apply this approach to modeling other major threats and potential 

sources of global economic shock, including natural, manmade and emerging perils, as 

drought is just one environmental risk facing the financial services industry. This approach can 

be replicated to measure the potential impact of other systemic risks on macro and micro 

economic scales. 

The banking sector is starting to see the relevance of stress testing portfolios on a geographic 

basis, and especially for mortgage books the required level of geographic information is 

emerging, making this type of modeling more readily implementable to the sector. 

Global ( re) insurer builds climate change action plan 

A global top 20 insurer and reinsurer wanted to analyze the potential impact of climate change 

on modeled losses for its portfolio. As part of the business ’s climate change action plan, it 

wanted to bette r understand the uncertainty around climate -change driven changes in future 

losses to produce metrics and targets for how it manages climate change risk and 

opportunities across its business. 

Through identifying the drivers of changes in risk within its po rtfolio, it could then target areas 

and priorities for further analyses, which can then inform its internal discussions and 

ultimately its business strategy. Two perils and regions came under the spotlight; U.S. 

hurricane and Australia cyclone. RMS was ask ed to help establish modeled losses for three 

different timeframes, through to 2030, 2050 and as far out as 2100. 

The IPCC, founded in 1988, is an intergovernmental body of the United Nations with a stated 

aim to “provide the world with objective, scienti fic information relevant to understanding the 

scientific basis of the risk of human -induced climate change, its natural, political, and 

economic impacts and risks, and possible response options .”2 The IPCC publishes regular 

Assessment Reports, the first wa s published in 1990, and since 2000, it has included 

projections of greenhouse gas emissions, and from 2014, it includes RCPs which describe 

different climate futures. These RCPs are all considered possible depending on the volume of 

greenhouse gases (GHG) emitted in the years to come. The different pathways also reflect how 

collective mitigation efforts will affect emissions.     

> 2Please see IPCC (2013). Principles governing IPCC work, IPCC Batumi, Ga. Link: https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/ipcc -
> principles/ipcc -principles.pdf .Using Catastrophe Risk Modeling to Help Understand Physical Climate Change Risk

399 

Figure 24 -5 Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) featured in the IPCC 

Fifth Assessment Report 

–RCP2.6: Most stringent mitigation is put into 

place. Emissions reach a peak by 2020 

–RCP4.5: Emissions continue to rise until 2040 

after which they begin to decline 

–RCP6.0: Emissions continue to rise until 2080 

after which they begin to decline 

–RCP8.5: Extremely high levels of emission occur 

unchecked 

Emissions levels and the effect of mitigation efforts are all very uncertain. But, by selecting an 

RCP it provides a basis for the analysis to assess the impact on key global cl imate variables, 

such as air/sea temperature and sea levels – and onward to assessing the impact on specific 

perils. 

RCP4.5 was selected as a default view for the project; it is a well -established and frequently 

quoted scenario, but also the lower RCP2.6 a nd extreme RCP8.5 were considered. When 

examining the impact of climate change on local and global climate variables, the most well -

respected and commonly used modeling framework is the Coupled Model Intercomparison 

Project (CMIP) model ensemble. 

When exam ining the resulting changes in tropical cyclone activity, RMS used the latest 

scientific reference papers to estimate future changes along the U.S. and Australia coastlines, 

and for storm surge risk in the U.S. In order to assess resulting impacts on model ed losses to 

our clients ’ portfolio, RMS modified the rate assumptions underlying the latest RMS North 

Atlantic Hurricane and Australia Cyclone Models to reflect the tropical cyclone frequency 

changes projected in the two selected reference papers for each region. The RMS long -term 

view of North Atlantic hurricane risk was used as the baseline for the U.S. RMS assessed 

modeled losses across the RMS Industry Exposure Database for wind and storm surge losses 

for each timeframe and also for the client ’s specif ic portfolio. Risk from hurricane storm surge 

saw losses increase significantly, with annual average losses more than doubling by the end of 

the century. 

Accounting for exposure changes 

To account for possible future changes to exposure in Australia and t he U.S., RMS developed 

a series of county -level factors, which reflected how the exposure for each county is projected 

to change by 2050. These factors were then applied on both the industry -wide and the client ’s

portfolio loss results, to provide view of how exposure changes might be expected to impact 

tropical cyclone risk in the future. Chapter 24 

400 

Typically, exposure projection exercises are used to forecast existing data (census housing 

counts, for example) into the very near future, usually in the order of 3 -5 ye ars. In order to 

project current exposure to 2050, a different approach needed to be developed. Population 

growth was selected as a proxy for longer -term exposure trends and used to develop a time 

series of exposure projections to 2050 based on established research and projection 

benchmarks. The key driver of the change in exposure across both countries is population 

growth. Population is expected to grow by 19 percent in the U.S. and 31 percent in Australia 

by 2050, with a trend of particularly high growth rates in urban areas. 

In addition, the redistribution of the population due to climate change (specifically, rising sea 

levels) was incorporated in the analysis. For this aspect of the analysis, the population map 

was overlaid with sea level rise inundati on maps and a relationship linking time to/since 

inundation with relocation was developed to consider coastal retreat caused by rising sea 

levels. 

To determine the speed at which a population moves from an area prone to inundation, a 

distribution is applie d on when residents are expected to relocate relative to when they are 

inundated (e.g. x percent will have left by the time they are inundated etc.). In terms of 

relocation location, assumptions are made on how far residents would move, such as 20 

percent staying within the same ZIP code. 

The resulting changes in population due to both growth and coastal retreat were aggregated 

into adjustment factors for each U.S. and Australian county and applied to the present -day 

industry and client portfolio. Combining the peril analysis with the exposure changes, RMS 

could then show by overall losses or at state/county level, the changes in annual average loss, 

with some areas showing greater levels of losses than the country average. 

Using this analysis as a baseline, the client can then build on this and examine other potential 

scenarios, such as a different RCP or modifications in factors such as tropical cyclone tracks, 

and precipitation. 

# 3 Conclusion 

The physical risk of climate change must be quantified in terms of the potential financial 

impact on businesses to help them and their stakeholders and regulators to adapt effectively 

to this emerging threat. Catastrophe risk models are well placed to do this and have previously 

been instrumental in driving change at simi lar times of uncertainty, such as after Hurricane 

Andrew. Probabilistic modeling is proven to capture the potential wide spread of events and 

allows for the models to reflect new possible climate change scenarios. Catastrophe risk 

models are now frequently being used by a wide range of organizations as a vital tool to help 

quantify, understand and plan for the increasing threat of climate change. Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

401 

# Modelling Climate Change Risk for the 

# Insurance Industry 

by 

Swiss Re Institute 1

# Abstract 

Modelling the insurance impact from climate change is complicated by uncertainties at two 

levels. First, there is a range of possible outcomes for underlying biophysical processes, and 

second, there are several confounding steps in the causal chain from em issions to temperature 

to global and regional climate variations to materialization of extreme weather events to the 

physical damages from catastrophes to insurance claims. Hence, the processes of how a 

changing climate impacts the frequency and severity o f natural catastrophes are not fully 

understood. There is a higher confidence about the impacts on secondary perils. However, 

many secondary perils are more difficult to model, enhancing uncertainties around modelling 

the impact of climate change. This cha pter outlines various influencing factors, time horizons, 

modelling challenges and levels of confidence for a range of natural catastrophe perils. It is 

increasingly important to regularly re -assess trends in input variables and model assumptions 

for curre nt underwriting models. Incorporating the latest findings from climate science into 

catastrophe risk modelling is necessary for increasing the sustainability of the insurance 

industry and building socio -economic resilience. 

Keyword s: climate physical risks , insurance, catastrophe risk modelling, impact of climate 

change, underwriting models 

# 1 Introduction 

One of the main challenges in understanding insurance risks arising from climate change lies 

in the range of uncertainties involved. Risks arise along a com plex causal chain. Emissions 

influence both global climate and regional climate variations, which in turn influence the risk 

of specific natural hazards (such as storm surge, floods, droughts and wildfires), which then 

influence the risk of physical damage (such as property damages, crop shortfalls and business 

interruption), which finally translate into insurance claims. There is considerable uncertainty 

involved in quantifying the parameters of the underlying biophysical processes and 

determining what the ir probability distributions look like. Modelling efforts rely on 

assumptions made along the causal chain: about emission paths and adaptation schemes ,

global and regional climate models , physical damage functions , and knock -on effects. The 

further one goe s along the chain, the greater the intrinsic model uncertainty ( McKinsey Global 

Institute, 2020 ), adding another layer on top of already uncertain parameters and processes.         

> 1This chapter is written by Thomas Holzheu, chief economist Americas, Swiss Re Institute, Swiss Reinsurance Americas,
> Armonk, NY, USA ,email: Thomas_Holzheu@swissre.com ;Michael Gloor, senior Nat Cat Specialist, Swiss Re Institute, Swiss
> Reinsurance, Zurich , Switzerland ,email :Michael_Gloor@swissre.com ;Kulli Tamm, senior Economist, Swiss Re Institute,
> Swiss Reinsurance Americas, Armonk, NY, USA ,email: Kulli_Tamm@swissre.com. Chapter 25

402 

Climate change is a systemic risk, affecting all parts of the economy. In terms of the impact on 

the insurance industry, climate change not only affects short -tail business lines such as 

property insurance, but it can also change the risk landscape for life & health or casualty 

insurance, thus requiring a holistic, long -term analysis of climate risks. Additionally, the risks 

arising from a changing climate do not stop on the liability side of an insurance company ’s

balance sheet but also affect the asset side if insurers ’ investment portfolios include assets 

that are exposed to the effec ts of a transition to a low -carbon economy. This chapter primarily 

focuses on physical risks to property re/insurance. The re/insurance industry traditionally 

deploys probabilistic catastrophe models for the purposes of risk underwriting and capital 

steeri ng. Incorporating the latest findings in climate science into catastrophe risk modelling is 

necessary to increase its usefulness to the insurance industry and society. Integrating climate 

change scenarios will allow for a more forward -looking assessment of extreme weather risk. 

# 2 Uncertainty about the magnitude of global warming 

The temperature of the atmosphere and the oceans has a direct or indirect impact on most 

physical processes in the Earth ’s system that define our climate and its extremes. The global 

average temperature itself is influenced by the concentration (and thus the emissions) of 

greenhouse gases (GHG) in the atmosphere. Any change in GHG concentrations and global 

temperatures, whether man -made or natural, will alter the risk exposure of human s, their 

assets , and the natural environment. The scientific community takes human influence on the 

Earth ’s climate as a fact, but the implications of that fact are clouded in multiple layers of 

uncertainty. 

A lot of the analysis and reporting on climate c hange is focused on the expected averages 

(means) of GHG concentration and temperature changes. For example, in a recent report, the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded: “Human activities are 

estimated to have caused approximately 1. 0°C of global warming above pre -industrial levels, 

with a likely range of 0.8°C to 1.2°C. Global warming is likely to reach 1.5°C between 2030 and 

2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate ”( IPCC, 2018 ). By the end of the 21st century, 

the IPCC projects a temperature increase of more than 4°C in a business -as -usual scenario 2.

But the uncertainty around those mid - and end -of century estimates is exceptionally wide, a 

facet that is lost in the discussion by only focusing on the means and likely out comes. As noted 

by a number of climate change researchers, focusing on the “most likely ” outcomes, even 

including some 1 -2 standard deviation bands around the mean, lulls policymakers and the 

society to a false sense of security ( Heal, 2017 ; Kunreuther et al., 2013 ; Wagner & Weitzman, 

2015 ). 

A key parameter in climate change modelling is equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS), which is 

defined as the “global average surface warming following a doubling of carbon dioxide 

concentrations. ”( IPCC, 2007 ) This is the metric that underpins all the estimates of future 

global temperatures, and any further impacts of those temperatures. In the IPCCs assessment, 

the ECS is “likely ” (that is, with probability above 66%) to be in the range 1.5 to 4.5°C ( IPCC, 

2013 ). Howev er, this means that there is up to a 17% probability that climate sensitivity is 

greater than 4.5°C even with a normal distribution. Averaging more recent estimates of 14 

leading climate scientists puts that probability even higher, at 23% ( Weitzman, 2012 ).

Distributional assumptions around the fatness of the tails of the ECS matter greatly for this 

assessment – the probability of ECS being 6°C, though low in absolute terms, is twice as large    

> 2Refers to projections for RCP -8.5 scenario, IPCC (2014) .Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry

403 

if the distribution function is lognormal rather than normal, and more than triple if the 

distribution is Pareto. 3 Yet the actual distribution appears unknowable 4 – the distributions in a 

number of published papers look quite different from one another and decidedly non -normal 

(see  Figure 25 -1). Some highly -reputed climate models give a chance of at least 15% that ECS 

is no less than 6°C ( Heal, 2017 ). 

Figure 25 -1 Estimate d probability density functions for the ECS from a variety of 

published studies 

Source: Millner et al. (2013) . Modified from Meinshausen et al. (2009) .

Taking the analysis from an uncertain ECS to estimates of GHG concentrations by end -of -

century and the resultant temperature increases, to the changes in the risk exposure profile 

for natural catastrophes, to economic and social impacts compounds the levels of scientific 

and modelling uncertainty. Uncertainty on the far -reaching implementation of climate -

mitigation and adaptation policies as well as on other macro -risk trends, such as social and 

economic development, will require the insurance industry to think in different qualitative and 

quantitative scenarios when attempting to assess the future impact o f climate change. 

Uncertainty around the primary driver for change, namely increasing global average 

temperatures, will lead to even larger uncertainty on local effects of natural catastrophes. 

This uncertainty, however, should not lead to inaction: first, several changes to local risk factors 

are already observable today and need to be incorporated into risk assessment and modelling 

for an appropriate view of today ’s risk landscape. Second, different projections are in sufficient 

agreement when limiting th e time horizon to the next few decades. In the face of climate 

change, the focus for the re/insurance industry and for financial regulators should be on an 

accurate representation of today ’s risk landscape and expected changes in the near future. 

# 3 Physical climate risks and their impact on the insurance industry 

The following sections will highlight how globally increasing temperatures and other macro -

risk trends change natural catastrophe risks. While the industry often focuses on key insurance     

> 3See Table 1, Ibid.
> 4See for example Pindyck (2011) .Chapter 25

404 

risks such a s tropical cyclones, we show the importance of also recognizing climate -induced 

changes to secondary perils that have traditionally received less attention. 

Some effects of climate change and global warming are already evident and shaking up our 

risk land scape: warmer average temperatures, rising sea levels, melting ice caps, longer and 

more frequent heatwaves, erratic rainfall patterns and more weather extremes. There are 

increasing concerns on how societies and companies manage the short - and long -term r isks 

posed by climate impacts. Risks associated with climate change include losses from both 

chronic (e.g. slow temperature increase and sea level rise) and acute physical risks (e.g. 

extreme weather events) and a repricing of financial assets in the trans ition to a low carbon 

economy (transition risks ) (see Figure 2). While physical risks can cause actual damage to 

people, assets or the environment, transition risks primarily affect the value of assets or result 

in additional costs . The scope of this analy sis focuses on modelling physical risks. A 

comprehensive risk assessment for insurance companies will require the integration of both. 

Figure 25 -2 Classification of climate change risks 

Source: Swiss Re Ins titute 

The (re)insurance industry traditionally thinks about natural -catastrophe risks in two 

dimensions: frequency and severity. Climate change affects these two dimensions, but it also 

introduces two new complexities to the risk equation: time horizon an d level of confidence. It 

is important to understand the time scale as this enables us to learn what changes have 

already happened and to make predictions about potential future changes. Slow but steady 

changes leave time for adaptation and measures to inc rease resilience. On the other hand, 

climatic changes of severe and rare events are difficult to observe because of their rare 

occurrence. Thus, many decades might be necessary to statistically prove changing trends, 

ultimately limiting (political) will to mitigate climate change and to invest in measures that 

increase resilience. 

Weather is an individual observation at a given point in space and time. Climate is the 

distribution of observations over an extended period and geography. With climate change, 

there can be a shift in the means, a change in variability or change in skew where extremes 

become more extreme and more frequent (see  Figure 25 -3). Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

405 

Figure 25 -3 Possible range of impact of climate change on climate variables (e.g. 

temperature) 

Source: IPCC (2013) 

Climate change, in combination with economic growth and rising urbanisation , is increasing 

the number of small -to -medium sized losses stemming from secondary perils and can impact 

the profitability of certain lines of business if not priced accurately. Absent a formal definition, 

industry practice has been to consider secondary perils as high -frequency, low -to -medium 

severity events as opposed to losses resulting from primary perils, which are low -frequency -

high -severity events such as earthquakes and hu rricanes. Secondary perils can happen on an 

independent basis – this would include river floods, flash floods, hailstorms, tornadoes, snow 

and ice storms, drought and wildfire outbreaks. However, often the events appear as 

secondary effects of primary peri ls, such as the flooding of Houston after hurricane Harvey in 

2017. For the last two decades, secondary perils accounted for more than half of the insured 

losses globally. The single biggest natural catastrophe insurance loss -event of 2018 was Camp 

Fire in California (USD 12 billion), a “secondary ” peril. There are areas of relatively high 

confidence in the impacts of climate change on natural hazards based on an alignment of 

empirical observations, quantitative models and unambiguous scientific theory. Man y of these 

relate to the so -called secondary perils. Sea level rise, for example, caused by thermal 

expansion of water and the melting of glaciers and icecaps will directly increase the magnitude 

of storm surges and pose a material long -term risk for low -lying coastal regions. Increased 

temperature variability can lead to longer and/or more frequent heat waves, droughts, water 

scarcity and wildfires. Confidence for these trends is high and heat waves not only affect 

agriculture, productivity, water resource s, health and mortality but also increase the risk of 

conflicts in certain regions. Increasingly hot and dry conditions also exacerbate wildfire risk, 

with severe consequences for exposure in the wildland -urban interface. Furthermore, 

increasing temperatur es enable the atmosphere to hold more water vapor, leading (on 

average) to an increased risk of extreme rainfall and subsequent flooding. While this effect can 

occur in many regions, the effect is especially impactful for torrential rainfall associated wit h

tropical cyclones. 

Currently, confidence in climate trends is considerably lower for atmospheric and 

oceanographic circulation changes, which affect natural phenomena like the frequency and 

intensity of severe tropical cyclones, European windstorms or tornado and hail storms. 

Confidence levels are partially lower due to the above -mentioned lower frequency of 

occurrence and because of the complex interplay of the climate system ( IPCC, 2018 ). While 

warmer sea -surface temperatures will increase the probabi lity of tropical cyclone formation 

and intensification, higher wind shear can be a counter -force. Uncertainty about the influence 

of climate change on jet streams, for example, will influence extratropical cyclones and impact 

the occurrence of anomalously stationary weather patterns ( Coumou et al., 2018 ). These 

complex interactions introduce a “confidence barrier ” (see Figure 4) that renders any  

> Probability
> Increase in mean
> Extremes
> shift with
> mean
> Probability
> Increase in variability
> Extremes
> become
> more
> extreme
> and more
> frequent
> Mean remains
> the

same  

> Probability
> Becomes skewed
> Mean remains
> the same
> Extreme highs
> become more
> extreme and
> more frequent
> Extreme
> lows remain
> nearly the
> same Chapter 25

406 

insurance -related quantification of climate -change effects on certain high severity perils (such 

as hurricanes) a s highly uncertain. Because of their material impact, insurers need to lower 

this barrier by increasing confidence through additional research or by quantifying modelling 

uncertainties if confidence remains low. 

Figure 25 -4 Classification of climate change effects by drivers, perils and confidence 

levels. 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

# 4 Confounding impacts of other exposure drivers: urbani sation, 

# economic development and demographics 

As climate changes, so too a re populations and economies around the world. Many loss trends 

observed today still largely originate from shifts in growing asset values and concentrations, 

as well as from changing patterns in land use. During the last six decades, the world population 

has grown by a factor of approximately 2.5 ( United Nations Department of Economic Social 

Affairs, 2019 ), while world real gross domestic product (GDP) has grown by more than 

sevenfold. In the 1950s, approximately 30% of the global population lived in urban areas. That 

figure has increased to over 50% today. These trends are expected to continue, and by 2050 

almost 70% of the global population will live in urban centres ( United Nations Department of 

Economic Social Affairs, 2018 ). Rapid urbanisation, especia lly in coastal cities, amplifies 

existing and future climate risks. B. Neumann et al. (2015) estimate that the number of people 

living in the low -elevation coastal zone, as well as the number of people exposed to storm 

surge events worldwide grow by about 1.3% annually or 0.8% faster than the overall 

population, especially in Asia and Africa. This implies that overall GDP growth for these Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

407 

countries underestimates the pace of development exposed to flood risk. Sealing of surfaces 

in cities and building activ ities in flood -prone or coastal areas increase the risk of water -related 

damage. As green areas disappear, heat and air -pollution islands intensify and pose severe 

risks to human health. Climate change often amplifies the negative impacts of human activiti es 

that remove natural absorption or buffer zones. 

Furthermore, increasing development in the wildland -urban interface (WUI) raises the risk of 

damaging wildfire. For example, between 1990 and 2010, the number of houses in the 

wildland -urban interface gre w 41% in the West of the US ( Radeloff et al., 2018 ). Having more 

structures in the WUI increases not only the damage wildfires inflict (because they are harder 

to fight) but also the risk that they will break out in the first place. Population growth and 

development are also a contributing factor for exposures to tornado risk. Population in the 

more at -risk regions in the US grew by an annual average rate of 3.0% between 1950 and 2010 

compared to 1.8% for the country overall ( Ashley & Strader, 2016 ). 

Beyond these demographic and urbanization factors, there are other economic drivers of 

exposure growth. Value of assets grow faster than GDP. For example, the value of tangible 

commercial assets and residential buildings in the US grew by 5% to 6% per year betwe en 1980 

and 2003 compared to a nominal GDP growth of 4.7% 5. Average US construction costs for new 

residential homes grew by an average real 1.1% per year between 1998 and 2017 because of 

higher standards of building due to insulation, air conditioning, plu mbing etc. ( Ford, 2017 ). 

The inclusion of socioeconomic factors in forward -looking climate change models for natural 

hazard losses show similar patterns. Several studies that use projected increases in the value 

of exposed assets project the contribution f rom socio -economic growth to be about equal or 

larger than the contribution from climate change ( Bouwer, 2013 ; Pielke Jr, 2007 ; Schmidt et 

al., 2009 ). Studies that only use population growth estimates or similar quantities such as land -

use change project the signal from climate change to be somewhat larger than the signal from 

exposure change ( Dorland et al., 1999 ). 

Example of modeling historic events with current exposure data 

To illustrate the impact of socio -economic contributions to exposure growth, we modeled the 

thought experiment what would happen if Hurricane Andrew were to hit South Florida in 2017, 

taking an identical track and at the same intensity. Swiss Re Institute ran Andrew ’s 1992 

footprint on a market portfolio for the state of Florida, in Swiss Re ’s proprietary tropical 

cyclone model. The tropical cyclone model contains every historical event in the National 

Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ’s HURDAT database along with probabilistic tropical 

cyclones for each historical tropical cyclo ne, resulting in more than 220,000 realizations of 

possible Atlantic tropical cyclones. The market portfolio is a representation of all insured 

property values (residential, commercial and automotive), along with coverage terms. 

Compared to an original ins ured loss of USD 27 bn in 2017 dollars, the 2017 insured losses 

would have increased to between 80bn to USD 100bn, assuming a similar coverage percentage 

(take -up rate, deductibles etc.) by the insurance industry, due to a combination of increased 

developm ent and asset values. Adjusted for inflation, this translates into 4 to 5% annual 

growth in exposures ( Linkin & Schwartz, 2017 ).   

> 5Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, April 2005. Chapter 25

408 

# 5 Impact of climate change on specific perils 

Wildfires 

In the case of wildfires, warming and drying are the primary causes. Pre -historical evidence 

stored in tree rings and charcoal buried in lakes tell us that for thousands of years, periods of 

warming have coincided with periods of increased wildfire activity ( Parisien et al., 2020 ). While 

fire is very complex and affected by mu ch more than just climate, the data from recent decades 

indicate that the hot years are the years with the most wildfire, and as temperatures have 

increased, burned areas have increased in step. 

Some risk solutions providers such as AIR, CoreLogic, RMS, a nd RiskFrontier have started to 

develop full -scale probabilistic wildfire models for regions with comparatively high exposure, 

such as California, Australia, and Canada ( Swiss Re Institute, 2017 ). These probabilistic models 

aim to provide assessment scores for wildfire risks that are based on a variety of 

region/location specific characteristics. Some of the factors that are considered include natural 

and man -made sources of ignition, long - and short -term weather and climatological conditions 

at the locatio n of ignition that could impact how a fire spreads, prior suppression efforts in the 

area that could have an influence on the amount of existing fuel loads, as well as current 

suppression access and capabilities. 

In comparison to other modelled natural ca tastrophe risks, wildfire is a complex paradigm with 

many elements ( Johnston, 2018 ). There is only a limited amount of historical data from which 

vulnerability curves can be developed to link hazard with actual damage to properties. 

Meanwhile, the number o f inputs a probabilistic wildfire model needs to consider is enormous 

(Parisien et al., 2020 ). In addition, physical characteristics of the surrounding interface 

locations are critical – such as construction and roof type, clearance distance, surrounding 

vegetation, and more – as lofted embers often create exposure in secondary locations. 

Meanwhile, the built environment and mitigation work in the interface area is rapidly changing. 

A key factor is a change in underlying exposures, marked by growth in popul ations and 

properties in the WUI. With rising urbanization of wildland as well as increasing industrial 

activity across the boreal forest areas, a full mapping of the Canadian WUI was only completed 

recently ( Johnston & Flannigan, 2018 ). 

Drought 

The IPCC expects higher temperatures to likely lead to greater magnitudes of agricultural 

droughts in continental area of US ( IPCC, 2018 ), in accordance to what is projected by EEA 

(European Environment Agency) regarding the frequency of meteorological and hydrolo gical 

droughts in most of Europe over the 21 st century ( European Environment Agency, 2020 ). 

Recent reports from IPCC state with high confidence that heatwaves will increase in intensity 

and duration into the 21 st century in most regions around the globe ( IPCC, 2018 , 2019 ). 

Technological advancements through different innovations are expected to be able to partly 

offset the potential increased severity of climate events in the medium time horizon ( Aggarwal 

et al., 2019 ). These include advances in precision f arming, land monitoring, irrigation efficiency, 

as well as adoption of new farm practices to mitigate and adapt to climate changes (resistant 

varieties of crops, diversification, changes in cropping patterns, etc.). This impact is expected 

to vary among re gions also based on socio -economic conditions and policy support. 

Inland flooding 

Inland flood risk, including river flood and pluvial flood risk (flooding caused by extreme 

rainfall), is expected to experience substantial changes in many regions, due to changing 

extreme precipitation patterns. As the atmosphere warms, it can hold more water vapour. In Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

409 

addition to this effect, changes in dynamical processes (e.g. hurricanes, extratropical cyclones) 

affect extreme precipitation. Large increases in flood ris k associated with hurricane rainfall are 

projected, due to a slowdown of the speed hurricanes move along their track ( Kossin, 2018 ), 

as well as increasing rainfall rates ( Liu et al., 2019 ). 

Observations of precipitation in the United States generally sugge st an increase of heavy 

precipitation, particularly in the eastern and central parts of the country, both in terms of 

intensity and frequency ( Donat et al., 2013 ). However, these trends vary regionally, with 

decreases in parts of the southern United States (Hoerling et al., 2016 ). Changes in 

precipitation may not be translated into similar changes in flooding, due to complex 

interactions between climate, catchments, rivers, and water management practices. Indeed, 

there are few sites with significant observe d changes in moderate or major floods ( Slater & 

Villarini, 2016 ). However, whilst much of the United States has shown little or no change, flood 

magnitudes have decreased in the Southwest, and increased in parts of the Midwest, and from 

the northern Appala chian Mountains to New England ( Peterson et al., 2013 ). The trends are 

not unequivocally due to climate change, with land management practices and long -term 

cycles also potential contributors to the observed patterns ( Shapley et al., 2005 ; Villarini et al., 

2011 ; Y. -K. Zhang & Schilling, 2006 ). 

Projections, however, show a clear impact of climate change on flood risk in the US. An 

increase in flood frequency is projected, with the annual number of 100 -year flood events 

expected to increase by 50% by 2100 under RCP 4.5, and by 150% under RCP 8.5 ( Wobus et 

al., 2017 ). Regionally, the largest fractional changes in flood frequency are expected to occur 

in the southern Appalachians and Ohio River valley, the northern and central Rocky Mountains, 

and the Northw est, with historical 1% AEP events becoming 2 -5 times more frequent by 2100 

in these regions. In terms of magnitude, there is a lack of a spatially coherent trend for the US 

(Arnell & Gosling, 2016 ). However, regionally, increases are expected in the centr al US ( Naz et 

al., 2016 ) and Pacific Northwest ( Salathé Jr et al., 2014 ). 

Climate change impacts on flood risk may be further exacerbated by other trends, including 

urbanization. Rapid urbanisation reduces avenues for water discharge and can lead to heavy 

flooding, as highlighted by attribution studies for Hurricane Harvey flooding ( Van Oldenborgh 

et al., 2017 ; W. Zhang et al., 2018 ) Another example is Mumbai (2005), when flooding after 

heavy rains resulted in one of the largest insurance loss events ever experienced in India (USD 

0.9 billion, according to sigma data). 

Coastal flooding 

Climate change also impacts coastal flood risk, principally via two mechanisms: global 

warming -induced sea -level rise and changes to the activity of storms associated with s urge 

(e.g. hurricane frequency and intensity changes). It is recognized that substantial but gradual 

changes in the probability of extreme storm surge events may take a long time to detect in 

observational records ( Ceres et al., 2017 ). However, observation s of coastal flooding have 

already noted an increase in risk during the past century along the US East Coast ( Grinsted et 

al., 2012 ). Increased coastal flood risk may also compound river flood risk, with evidence of a 

significant increase in the number of compound flood events over the past century at many of 

the major coastal cities of the United States ( Wahl et al., 2015 ). One such city is New York, 

which has experienced an increase in coastal flooding during the past century, with a large 

contribution fr om rising sea levels ( Talke et al., 2014 ), but also from an increase in the number 

of storm surge weather patterns that are associated with high precipitation ( Wahl et al., 2015 ). 

Projections show substantial increases in coastal flood risk for the US, wit h the greatest storm 

surge increases on the East and Gulf coasts ( J. E. Neumann et al., 2015 ). For the US Florida and Chapter 25 

410 

Gulf coasts, research suggests a median increase in storm surge risk of 25 -47% comparing the 

last two decades of the 20 th and 21 st centuri es under the RCP 4.5 scenario ( Balaguru et al., 

2016 ). Under RCP 8.5, the historical 100 -year flood level is projected to occur every 1 -30 years 

along the southeast Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the US, and annually in the New England and 

mid -Atlantic region s by the end of the century ( Marsooli et al., 2019 ). The relative contribution 

of TC climatology changes to coastal flood hazard varies along the coast, with the largest 

contributions in the Gulf of Mexico, where the effect of TC climatology is larger than that of 

sea -level rise for more than 40% of coastal counties. Yet regional differences in changes in 

coastal flood risk may vary depending on which return period is examined ( Buchanan et al., 

2017 ). For example, considering a 50 cm sea -level rise, the inc reased frequency of historically 

1-in -10 -year floods is lower in Seattle, WA than Charleston, SC, whereas for 1 -in -500 year 

floods the pattern is reversed. While sea -level rise this century is expected to be lower than 

that ( Bamber et al., 2019 ), it will n evertheless severely alter coastal flood risk ( Marsooli et al., 

2019 ). 

# 6 Modelling challenges 

Cat models and increased parameter uncertainty 

The insurance industry uses catastrophe models to assess the risks from extreme weather 

events. These models are designed to solve the analytical problem that most disaster losses 

come from a few large events. The most extreme events are rare and therefore only 

represented with few actual observations in the historic data. Cat models generate large 

numbers of synthetic events that are designed to be realistic and fill gaps in the loss history. 

These synthetic hazard events get combined with data on the physical characteristics of assets 

(such as buildings and infrastructure) to provide information about vulnerabilities to the 

modeled hazards. As a final step, modeled vulnerabilities get combined with data about 

insurance coverage to provide information about individual insurers ’ or the industry ’s financial 

exposures (see  Figure 25 -5). Catastrophe models vary in many aspects and can result in 

different probability distributions for the same insurers ’ portfolios ( Weinkle & Pielke Jr, 2017 ). 

Figure 25 -5 Layers of a typical catastrophe model 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

Such catastrophe models have served the insurance industry well until now for underwriting 

and risk -management purposes. Standard short -tail property insurance typical ly gets renewed Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

411 

on an annual basis and thus allows for continuous adjustments to underlying slow trends in 

hazard, vulnerability, exposure and insurance policies. However, these models have limitations 

when trying to assess the future medium - and long -term impact of changing climatic and 

socio -economic conditions. 

Historical bias and uncertain socio -economic and exposure trends 

Catastrophe models have been developed based on historical hazard, vulnerability and 

insurance -loss data sets and embedded theorie s and interpretations, which implicitly assume 

that the present and near future will be comparable to the past. One important modelling and 

underwriting risk in the context of climate change, and all other macro -risk trends, is a 

potential underestimation of risk premiums by relying on historical loss data or incomplete / 

outdated models to assess the current risk. Especially for low -frequency perils, this can lead 

to risk assessments that lag decades behind the current risk landscape. This is illustrated 

conceptually in  Figure 25 -6: if a risk assessment is based on a long -term historical average of 

e.g. a physical hazard, a historical bias can create a gap between actual risk and modelled risk. 

Figure 25 -6 Illustration of historical bias 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

Model builders have developed techniques to debias and correct the models for (multi -)

decadal variability of the underlying natural hazard, for changing building codes and protection 

measures that affect the vulnerability and to adjust for a growing insur ance exposure with the 

goal to best assess the current risk landscape. However, the models are, per se, not designed 

to analyse the sensitivity of financial losses in a future and potentially rapidly changing climate, 

while also incorporating future socio -economic trends as well as climate -mitigation and 

adaptation measures that eventually affect the ultimate impact on the re/insurance industry 

(see  Figure 25 -7). Therefore, all layers of a natural -catastrophe re/insurance model potentially 

need to be analysed and likely changed for an adequate representation of insurance risk in a 

future climate, leading to a vast number of model parameters that are often h ighly uncertain 

for medium - to long -term projections. While a gradual debiasing of models remains possible 

to assess today ’s property -insurance risk, even in a changing climate, the models are, by design, 

often not adequate to efficiently study the sensiti vity of many highly uncertain and time -

dependent parameters. Chapter 25 

412 

Figure 25 -7 Influence of macro trends on model components for weather -related 

risks 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

Currently, many efforts focus o n incorporating potential future hazard trends for long -term 

scenarios (e.g. 2050 and beyond) for key natural -catastrophe risks (such as North -Atlantic 

Hurricanes) while keeping other model components constant (such as the underlying portfolio 

and vulnerab ilities). While such exercises can be interesting, they provide little decision -useful 

information because today ’s insurance exposure is inserted into a possible future climate state 

without considering the complex interaction of insurance with other (soci o-economic) macro 

trends, ultimately leading to an unrealistic future representation of the insurance environment. 

An additional challenge for the re/insurance industry is that the most influential and widely 

used models are proprietary, meaning the det ails of their construction and output are not 

subject to ope n scientific debate and peer review. Finally, they are designed to be used in 

places and for assets where the insurance industry has significant exposure but tend to be less 

accurate or non -existe nt for countries where current risks are low and/or insurance cover is 

low ( Sobel, 2019 ). 

Lack of robust models for secondary perils 

Fully -probabilistic insurance models are currently well established for key perils such as 

tropical cyclone risks while secondary perils that are most affected by climate change in the 

near - and mid -term have received less attention from the modelling community. By only 

focusing on peak perils, there is therefore a considerable risk of significantly underestimating 

the over all impact of climate change by neglecting perils such as local flooding, wildfire or 

droughts. With a few exceptions (e.g. flood risk models in US), the discipline of secondary peril 

risk modelling has not been afforded the same priority as the primary pe ak loss -generating 

perils such as hurricanes in the North Atlantic. Also, secondary perils modelling is more 

complex. 

• The areas vulnerable to primary perils are generally well -defined (e.g. near seismic 

fault lines (earthquakes) and coastal areas (tropical cyclones)). Many secondary perils, Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

413 

on the other hand, can happen anywhere (e.g. heavy precipitation in large urban 

ce ntres far inland or away from river plains). Swiss Re for example developed global 

flood maps based on LiDAR data for a consistent elevation data set on a 30 -meter 

resolution. For certain markets in North America, Europe and Asia Pacific, this is 

complemen ted with modelled events for a full probabilistic model. 

• While primary perils typically affect large areas in a relatively homogeneous way, many 

secondary perils are highly localized (e.g. hailstorms or tornados) and driven by 

complex thermodynamics. A lar ge amount of data and computational power is 

required to model these perils. Data history is short and biased towards human 

observation. Today ’s weather models still cannot reliably simulate severe convective 

storms that produce tornadoes. Thus, it is diff icult for researchers to evaluate the 

impact of climate change based on current computer models because the 

counterfactual scenarios, by definition, did not actually happen ( Ornes, 2018 ). 

• Some secondary perils are strongly influenced by unpredictable human intervention. 

The scale of wildfires for example, are impacted by human prevention, ignition (e.g. 

the mechanical failure of a vehicle that set off the Carr Fire in California in 2018), 

containment and suppression activities. Pluvial flood risks are more dependent on 

urbanization, man -made surface modifications and soil conditions than for example 

storm surge risks. 

With more than 50% of insured losses over the last decade coming from secondary perils, this 

is an obvious challenge for the insurance industr y. Unlike primary perils, the regional footprint 

of secondary perils is more ubiquitous and therefore of growing relevance for many smaller 

regional and super -regional insurers outside of the traditional peak cat scenarios which did 

not need to worry too m uch about modelling cat risk exposures in the past. Currently, this is 

more a profitability topic, however, with the possibility of accelerating climate -driven claims 

trends, secondary perils can morph into a financial -stability risk for insurance companie s and 

therefore for regulators and rating agencies. 

Scenario analysis as the way forward 

Complexity and uncertainty should not stop the re/insurance industry from evaluating the 

impact of climate change on both today ’s insurance risks and the expected fut ure risk 

landscape. Improving our understanding and modelling capabilities on the impact of climate 

change help to a) ensure today ’s risk premiums and capital requirements reflect the current 

risk landscape, b) create transparency and ultimately improve st ability of financial markets by 

publicly disclosing climate -related risks to investors, and c) create a framework for decision 

makers to steer a company ’s exposure to climate risks. If companies, or the industry overall, 

fail to provide meaningful answers, ambiguity will be the result. Ambiguity (also referred to as 

parameter risk) about risk distributions increases capital cost and challenges the insurability 

of perils. Cabantous et al. (2011) show that insurers charge higher premiums when faced with 

ambig uity than when the probability of a loss is well specified (risk). Furthermore, they tend 

to charge more for conflict ambiguity (different models produce diverging probability 

distributions) than imprecise ambiguity (a model produces a loss distribution wi th low 

confidence) for flood and hurricane hazards. 

Normally, not all model parameters can be investigated with the same level of depth. However, 

meaningful scenario analyses that can be both qualitative and quantitative can help to address 

above -mentioned key purposes. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) Task Force for Climate -

related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), which is a widely supported and accepted industry body, 

has developed recommendations on how to best analyse and disclose climate -related risks. Chapter 25 

414 

For scenario analysis, TCFD has published an extensive report (TCFD, 2017 ). These 

recommendations should be used as a baseline for the industry. Individual regulatory 

jurisdictions have also developed and published frameworks for the financial industry to 

address physical and transition risk originating from climate change. For physical risks, see for 

instance Bank of England (2019) .

It should also be mentioned that the insurance industry can and should play an important role 

in communicating risks to clie nts and governments in areas that are exposed to climate -related 

risks. Climate -scenario analysis is one of the tools that can be used for such purposes. For 

example, Swiss Re has performed an analysis for New York City to not only better understand 

the ri sk drivers related to a change in frequency and intensity of hurricanes and resulting storm 

surges but also to assess the economics of climate -adaptation measures ( ECA, 2009 ). For 

example,  Figure 25 -8 shows that expected annual losses from sea -level rise and an increase in 

frequency and intensity of hurricanes could more than double by 2050. The cost/benefit ratios 

of different resiliency measures are show n on the right, providing an economic framework for 

decision makers. This case study also highlights again that climate -risk scenarios should not 

only focus on changes in hazard but should also incorporate potential risk adaptation 

measures. Extensive coas tal flood protection measures are currently under consideration or 

development to protect many urban areas around the globe. 

Figure 25 -8 Case study on changing hurricane risk in 2050 for New York City to 

anal yse drivers of loss (left) and Cost/Benefit ratios of adaptation measures (right) 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

Limited scope of modelling for long -term time horizon 

Besides above -discussed scenario -analysis frameworks, (re)insurance firms apply a forward -

looking approach through active monitoring/research, e.g. by using emerging risk and Own 

Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA) processes. The ORSA time -horizon is typic ally shorter 

than the timespan over which climate risks will evolve. However, firms could also assess their 

longer -term strategy as part of their ORSA, i.e., the impact of climate change for certain 

(re)insurance products. Emerging risk tools support the r eview of early signals. Emerging risks 

are defined as newly developing or changing risks that are difficult to quantify and could have 

a major impact on society and industry. It involves external and internal sources, e.g. databases 

and literature, and sub ject matter experts from different business areas.  Figure 25 -9 illustrates 

the complex interactions of climate change that are in scope of Swiss Re ’s “SO NAR ” early 

warning tool, an internal crowdsourcing platform that collects input and feedback from 

underwriters, client managers, risk experts and others across the company ( Swiss Re Institute, 

2019 ). The graph lists the natural catastrophe perils that are subject to explicit modelling Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

415 

efforts – at various stages – as described above. The graph also shows other areas that have 

not yet been afforded the same degree of investigation such as the impact of climate change 

on human life and health. Furthermore, t here are knock -on effects on migration, urbanisation, 

food security, water scarcity, etc. These areas are observed in a more qualitative manner which 

can morph into quantitative modelling as scientific evidence and data become available. 

Figure 25 -9 Climate change in the framework of Swiss Re’s emerging risk tool 

“SONAR” 

Source: Swiss Re Institute 

Feedback loops and tipping points 

From a broader risk management perspective, traditional approaches generally extrapolate 

from historical data and assume a normal distribution for shocks. As noted above, however, 

historical data can create a downward bias and most of the climate -related risks appear to 

have fat tails, necessitating an "epistemological break" with regard to risk management ( Bank 

for International Settlements, 2020 ). Forward -looking scenario -based analysis has started to 

develop to fill a part of this void. Nevertheless, several further modelling limitations remain to 

be addressed, including that of the timing and impact of feedback loops and tipping points. 

A major long -term risk of unmitigated climate change is posed by irreversible tipping points. 

The Earth ’s climate system comprises many dynamic oceanic and atmospheric processes, 

which are strong ly interlinked and thus not necessarily self -stabilising. This means that even 

relatively small perturbations can “tip ” the climate into a new state or initiate positive 

feedback loops, which can significantly alter the climate for centuries to come. An ex ample of 

a positive feedback loop is the thawing of permafrost in arctic regions, releasing immense 

quantities of carbon dioxide and methane currently stored in the frozen soil ( Schuur et al., 

2015 ). .The release of these greenhouse gases will cause even more warming and more 

permafrost thawing. Another feedback loop is around temperature changes and ice sheet 

disintegration. However, the parameter values that determine the strength (and even the sign) 

of those feedback loops are largely unknown or possibl y unknowable ( Pindyck, 2013 ). Such 

feedback loops are often projected to act only over the very long term (centuries and millennia) 

and therefore omitted from most general circulation models ( Weitzman, 2011 ). For example, Chapter 25 

416 

none of the IPCC ’s climate models though the Fifth Assessment Report include the warming 

tundra feedback loop ( Romm, 2018 ). Yet more recent analysis shows that some of the 

feedbacks are not as slow as previously believed ( Dixon, 2019 ). For instance, a recent paper 

for the feedback loops fr om temperature to sea level rise suggests that due to non -linear ice 

sheet dynamics, it only takes decades rather than centuries or millennia for the lag between 

the two ( Hansen et al., 2015 ). Thus, current analysis potentially significantly underestimates 

future warming. This would have follow -on implications to the risk and exposure profile on 

which catastrophe modelling depends, and the uncertainty about the changes to the risk 

landscape adds another layer of challenges to the modelling. 

# 7 Summary and conc lusions 

The effects of climate change are already evident: warmer average temperatures, rising sea 

levels, melting ice caps, longer and more frequent heatwaves, erratic rainfall patterns and 

more weather extremes. The effects contribute most notably to gro wing losses from 

secondary perils. Most of the past increase in economic and insured losses from natural 

hazards has come from greater exposure to hazards rather than increases in their mean and 

tail intensity. Yet quantifying the relative contributions of socio -economic vs climate related 

divers is challenging given the data limitations and short time periods with consistent exposure 

data. In the future, hazard intensification will likely assume a greater role. 

Modelling the insurance impact from climate change is complicated by the uncertainties 

surrounding the estimated magnitude of the underlying biophysical processes, and further 

confounded by the several steps in the causal chain from emissions to temperature to global 

and regional climate variations to materialization of extreme weather events to the physical 

damages from catastrophes to insurance claims. Hence, the processes of how a changing 

climate impacts the frequency and severity of natural catastrophes are not fully understood. 

There is a high er confidence about the impacts on secondary perils. However, many secondary 

perils are more difficult to model and have received less attention by the modelling community 

in the past, enhancing the current uncertainties in modelling the impact of climate change. 

Today, the effects of climate change on property risks are still manageable for re/insurers. The 

short -term nature of most property re/insurance business allows for continuous adjustments 

of risk view and risk to reflect observed climate, exposure and vulnerability changes. However, 

it is increasingly important to regularly reassess the inherent trends in input variables and 

model assumptions for current underwriting models. 

Insurers need to keep abreast of the latest scientific findings and incorporate them into their 

natural -catastrophe models, in order to remain sustainable in the era of climate change. 

Substantial effort is needed to translate scientific results into valua ble and workable risk -

assessment know -how and tools. More sophisticated modelling approaches are needed to 

account for (the growing loss impacts of) secondary perils that have been inadequately 

modelled in the past. 

Climate change is a systemic risk. Impor tant questions for the insurance industry relate to the 

possibility of increasing tail risks and/or more correlations of risk factors. If left unmitigated, it 

will have severe consequences for the global risk landscape. Complexity and uncertainty 

should no t stop the re/insurance industry from evaluating the impact of climate change on 

both today ’s insurance risks and the expected future risk landscape. Scenario analysis provides 

one way forward. Qualitative emerging risks tools further support the review of early signals. Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

417 

Transitioning to a more sustainable economy will bring transition risks, with significant 

relevance for insurers investment portfolios, but also provide opportunities for the insurance 

industry both on the asset and liability side of the ba lance sheet. A rapid transition will 

moreover allow for the reduction of the worst tail risks on the physical risks side. Chapter 25 

418 

# Bibliography 

Aggarwal, P., Vyas, S., Thornton, P., Campbell, B. M., & Kropff, M. (2019). Importance of 

considering technology growth in impact assessments of climate change on 

agriculture. Global Food Security, 23 , 41 -48. 

Arnell, N. W., & Gosling, S. N. (2016). The impacts of climate change on river flood risk at the 

global scale. Climatic Change, 134 (3), 387 -401. 

Ashley, W. S., & St rader, S. M. (2016). Recipe for disaster: How the dynamic ingredients of 

risk and exposure are changing the tornado disaster landscape. Bulletin of the 

American Meteorological Society, 97 (5), 767 -786. 

Balaguru, K., Judi, D. R., & Leung, L. R. (2016). Futu re hurricane storm surge risk for the US 

gulf and Florida coasts based on projections of thermodynamic potential intensity. 

Climatic Change, 138 (1 -2), 99 -110. 

Bamber, J. L., Oppenheimer, M., Kopp, R. E., Aspinall, W. P., & Cooke, R. M. (2019). Ice sheet 

contributions to future sea -level rise from structured expert judgment. Proceedings 

of the national academy of sciences, 116 (23), 11195 -11200. 

Bank for International Settlements. (2020). The green swan. 

Bank of England. (2019). A framework for assessing f inancial impacts of physical climate 

change. 

Bouwer, L. M. (2013). Projections of future extreme weather losses under changes in climate 

and exposure.  Risk Analysis, 33 (5), 915 -930. 

Buchanan, M. K., Oppenheimer, M., & Kopp, R. E. (2017).  Amplification of flood frequencies 

with local sea level rise and emerging flood regimes. Environmental Research 

Letters, 12 (6), 064009. 

Cabantous, L., Hilton, D., Kunreuther, H., & Michel -Kerjan, E. (2011). Is imprecise knowledge 

better than conflicting e xpertise? Evidence from insurers’ decisions in the United 

States. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 42 (3), 211 -232. 

Ceres, R. L., Forest, C. E., & Keller, K. (2017). Understanding the detectability of potential 

changes to the 100 -year peak storm surge. Cli matic Change, 145 (1 -2), 221 -235. 

Coumou, D., Di Capua, G., Vavrus, S., Wang, L., & Wang, S. (2018). The influence of Arctic 

amplification on mid -latitude summer circulation. Nature Communications, 9 (1), 1 -

12. 

Dixon, J. (2019). The economic impact of glob al warming. Oxford Economics White Paper .

Donat, M., Alexander, L., Yang, H., Durre, I., Vose, R., Dunn, R., . . . Caesar, J. (2013). Updated 

analyses of temperature and precipitation extreme indices since the beginning of 

the twentieth century: The HadEX 2 dataset. Journal of Geophysical Research: 

Atmospheres, 118 (5), 2098 -2118. 

Dorland, C., Tol, R. S., & Palutikof, J. P. (1999). Vulnerability of the Netherlands and 

Northwest Europe to storm damage under climate change. Climatic Change, 43 (3), 

513 -535. 

ECA. (2009). Shaping climate -resilient development: A framework for decision -making", a 

Report of the Economics of Climate Adaptation (ECA) Working Group. . 

European Environment Agency. (2020). Meteorological and hydrological droughts. Retrieved 

from https ://www.eea.europa.eu/data -and -maps/indicators/river -flow -drought -

3/assessment 

Ford, C. (2017). Cost of Constructing a Home. 

Grinsted, A., Moore, J. C., & Jevrejeva, S. (2012). Homogeneous record of Atlantic hurricane 

surge threat since 1923. Proceedings o f the national academy of sciences, 109 (48), 

19601 -19605. 

Hansen, J., Sato, M., Hearty, P., Ruedy, R., Kelley, M., Masson -Delmotte, V., . . . Rignot, E. 

(2015). Ice melt, sea level rise and superstorms: evidence from paleoclimate data, Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

419 

climate modeling, a nd modern observations that 2° C global warming is highly 

dangerous. Atmospheric Chemistry & Physics Discussions, 15 (14). 

Heal, G. (2017). The economics of the climate. Journal of Economic Literature, 55 (3), 1046 -

1063. 

Hoerling, M., Eischeid, J., Perlwit z, J., Quan, X. -W., Wolter, K., & Cheng, L. (2016). 

Characterizing recent trends in US heavy precipitation. Journal of Climate, 29 (7), 

2313 -2332. 

IPCC. (2007). Climate change 2007 -the physical science basis .

IPCC. (2013). Summary for policymakers. Climate change 2013 - the physical science basis 

IPCC. (2014). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report .

IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers. Global Warming of 1.5 C. An IPCC Special Report on 

the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 C Above pre -Industrial Levels., Global 

Warming of 1.5 C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 C 

Above Pre -Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse gas Emission Pathways, 

in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate 

Change. In. 

IPCC. (2019). Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, 

desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and 

greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems .

Johnst on, L. M. (2018). Current research on Canada’s interface areas. Canadian Wildland Fire 

and Smoke Newsletter, Spring 2018. 

Johnston, L. M., & Flannigan, M. D. (2018). Mapping Canadian wildland fire interface areas. 

International journal of wildland fire, 2 7(1), 1 -14. 

Kossin, J. P. (2018). A global slowdown of tropical -cyclone translation speed. Nature, 

558 (7708), 104 -107. 

Kunreuther, H., Heal, G., Allen, M., Edenhofer, O., Field, C. B., & Yohe, G. (2013). Risk 

management and climate change. Nature Climate Change, 3 (5), 447 -450. 

Linkin, M., & Schwartz, M. (2017). Hurricane Andrew: The 20 miles that saved Miami, Swiss 

Re. 

Liu, M., Vecchi, G. A., Smith, J. A., & Knutson, T. R. (2019).  Causes of large projected 

increases in hurricane precipitation rates with global warming. npj Climate and 

Atmospheric Science, 2 (1), 1 -5. 

Marsooli, R., Lin, N., Emanuel, K., & Feng, K. (2019). Climate change exacerbates hurricane 

flood hazards along US Atlantic and Gulf Coasts in spatially varying patterns. Nature 

Communicatio ns, 10 (1), 1 -9. 

McKinsey Global Institute. (2020). Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and 

socioeconomic impacts. 

Meinshausen, M., Meinshausen, N., Hare, W., Raper, S. C., Frieler, K., Knutti, R., . . .  Allen, M. 

R. (2009). Greenhouse -gas emissio n targets for limiting global warming to 2 C. 

Nature, 458 (7242), 1158 -1162. 

Millner, A., Dietz, S., & Heal, G. (2013).  Scientific ambiguity and climate policy. 

Environmental and Resource Economics, 55 (1), 21 -46. 

Naz, B. S., Kao, S. -C., Ashfaq, M., Rastog i, D., Mei, R., & Bowling, L. C. (2016). Regional 

hydrologic response to climate change in the conterminous United States using high -

resolution hydroclimate simulations.  Global and Planetary Change, 143 , 100 -117. 

Neumann, B., Vafeidis, A. T., Zimmermann, J., & Nicholls, R. J. (2015).  Future coastal 

population growth and exposure to sea -level rise and coastal flooding -a global 

assessment. PloS one, 10 (3), e0118571. 

Neumann, J. E., Emanuel, K., Ravela, S., Ludwig, L ., Kirshen, P., Bosma, K., & Martinich, J. 

(2015). Joint effects of storm surge and sea -level rise on US Coasts: new economic Chapter 25 

420 

estimates of impacts, adaptation, and benefits of mitigation policy. Climatic Change, 

129 (1 -2), 337 -349. 

Ornes, S. (2018). Core C oncept: How does climate change influence extreme weather? 

Impact attribution research seeks answers. Proceedings of the national academy of 

sciences, 115 (33), 8232 -8235. 

Parisien, M. -A., Dawe, D. A., Miller, C., Stockdale, C. A., & Armitage, O. B. (2020) .

Applications of simulation -based burn probability modelling: a review. International 

journal of wildland fire, 28 (12), 913 -926. 

Peterson, T. C., Heim Jr, R. R., Hirsch, R., Kaiser, D. P., Brooks, H., Diffenbaugh, N. S., . . .  Karl, 

T. R. (2013). Monitor ing and understanding changes in heat waves, cold waves, 

floods, and droughts in the United States: state of knowledge. Bulletin of the 

American Meteorological Society, 94 (6), 821 -834. 

Pielke Jr, R. A. (2007). Future economic damage from tropical cyclones : sensitivities to 

societal and climate changes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: 

Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 365 (1860), 2717 -2729. 

Pindyck, R. S. (2011). Fat tails, thin tails, and climate change policy. Review of E nvironmental 

Economics and Policy, 5 (2), 258 -274. 

Pindyck, R. S. (2013). Climate change policy: What do the models tell us? Journal of 

Economic Literature, 51 (3), 860 -872. 

Radeloff, V. C., Helmers, D. P., Kramer, H. A., Mockrin, M. H., Alexandre, P. M., Bar -Massada, 

A., . . . Syphard, A. D. (2018). Rapid growth of the US wildland -urban interface raises 

wildfire risk. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 115 (13), 3314 -3319. 

Romm, J. (2018). Climate Change: What Everyone Needs to Know® : Oxford University Press. 

Salathé Jr, E. P., Hamlet, A. F., Mass, C. F., Lee, S. -Y., Stumbaugh, M., & Steed, R. (2014). 

Estimates of twenty -first -century flood risk in the Pacific Northwest based on 

regional climate model simulations. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 15 (5), 1881 -1899. 

Schmidt, S., Kemfert, C., & Faust, E. (2009). Simulation of economic losses from tropical 

cyclones in the years 2015 and 2050: the effects of anthropogenic climate change 

and growing wealth. 

Schuur, E. A., McGuire, A. D., Schädel, C., G rosse, G., Harden, J., Hayes, D. J., . . .  Lawrence, D. 

M. (2015). Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback. Nature, 520 (7546), 

171 -179. 

Shapley, M. D., Johnson, W., Engstrom, D., & Osterkamp, W. (2005). Late -Holocene flooding 

and drought in the Northern Great Plains, USA, reconstructed from tree rings, lake 

sediments and ancient shorelines. The Holocene, 15 (1), 29 -41. 

Slater, L. J., & Vil larini, G. (2016). Recent trends in US flood risk. Geophysical Research 

Letters, 43 (24), 12,428 -412,436. 

Sobel, A. (2019). Testimony before the House, Science, Space, and Technology Committee of 

the House of Representatives. Washington, DC, 26 September 2 019 .

Swiss Re Institute. (2017). Wildfire in Canada: Fostering resilience through advances in 

modelling, Swiss Re. 

Swiss Re Institute. (2019). Swiss Re SONAR: New emerging risk insights, Swiss Re. 

Talke, S. A., Orton, P., & Jay, D. A. (2014). Increasing storm tides in new york harbor, 1844 –

2013. Geophysical Research Letters, 41 (9), 3149 -3155. 

TCFD. (2017). Technical Supplement: The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -

Related Risks and Opportunities. In: Task Force on Climate -Related Financial 

Disclosures. 

United Nations Department of Economic Social Affairs. (2018). 2018 revision of world 

urbanization prospects. 

United Nations Department of Economic Social Affairs. (2019). World Popul ation Prospects: 

The 2019 Revision, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Modelling Climate Change Risk for the Insurance Industry 

421 

Van Oldenborgh, G. J., Van Der Wiel, K., Sebastian, A., Singh, R., Arrighi, J., Otto, F., . . . 

Cullen, H. (2017). Attribution of extreme rainfall from Hurricane Harvey, August 

2017. Environmental Research Letters, 12 (12), 124009. 

Villarini, G., Smith, J. A., Baeck, M. L., & Krajewski, W. F. (2011). Examining flood frequency 

distributions in the Midwest US 1. JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources 

Association, 47 (3), 447 -463. 

Wagner, G., & Weitzman, M. L. (2015). Climate shock: the economic consequences of a 

hotter planet : Princeton University Press. 

Wahl, T., Jain, S., Bender, J., Meyers, S. D., & Luther, M. E. (2015). Increasing risk of 

compound flooding from storm sur ge and rainfall for major US cities. Nature Climate 

Change, 5 (12), 1093 -1097. 

Weinkle, J., & Pielke Jr, R. (2017). The Truthiness about hurricane catastrophe models. 

Science, Technology, & Human Values, 42 (4), 547 -576. 

Weitzman, M. L. (2011). Fat -tailed uncertainty in the economics of catastrophic climate 

change. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 5 (2), 275 -292. 

Weitzman, M. L. (2012). GHG targets as insurance against catastrophic climate damages. 

Journal of Public Economic Theory, 14 (2), 221 -244. 

Wobus, C., Gutmann, E., Jones, R., Rissing, M., Mizukami, N., Lorie, M., . . . Martinich, J. 

(2017). Climate change impacts on flood risk and asset damages within mapped 100 -

year floodplains of the contiguous United States. Natural Hazards and Earth System 

Sciences, 17 (12), 2199. 

Zhang, W., Villarini, G., Vecchi, G. A., & Smith, J. A. (2018). Urbanization exacerbated the 

rainfall and flooding caused by hurricane Harvey in Houston. Nature, 563 (7731), 

384 -388. 

Zhang, Y. -K., & Schilling, K. (2006). Inc reasing streamflow and baseflow in Mississippi River 

since the 1940 s: Effect of land use change. Journal of Hydrology, 324 (1 -4), 412 -422. Chapter 25 

422 

# Disclaimer 

© 2020 Swiss Re . All rights reserved. 

The entire content of this chapter is subject to copyright with all rights reserved. The 

information may be used for private or internal purposes, provided that any copyright or other 

proprietary notices are not removed. Electronic reuse of the data published in this report is 

prohibited. 

Reproduction in whole or in part or use for any public purpose is permitted only with the prior 

written approval of Swiss Re Institute. Courtesy copies are appreciated. 

Although all the information used in this study was taken from reliable sources, Swis s Re does 

not accept any responsibility for the accuracy or comprehensiveness of the information given 

or forward looking statements made. The information provided and forward -looking 

statements made are for informational purposes only and in no way consti tute or should be 

taken to reflect Swiss Re ’s position, in particular in relation to any ongoing or future dispute. 

In no event shall Swiss Re be liable for any loss or damage arising in connection with the use 

of this information and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward -looking 

statements. Swiss Re undertakes no obligation to publicly revise or update any forward -looking 

statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 423 

# Part III ESG Index and Rating Methodologi es Chapter 26 

424 

# MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

By 

MSCI ESG Research LLC 1,2

# Abstract 

This chapter introduces three tools developed by MSCI to support ESG integration: ESG Ratings, 

ESG Indexes , and ESG Analytics 3. ESG Ratings aims to help investors to identify and quantify 

the ESG risks and opportunities. ESG Indexes provide institutional investors with indexes th at 

can be used manage and report on ESG mandates or as benchmarks to measure ESG 

investment performance. ESG Analytics can help investors integrate ESG Ratings and Indexes 

into their security selection and portfolio construction processes, stress testing, and risk and 

performance attribution analysis. We also discussed several transmission channels linking 

companies ’ ESG performance with their financial performance. 

Keyword s: ESG ratings, ESG indexes, ESG and financial returns 

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, institutional investor adoption of environmental, social and governance (ESG) 

investing and the subsequent growth in ESG assets under management has accelerated.  While 

many factors have contributed to this growth, we focus here on three pr imary drivers of 

increased ESG investment: sustainability challenges, shifts in investor preferences, and 

improvement in data and analytics. 

The world itself is changing: As companies face rising complexity on a global scale, modern 

investors are reevalua ting traditional investment approaches global sustainability challenges 

such as flood risk and sea level rise, privacy and data security, demographic shifts, and 

regulatory pressures, are introducing new risk factors for investors that may not have been 

pr eviously seen. 

Investor preferences are changing: A growing body of studies suggest that millennials - as well 

as women - are asking more of their investments. Over the next two to three decades, the 

millennial generation could shift between $15 trillion and $20 trillion into U.S. -domiciled ESG 

investments, roughly doubling the size of the U.S. equity market (Bank of America Corporation, 

2018) .            

> 1This chapter is written by E mma Wu ,MSCI ESG Research LLC , email: Zhe.Wu@msci.com ; and Xiaoshu Wan g,MSCI ESG
> Research LLC , email: Xiaoshu.Wang@msci.com, based on publications by MSCI on ESG methodologies and related
> research topics.
> 2Certain information ©2020 and reproduced by permission of MSCI ESG Research LLC; all rights reserved. The ESG data
> contained herein is the property of MSCI ESG Research LLC, its affiliates and/or information providers (“MSCI ESG”). MSCI
> ESG makes no warranties with respect to any such ESG data. The ESG data contained herein is used under license and may
> not be further used, distributed or disseminated without the express written consent of MSCI ESG.
> 3MSCI ESG Ratings are produced by MSCI ESG Research LLC. MSCI ESG Indexes and Analytics utilize information from,
> but are not provided by, MSCI ESG Research LLC. MSCI Ind exes and Analytics are products of MSCI Inc. MSCI Indexes are
> administered by MSCI Limited (UK). MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management

425 

Investment data and analytics are evolving: Better data and analytics have paved the way for 

numerous studies tha t explore ESG investing. Better data from companies, combined with 

better ESG research and analytics capabilities, have resulted in more systematic, quantitative, 

objective and financially relevant approaches to ESG key issues. 

Since its founding in 2006, the United Nations Principles for Responsible Investing (PRI) has 

attracted support from more than 1,800 signatories, representing over USD $68 trillion in 

assets under management as of April 2017. Signatories commit to six voluntary principles, the 

first of which is the incorporation of ESG issues into investment analysis and decision -making. 

More than $270 billion in assets have been allocated to investments tracking / benchmarked 

to MSCI ESG equity & fixed income indexes since 2014 .4

# 2 MSCI Tools for ESG analysis and integration 

In this section, we introduce three sets of MSCI tools for ESG analysis: ESG ratings, indexes, 

and analytics. ESG ratings aims to help investors to identify and quantify the ESG risks and 

opportunities. MSCI ’s ESG Indexes provide institutional investors with indexes that can be used 

manage and report on ESG mandates or as benchmarks to measure ESG investment 

performance. ESG analytics can help investors integrate ESG ratings and indexes into their 

security selection and portfolio construction processes, stress testing, and risk and 

performance attribution analysis. 

MSCI ESG Ratings 

MSCI ESG Ratings help investors identify ESG risks and opportunities within their portfolio. We 

research and rate companies on a ‘CCC ’ (worst) to ‘AAA ’ (best) scale according to their 

exposure to industry specific ESG risks and their ability to manage those risks relative to peers 

(Figure 26 -1). Currently, MSCI ESG Ratings cover approximately 7,500 companies (13,500 total 

issuers, including subsidiaries) and more than 650,000 equity and fixed income securities 

globally. 

Figure 26 -1 MSCI ESG Rati ng scale 

Issues addressed by ESG ratings 

The overall objective of MSCI ESG Ratings is to assess how well, relative to industry peers, a 

given company manages most relevant environmental, social and governance risks and   

> 4Based on publicly available information or press releases published by MSCI from 2014 to date .Chapter 26

426 

opportunities to ensure sustaina ble business growth. The MSCI ESG Rating model does so by 

addressing four key questions: 

• What are the most significant ESG risks and opportunities facing a company and its 

industry? 

• How exposed is the company to those key risks and/or opportunities? 

• How w ell is the company managing key risks and opportunities? 

• Based on its level of exposure and management of relevant risks and opportunities, 

how does the company compare to its global industry peers? 

Environmental, social, and governance risks and opportu nities are posed by large scale trends 

(e.g. climate change, resource scarcity, demographic shifts) as well as by the nature of the 

company ’s operations. Companies in the same industry generally face the same major risks 

and opportunities, though individua l exposure can vary. 

A risk is considered financially relevant to an industry when it is likely that companies in a given 

industry will incur substantial costs in connection with it (for example: regulatory ban on a key 

chemical input requiring reformulat ion). An industry could see growth opportunity when it is 

likely that companies in a given industry could capitalize on social or environmental trends (for 

example: opportunities in clean technology for the LED lighting industry). The MSCI ESG 

Ratings mode l focuses only on issues that are determined to be most relevant for each industry. 

We identify relevant risks and opportunities for each industry through a quantitative model 

that looks at ranges and average values for each industry for externalized impa cts such as 

carbon intensity, water intensity, and injury rates. Companies with unusual business models 

for their industry may face fewer or additional key risks and opportunities. Company -specific 

exceptions are allowed for companies with diversified busi ness models, facing controversies, 

or based on industry rules. Once identified, these key Issues are assigned to each industry and 

company. Three examples of these key issues are provided below. 

Carbon Emissions : this issue evaluates the extent to which companies may face increased 

costs linked to carbon pricing or regulatory caps. Scores are based on exposure to GHG -

intensive businesses and emerging regulations; carbon reduction targets and mitigation 

programs; and carbon intensity over time and vs. pee rs. 

Labor Management : this issue evaluates the extent to which companies may face workflow 

disruptions due to labor unrest or reduced productivity due to poor job satisfaction. Scores 

are based on exposure to regions facing labor unrest, size of workforce, and corporate 

restructuring/layoffs; workforce policies, benefits, training, and employee engagement; 

and labor -related controversies. 

Corporate Governance – Board : this issue is scored primarily on the basis of the board ’s

independence from management, a nd on various measures of board experience and 

effectiveness. Metrics included in this component evaluate basic board structures such as 

overall board independence; individual director qualifications and experience, including 

industry and financial experti se, cases of executive misconduct, as well as areas of concern 

such as attendance and overboarding; and negative governance -related events. MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

427 

Setting Key Issue weights 

Once the key issues have been selected, we set the weights that determine each key issue ’s

contribution to the overall rating. Each key issue typically comprises 5 -30% of the total ESG 

Rating. The weightings take into account both the contribution of the industry, relative to all 

other industries, to the negative or positive impact on the envi ronment or society; and the 

timeline within which we expect that risk or opportunity for companies in the industry to 

materialize. 

Key Issue assessment 

Our ESG ratings assess both ESG related risks and opportunities. To understand whether a 

company is adeq uately managing a key ESG risk, it is essential to understand both the 

management strategies it has employed and how exposed it is to the risk. The MSCI ESG 

Ratings model measures both of these: risk exposure and risk management. To score well on 

a key iss ue, management needs to be commensurate with the level of exposure: a company 

with high exposure must also have very strong management, whereas a company with limited 

exposure can have a more modest approach. Conversely, a highly exposed company with poor 

management will score worse than a company with the same management practices but lower 

exposure to the risk. 

Assessment of opportunities works similarly to risks, but the model for combining exposure 

and management differs. Exposure indicates the relevan ce of the opportunity to a given 

company based on its current business and geographic segments. Management indicates the 

company ’s capacity to take advantage of the opportunity. Where exposure is limited, the key 

issue score is constrained toward the middl e of the 0 -10 range, while high exposure allows for 

both higher and lower scores. 

Constructing the rating 

The ESG Ratings model is industry relative and uses a weighted average approach. Key Issue 

weights are set at the GICS® 5 Sub -Industry level (8 -digit) based on each industry ’s relative 

external impact and the time horizon associated with each risk. Key Issues and weights 

undergo a formal review and feedback process at the end of each calendar year. 

Corporate governance is eq ually relevant for all industries and therefore always weighted and 

analyzed for all companies. Where there are company -specific exceptions, weights depart 

from the industry standard weights but remain in proportion. For each company a Weighted 

Average Key Issue Score is calculated based on the underlying Key Issue scores and weights. 

To arrive at a final letter rating, the Weighted Average Key Issue Score is normalized by industry. 

The range of scores for each industry is established annually by taking a r olling three -year 

average of the top and bottom scores among the MSCI ACWI Index constituents; the values 

are set at the 97.5th and 2.5th percentile. Using these ranges, the Weighted Average Key Issue 

Score is converted to an Industry Adjusted Score from 0 -10, where zero is worst and 10 is best. 

The Industry Adjusted Score corresponds to a rating between worst (CCC) and best (AAA). 

These assessments of company performance are not absolute but are explicitly intended to be 

relative to the standards and perfo rmance of a company ’s industry peers. 

Data sources 

To assess companies ’ exposure to and management of ESG risks and opportunities, we collect 

data from the following sources:   

> 5GICS, the global industry classification standard jointly de veloped by MSCI Inc. and S&P Global. Chapter 26

428 

• Macro data at segment or geographic level from academic, government, NGO 

datas ets (e.g. Transparency International, US EPA, World Bank) 

• Company disclosure (10 -K, sustainability report, proxy report, AGM results, etc.) 

• Government databases, 1600+ media, NGO, other stakeholder sources regarding 

specific companies 

Issuer communicatio ns 

Companies are invited to participate in a formal data verification process prior to publication 

of their ESG Rating report. At that time, companies have the opportunity to review and 

comment on the facts contained in their existing MSCI ESG Rating repor t, as well as to provide 

MSCI ESG Research any additional ESG information if they wish. This process is also in 

accordance with the objective of frequently updating company reports with the latest 

available information as provided by companies. Issuers may request to see their reports 

and/or to provide updates or corrections at any time. 

Monitoring and updates 

Companies are monitored on a systematic and ongoing basis, including daily monitoring of 

controversies and governance events. New information is re flected in reports on a weekly 

basis and significant score changes trigger analyst review and re -rating. Companies receive an 

in -depth review at least annually. 

Quality review 

Formal in -depth quality review processes take place at each stage of analysis, including 

automated and quality checks of data and rating publication; industry and market lead 

oversight of ratings and reports; Methodology Committee approval of any exceptions, 

truncations, or major (two or more ratings level) rating changes; and an ES G Methodology 

Committee to review contentious cases. 

Annual consultation 

In November of each year, MSCI ESG Research reviews the Key Issues assigned to each industry 

as well as their weights. This process also identifies emerging issues and those that ha ve 

become less significant. As part of this process, MSCI ESG Research consults with clients about 

proposed changes to Key Issue selections for each industry as well as any proposed new Key 

Issues. 

MSCI ESG Indexes 

MSCI ESG Indexes are designed to support common approaches to ESG investing, and help 

institutional investors more effectively benchmark to ESG investment performance as well as 

manage, measure and report on ESG mandates. MSCI ESG Indexes also provide institutional 

investors with transparency int o ESG sustainability and values alignment, together with the 

ability to compare holdings. 

The ESG integration indexes aim to maintain the key characteristics of the parent free float 

market capitalization indexes, either through an explicit tracking error constraint or by 

targeting sector weights that reflect the underlying parent indexes, designed to limit the 

systematic risk introduced by the ESG selection process. 

Other indexes focus on single themes or issues, such as the MSCI Low Carbon Target Indexes, 

which are designed to achieve a target level of tracking error while minimizing carbon 

exposure. Indexes in the integration category are designed to help investors efficiently MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

429 

integrate ESG considerations into their core asset allocation without deviating from broad 

market characteristics. 

Our indexes can be grouped into the value category and impact category. The value category 

aims to help investors to align their personal or ethical values, or faith, with their investment 

processes. These include the MS CI SRI Index, MSCI KLD 400 Index and the MSCI ex 

Controversial Weapons Index. The impact category indexes, such as the MSCI Sustainable 

Impact Index, include companies whose core business addresses at least one of the world ’s

social and environmental chal lenges, as defined by the United Nations Sustainable 

Development Goals. A few examples of these indexes are presented in the following boxes. Chapter 26 

430 

Box 1 ：MSCI ESG Leaders Indexes 

The MSCI ESG Leaders Indexes target companies that have the highest ESG Rating in each 

sector of the parent index. MSCI provides investors globally with ESG indexes designed to 

facilitate clients ’ integration of ESG considerations into their investment process. 

The indexes use a best -in -class approach by selecting companies that have th e highest MSCI 

ESG Ratings. They are free float -adjusted market capitalization weighted indexes designed 

to represent the performance of companies that have favorable ESG profiles compared to 

industry peers. Overall the indexes target a 50% sector represen tation vs. the parent index. 

The indexes are designed for institutional investors seeking exposure to companies with a 

strong sustainability profile and relatively low tracking error to the underlying equity 

market. The indexes aim to help investors seekin g to: 

• Mitigate short - and long -term ESG risk 

• Meet their fiduciary obligations 

• Mitigate reputational risk 

• Maintain broad market exposure 

• Have sector diversification 

• Avoid taking active country or sector bets 

Key features of MSCI ESG Leaders Indexes 

• Leverag es MSCI ’s award winning MSCI ESG Research and ESG Ratings to identify 

companies that have demonstrated an ability to manage their ESG risks and 

opportunities 

• Best -in -class approach – the indexes select the highest rated companies in each 

sector 

• Designed to exclude companies involved in severe controversies 

• Based on industry leading MSCI Indexes and are designed to enable seamless 

integration 

• Parent index construction rules designed to achieve replicability 

The indexes can be used as follows: 

• As part of the portfolio creation process: Consistent market representation 

designed to represent a broad spectrum of the global equity opportunity set 

without home bias MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

431 

• Performance benchmarks for ESG funds for global mandates, with regional, 

country, sector and other subsets available for more targeted investment 

mandates 

• May be licensed for use as the basis for structured products and other index -linked 

investment vehicles, such as exchange -traded funds (ETFs) and exchange -traded 

notes (ETNs) 

• A source of research to aid ESG investment strategies 

• To define a universe of securities that have a strong ESG profile 

Figure 26 -2 Cumulative index performance of MSCI World ESG Leaders Index —

USD gross returns (September 2007 - February 2020) 6

Table 26 -1 Annual performance of MSCI World ESG Leaders Index 

Source: MSCI as of Feb 28, 2020   

> 6All index performance data is historical and for informational purposes only. Past performance is not indicative of future
> returns, which may differ materially. Chapter 26

432 

Figure 26 -3 Cumulative Index Performance of MSCI Emerging Markets ESG 

Leaders Index — USD gross returns (September 2007 – February 2020) 

Table 26 -2 Annual performance of MSCI Emerging Markets ESG Leaders Index 

Source: MSCI as of Feb 28, 2020 MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

433 

Box 2: MSCI Low Carbon Indexes 

MSCI offers indexes designed to represent the performance of divestment and re -weighting 

strategies to reduce carbon exposure. These approaches are summarized below: 

• Divestment strategies aim to enable institutions to have simpl e and clear 

communications with stakeholders but ignore short -term portfolio risks. For 

example, a portfolio replicating the MSCI Global ex Fossil Fuels Indexes aims to 

eliminate 100% of the policy benchmark ’s carbon reserves exposure by excluding 

companie s that own oil, gas and coal reserves. 

• Re -weighting strategies, such as those applied to portfolios that track the MSCI 

Global Low Carbon Target Indexes, seek to increase exposure to more carbon -

efficient companies while reducing short -term risk against th e benchmark. 

• Combining selection and re -weighting strategies may offer a clear message in 

communicating with stakeholders while taking into account short -term tracking 

error and long -term risk exposure to carbon -intensive companies. A portfolio 

replicating the MSCI Global Low Carbon Leaders Index would include companies 

with low carbon exposure while seeking to minimize ex -ante tracking error. 

The MSCI Low Carbon Indexes are intended to help identify potential risks associated with 

the transition to a low carbon economy while representing the performance of the broad 

equity market. Launched in 2014 the index series are designed to address two dimensions 

of carbon exposure: carbon emissions and fossil fuel reserves. 

MSCI Low Carbon Indexes can be split into two index suites: 

• The MSCI Global Low Carbon Target Indexes re -weight stocks based on their 

carbon exposure in the form of carbon emissions and fossil fuel reserves. The 

indexes are designed to achieve maximum carbon exposure reduction and achieve 

0.3% (30 basis points) ex ante tracking error target while minimizing carbon 

exposure relative to their parent indexes. 

• The MSCI Global Low Carbon Leader Indexes aim to achieve at least 50% reduction 

in the carbon footprint of the parent index by excluding compani es with the 

highest carbon emissions intensity and the largest owners of carbon reserves (per 

dollar of market capitalization). They also aim to minimize the tracking error 

relative to their parent index. 

MSCI ESG Analytics 

Asset owners and their investment consultants increasingly demand systematic integration of 

ESG factors into their investment processes. Institutional investors often require regular 

reporting on the ESG exposures and characteristics of their investments. To meet these 

demands, user -friendly analytical tools are being developed by vendors. MSCI ’s ESG research, 

data and indexes are available on its analytics systems, including the MSCI Beon platform. 

Investors can integrate MSCI ESG Ratings and MSCI Indexes into their security selection and 

portfolio construction processes, stress testing, and risk and performance attribution analysis. Chapter 26 

434 

# 3 Has ESG historically compromised financial returns? 

A common debate with ESG investing revolves around the idea that incorpor ating ESG factors 

into the investment process will hurt performance. However, many studies suggest that 

companies with robust ESG practices displayed a lower cost of capital, lower volatility, and 

fewer instances of bribery, corruption and fraud over certa in time periods. And some studies 

have also shown that companies with poorer ESG performance have had a higher cost of 

capital, higher volatility due to controversies and other incidences such as spills, labor strikes 

and fraud, and accounting and other go vernance irregularities. 7

Figure 26 -4 Gross profitability of ESG quintiles 

Note: Gross profitability (z -score) of size -adjusted ESG quintiles is computed as most 

recently reported sales less cost of goods sold, divided by most recently reported 

company total assets. Data from January 2007 to May 2017. Average value over 

the period is represented by blue dots; current exposure by red dots. The vertical 

bars represent the 5% to 95% range of observed values. H istorical data for 

informational purposes only. Past performance is not indicative of future results, 

which may differ materially. 

In a recent study (Melas et al., 2018) , MSCI researchers focused on understanding how ESG 

characteristics have led to finan cially significant effects. The study examined how ESG 

information embedded within stocks is transmitted to the equity market. Borrowing from 

central banks, we created three “transmission channels ” within a standard discounted cash 

flow (DCF) model. We cal l these the cash -flow channel, the idiosyncratic risk channel and the 

valuation channel. The former two channels are transmitted through corporations ’

idiosyncratic risk profiles, whereas the latter transmission channel is linked to companies ’

systematic r isk profiles. Our research showed that ESG had an effect on valuation and 

performance of many of the companies in the study.   

> 7Sources: Chava, 2011; 20+ studies, both academic and industry; Lansilahti, 2012; Credit Suisse; Deutsche Bank; MSCI ESG
> Research, et al.; Huang, 2010; Bhagat and Bolton, 2008; Cremers et al., 2005; Deutsche Bank, 2012; ISS, 2011; et al. MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management

435 

Cash -flow channel : High ESG -rated companies were more competitive and generated 

abnormal returns, often leading to higher profitability and dividend payments, especially 

when compared to low ESG -rated companies. 

Idiosyncratic risk channel: High ESG -rated companies experienced a lower frequency of 

idiosyncratic risk incidents such as major drawdowns. Conversely, companies with low ESG 

ratings were more likely to experience major incidents. 

We saw that companies in the bottom fifth of the MSCI World Index experienced large 

drawdowns (above 95%) three times higher than those in the top fifth, as can be seen in the 

exhibit below, supporting the assertion that ESG has provided insight into incident risks 

throughout the 10 -year period we studied. 

Figure 26 -5 Large drawdown frequency of top vs. bottom ESG quintile 

Note: MSCI World Ind ex, January 2007 to May 2017. We use a full three -year look -

ahead window in reporting results. For each month, we report the number of stocks 

that realized a more than 95% cumulative loss over the next three years, taking the 

price at month end as the refe rence point for the return calculation. Thus, the last 

data point is from May Historical data for informational purposes only. Past 

performance is not indicative of future results, which may differ materially. 

Valuation channel: High ESG -rated companies have shown lower systematic risk exposure, 

evidenced by less volatile earnings and less systematic volatility. Compared to low ESG -rated 

companies, they also experienced lower betas and lower costs of capital. In a DCF model   

> framework, the systematic risk exposure affects the denominator of the DCF model, and a company
> with lower cost of capital would have a higher valuation. Chapter 26

436 

Figure 26 -6 Systematic volatility of ESG quintiles 

Note: Systematic volatility (or common factor risk) is calculated as the volatility 

predicted by all the factors of the GEMLT model. Data from January 2007 to May 

2017. Average value over the period is represented by blue dots; current exposure 

by red dots. The vertical b ars represent the 5% to 95% range of observed values. 

Historical data for informational purposes only. Past performance is not indicative 

of future results, which may differ materially. 

# 4 Conclusion 

The prominence of environmental, social, and governance is sues on policy makers and the 

public agenda continues to fuel and shape the ESG investing landscape. MSCI delivers ESG 

indexes and analytics, and MSCI ESG Research delivers ratings, research and metrics, to help 

investors navigate this challenging landscap e. As a pioneer in ESG Research and analytical tools, 

MSCI ESG Research offers an extensive history of data, scores, and ratings that enable more 

informed analysis of ESG risks and opportunities across all aspects of the investment process 

– from defining investment policy and selecting benchmarks to research, portfolio 

construction and risk management, engagement and reporting. MSCI Tools for ESG Risk Management 

437 

# Bibliography 

Bank of America Corporation. (2018). 2016 Environmental Social & Governance Report. 

Melas, D., Nagy., Z., Nis hikawa, L., Lee, L. -E., & Giese, G., (2019). Foundations of ESG Part 1: 

How ESG Affects Equity Valuation, Risk and Performance, MSCI. Chapter 27 

438 

# Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks 

# into Credit Analysis 

By 

Moody ’s Investors Service 1,2

# Abstract 

This chapter provides an overview of Moody ’s approach to incorporating ESG risks into credit 

analysis. It starts with a discussion o f the general principles for assessing Environmental, Social 

and Governance (ESG) risks, followed by some key findings from Moody ’s Environmental Risks 

Global Heat Map, a framework to assess carbon transition risk for corporate sectors, and the 

ESG impact analysis on the bank ratings. 

Keyword s: ratings , credit impact , ESG considerations , environmental risk , social risk ,

governance risk , heat map , climate change 

# 1 General principles for assessing Environmental, Social and 

# Governance risks 

Introduction 

In our credit analysis, Moody ’s seeks to be comprehensive, incorporating the broadest 

possible view into the material considerations that can affect the credit quality of an issuer or 

sector. 3 Our objective is to capture all considerations that have a material impact on credit 

quality. 4 We are focus ed on the material credit considerations that may influence the relative 

risk of default and expected financial loss in the event of default for issuers and debt 

obligations over all time horizons, regardless of whether or not they are classified as ESG ri sks. 

However, a precise and widely accepted classification of ESG risks would be useful for more 

transparently describing when ESG risks are credit drivers behind our ratings. 

In our analysis, we identify and assess credit implications arising from all mat erial ESG 

considerations that we can discern, whether they have a current impact or a potential future 

impact. Material risks could include the impact that a prolonged drought has on a 

municipality ’s tax revenue and capital spending on water infrastructure , or the likely credit                                       

> 1
> This Chapter is compiled by Moody’s Investors Service. For further details, please contact Brian Cahill, Managing Director
> –Global Head ESG, email: brian.cahill@moodys.com; Li Ma, Managing Director –Corporate Finance, email:
> li.ma@moodys.com; Jessie Tung , VP –Senior Credit Officer, Corporate Finance, email: jessie.tung@moodys.com .
> 2Contents of this chapter draw from various Moody ’spublications, including: "General Principles for Assessing
> Environmental, So cial and Governance Risks", January 2019 ；"Environmental Risk -Global: Heat map: 11 sectors with $2.2
> trillion debt have elevated environmental risk exposure", September 2018 ；“Non -financial companies –Global:
> Framework to assess carbon transition risk f or corporate sectors ”, September 2019 ；and "Banking -Global: The impact of
> environmental, social and governance risks on bank rati ngs", July 2019.
> 3See “Cross -Sector Rating Methodology: General Principles for Assessing Environmental, Social and Governance Risks”,
> Moody’s Investors Service, January 2019.
> 4Considerations that are material to credit quality may not include all investment parameters that some market participants
> would regard as green, sustainable or ethical. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

439 

impacts that regulatory frameworks and ESG -related laws, policies and regulations will have 

on rated issuers and sectors as a whole. 5 We also assess any mitigating or adaptive behavior 

that issuers undertake. In some instances, we ma y identify ESG trends that are positive for an 

issuer ’s credit profile. 

In order to be meaningful for ratings, ESG considerations must be material with regard to the 

likelihood of default and credit loss. Issuers encounter a multitude of ESG risks and 

oppo rtunities, many of which have little tangible impact on operating or financial performance. 

For example, a company ’s volunteer work, charitable activities and other such initiatives are 

important to the extent that they produce social value, but their pote ntial positive impact on 

the company ’s financial health or credit standing is unlikely to be material. 

The materiality of a particular aspect of ESG is typically specific to a sector or even an issuer 

or a transaction. For example, air pollution emissions standards may be an important credit 

issue for the auto manufacturing sector but may not be meaningful for the credit quality of 

media companies. The strategies issuers within a given sector follow to address an ESG risk 

that is common to them all may resu lt in improvements in credit strength for some issuers and 

deterioration in credit strength for others. 

Our approach to ESG considerations is similar to our approach for other material credit 

considerations in that it includes an assessment of the impact o n an issuer ’s cash flows and 

the value of its assets over time; the sufficiency of cash flows and assets in relation to the 

issuer ’s debt burden and other financial obligations; and liquidity and the ability to access 

capital. Typically, for two issuers at the same rating level, the issuer with greater stability of 

cash flows can carry higher levels of leverage than the issuer that has less stable cash flows. 

Visibility into future cash flows is also an important consideration. 

For example, for a non -financ ial corporate, we seek to assess how ESG issues such as 

reputation for product safety and carbon transition risks influence credit drivers such as 

demand for its products, the cost of production and the need for financing to make capital 

expenditures, as w ell as the potential that these drivers could change meaningfully over time 

(Figure 27 -1). For structured finance transactions, we typically assess how E SG considerations 

may affect underlying asset values, in addition to considering how the special purpose 

vehicle ’s governance affects creditors. For sovereigns, meanwhile, we seek to assess how ESG 

considerations such as the economic effects of environment al issues, including climate change, 

or social and governance -related issues, such as control of corruption and the rule of law, could 

affect GDP, the trajectory and stability of the government ’s revenues and expenditures as well 

as the government ’s abilit y to withstand shocks, among other drivers of government 

creditworthiness ( Figure 27 -2).    

> 5Ratings and rating actions, even those in response to policy decisions or changes, do not express judgments on the
> appropriateness of any policy; rather, they reflect our view of how those policies affect the ability of an issuer to repay i ts
> financial obligations. Chapter 27

440 

Figure 27 -1 An Illustration of How ESG Considerations Are Captured in Corporate 

Credit Ratings 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Note: The information in this exhibit is not exhaustive. 

Figure 27 -2 An Illustration of How ESG Considerations Are Captured in Sovereign 

Credit Ratings 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Note: The information in this exhibit is not exhaustive. 

General principles for assessing environmental risk 

Environmental risks are a significant consideration for a large number of issuers in the public 

and private sectors. We view environmental risk as falling broadly into two categories: (i) the 

consequences of regulatory or policy initiatives that seek to re duce or prevent environmental 

trends or hazards or perceived trends or hazards; and (ii) the adverse effects of direct 

environmental trends and hazards, such as pollution, drought, severe natural and human -Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis 

441 

caused disasters, and climate change. Some environ mental considerations straddle these 

categories, such as carbon transition risk, where we consider the regulatory risk and the 

potential direct effect of the hazards that may result. 

Among environmental risks, we see three tiers related to timing, certaint y and severity: 

• Regulations that have been implemented or those that are likely to be introduced 

(given, for example, proposals by regulators or legislators or binding agreements 

under an international accord) have the clearest impact on the credit profile s of 

issuers and sectors. 

• Longer -term regulatory initiatives where implementation is unclear or subject to 

delays or meaningful regional variations (given, for example, very general agreements 

under an international accord with no enforcement mechanisms) p rovide less visibility 

into the likely impacts on the relative risk of default and credit loss for issuers. Lack of 

clarity may also diminish issuers' ability to adapt to regulations, adding a further layer 

of uncertainty regarding the credit implications. 

• Direct environmental trends such as the those arising from climate change (for 

example, rising temperatures) are typically incremental, developing over very long 

time frames, with diffuse consequences and limited immediate impact on ratings. 

High impact e nvironmental hazards such as hurricanes or cyclones, wildfires or floods 

are episodic; they can be severe, concentrated in their impact and can sometimes 

have an immediate impact on ratings. The credit impact of long -term environmental 

trends or future haz ards may be curbed or offset by other influences. These could 

include the implementation of regulations or technological changes that mitigate the 

effects of the trend, adaptation strategies such as improvements in physical and 

institutional infrastructure , or rising income levels that increase a government ’s tax 

base, allowing it to finance needed improvements. 

The impact of these risks may affect factor or sub -factor scoring in methodology scorecards; 

for example, these risks could affect our forward -looking assessment of business profile, 

leverage and coverage, economic strength or GDP, or they may be considered outside of the 

scorecard. We also consider environmental risks in tandem with other issuer or sector 

characteristics that may mitigat e or exacerbate their impact. 

For example, factors such as scale, high barriers to entry, the ability to recover rising costs from 

customers or taxpayers, financial flexibility, and expertise in handling operational and 

regulatory issues are important to the ability of issuers in most sectors to handle 

environmental exposures and implement adaptation strategies while maintaining their credit 

profiles. Conversely, small scale, geographic concentration, low income levels and 

deteriorating demographic trends make some issuers much more susceptible to 

environmental hazards or less likely to be able to implement adaptation strategies. Chapter 27 

442 

# 2 Key findings from Environmental Risks Global Heat Map 

Eleven sectors with $2.2 trillion debt have elevated environmental risk 

expo sure 

To better inform our analysis 6, and in a follow -up to an original 2015 study, 7 we present a heat 

map that shows the relative exposure of 84 sectors globally to material environmental risks. 

The amount of rated debt covered by this global sector review is $74.6 trillion, up 10% from 

our 2015 edition. 

The heat map provides a high -level assessment of the materiality of environmental risks to a 

sector ’s overarching credit quality, and the nominal exposure of a sector to the five most 

material subcategories of environmental risks: air pollution; soil and water pollution, and land 

use restrictions; carbon regulations; water shortages; and natural and man -made hazards. 

Our heat map identifies 11 sectors, totaling roughly $2.2 trillion in rated debt, with eleva ted 

credit exposure to environmental risks ( Figure 27 -3). Again, this represents a 10% increase in 

rated debt from 2015. In Moody ’s view, these sectors have clear exposure to environmental 

risks that are either already material to credit quality or could be over the next three to five 

years. 

Figure 27 -3 For 11 sectors, with $2.2 trillion in rated debt, envi ronmental risks are 

already ratings -relevant or will be in the co ming few years . Breakdown of “Elevated 

Risk” (Immediate/Emerging) sectors in environmental risks heat map (in US$ billion)      

> 6See “Environmental R isks –Global: Heat map: 11 sectors with $2.2 trillion debt have elevated environmental risk exposure”,
> Moody’s Investors Service, September 2018.
> 7See “Environmental Risks: Heat Map Shows Wide Variations in Credit Impact Across Sectors”, Moody’s Investo rs Service,
> November 2015. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

443 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Note: Boxes are sized relative to the value of rated debt (in US$ billion) and color 

indicated for overall credit exposure. 

The relative scoring in our 2018 environmental risks heat map remains largely stable since our 

2015 edition. However, there have been a number of changes in overall scoring, as illustrated 

in  Figure 27 -4. Shipping, and surface transportation and logistics are now scored as “Elevated 

Risk - Eme rging, ” compared with “Moderate Risk ” previously, reflecting a gradual tightening 

of environmental regulations and emissions standards. Six sectors accounting for $1.8 trillion 

in rated debt move to “Moderate Risk ” from “Low Risk. ” While the specific ratio nale for these 

changes is sector -specific, the change to scores generally reflects our view that the potential 

for environmental risks to become material for these sectors over five or more years has 

increased. Meanwhile, power generation projects move dow n to “Moderate Risk ” from 

“Elevated Risk - Emerging, ” as a result of a shift in our rated portfolio toward renewable 

generation. Finally, two new sectors – pension funds and asset managers – have been added, 

both scoring “Low Risk. ”

Figure 27 -4 Changes in overall sector environmental risk scores since 2015. Heat 

map score and rated debt, US$ billion. 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Note : For 2015 heat map, see “Environmental Risks: Heat Map Shows Wide 

Variations in Credit Impact Across Sectors”, November 2015. 

Two sectors – coal mining and terminals, and unregulated utilities and power 

companies – are scored as “Elevated Risk – Immediate” 

Co al mining and coal terminals, and unregulated utilities and power companies (with total 

outstanding rated debt of $517 billion) have already experienced material credit pressure as a 

result of environmental risks. 

Indeed, environmental considerations have constrained credit quality and contributed to 

downward pressure on the ratings of coal companies, primarily through reducing demand for 

the commodity. Such pressures are incorporated into our present and future view of coal 

producers ’ revenues and margins, although the degree of impact varies by region and type of 

coal. For example, metallurgical coal producers are not facing the same demand pressures as 

thermal coal producers. Notably, the US coal industry has undergone a significant ratings Chapter 27 

444 

migration due, in part, to the impact of rising environmental concerns related to the use of 

coal and eroding cost competitiveness compared with gas and renewables. 

Unregulated utilities and power companies, meanwhile, are directly exposed to the policy 

pressure to cut emissions, which continues to disrupt business models and pressure margins 

in mature economies. The overall credit impact for a particular issuer is a function of a number 

of variables, notably the share of generation in the company ’s total business, gener ation 

technology, and geographic location. For instance, the impact on generators is more 

pronounced in Europe than in Asia, because power demand is still growing significantly in the 

latter and emission reduction policies are less stringent in many countr ies there. 

Nine sectors are categorized as “Elevated Risk – Emerging" meaning that the 

credit impact of environmental exposures is likely to crystallize over the next 

few years 

Nine sectors are categorized as “Elevated Risk - Emerging," accounting for $1.7 trillion in rated 

debt. They include automotive manufacturers, building materials, commodity chemicals, 

independent oil and gas exploration and production, oil and gas refining and marketing, mining, 

steel, shipping, and surface transportation and logisti cs. The latter two represent new 

additions to the “Elevated Risk - Emerging ” category, as they were scored as “Moderate Risk ”

in our 2015 report. 

In Moody ’s view, all of these sectors exhibit clear exposure to environmental risks that could 

be material to credit quality within the next three to five years. Issuers in these sectors tend 

to have greater flexibility than those in the “Elevated Risk - Immediate ” category in responding 

to regulations, in the timing of required capital spending to remediate or pr event 

environmental hazards, or in passing on expected cost increases to customers or taxpayers. 

For example, for the global oil and gas refining and marketing industry, we expect the trend 

toward stricter requirements to continue for air, water and carbon emissions, as well as 

product specifications (for example, lower sulfur content). Furthermore, carbon regulations 

may dampen demand for refined products over the longer term. Refiners face the choice of 

incurring mandatory expenditures or closing refineri es that do not meet more stringent 

requirements. Overall, we expect refiners that have better geographic or asset diversification, 

larger crude distillation capacity and stronger margins to be better positioned to cope with 

changing requirements, and envir onmental and disaster risks in the sector. 

A further 22 sectors with $10.1 trillion in rated debt face moderate credit 

exposure to environmental risks 

For 22 sectors with $10.1 trillion in rated debt, we identify some exposure to environmental 

risks. Howev er, there is less certainty that these risks will develop in a way that is material to 

ratings for most issuers in the sector, or there is a longer runway for issuers to adjust business 

models and balance sheets to substantially mitigate the overall credit impact. Developing 

economy sovereigns ($5.2 trillion), manufacturing ($1.2 trillion), integrated oil and gas 

companies ($714 billion), and regulated electric and gas utilities with generation ($673 billion) 

are the four largest sectors that face moderate risks ( Figure 27 -5). Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis 

445 

Figure 27 -5 22 Sectors have moderate credit exposure to environmental risks. 

Breakdown of “Moderate Risk” sectors in environmental risks heat map (in 

US$ billion) 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Note: Boxes are sized relative to the value of rated debt (in US$ billion) and color 

indicated for overall credit exposure. 

51 sector s with $62.3 trillion in rated debt have low exposure, meaning 

environmental risks are unlikely to generate material credit consequences 

For most of the remaining 51 sectors where Moody ’s has rated coverage, the overall credit 

exposure to environmental ris ks is, in our opinion, low. There are typically four reasons these 

sectors are scored “Low Risk ”. 

1. Some sectors are likely to benefit from emerging environmental trends. For example, 

the overall credit exposure to environmental risks for the mass transit se ctor is low 

because mass transit is an energy -efficient mode of transportation whose ridership 

will likely increase as governmental policies and public preference shift away from 

carbon -intensive travel. Chapter 27 

446 

2. There are other sectors with fundamentally low busin ess exposure to environmental 

risks. For example, the media and broadcasting sector has very low emissions of 

pollutants and carbon, and major publishing and printing companies have transitioned 

to digital offerings, resulting in a decline in exposure to e nvironmental risks related to 

paper products. 

3. Many sectors have business diversity and flexibility that mitigate the environmental 

risks they may face. For example, environmental risks to banks and finance companies 

are indirect, undertaken through financi ng clients' operations. Such risk exposure is 

unlikely to translate into a meaningful credit impact because banks and finance 

companies typically benefit from portfolio diversification, and lending is typically short 

to medium term. This provides these ent ities with flexibility to shift portfolio 

composition away from clients highly exposed to environmental risks. 

4. Finally, some sectors have the economic, policy or financial flexibility to adapt to the 

environmental risks they cannot avoid. For example, whil e climate change is a global 

phenomenon, developed economy sovereigns and regional and local governments 

typically have much greater financial resources, economic resilience and institutional 

capacity to assist in climate adaptation. 

Descriptions of the fi ve environmental risk subcategories 

Air Pollution 

Along with soil and water pollution, air pollution is one of the traditional areas of 

environmental risk and regulation. Air pollutants, which may stay in the atmosphere or 

eventually pollute land and water ways, have the potential to harm the health of humans, 

other organisms and habitats. This category excludes carbon dioxide emissions, but includes 

those greenhouse gases that have been regulated as pollutants outside of concerns about 

their contribution to global warming, for instance nitrous oxides, sulfur oxides, and particulate 

matters. 

Soil and Water Pollution and Land Use Restrictions 

Soil and water pollution most typically occurs from industrial, human and agricultural waste, 

as well as surface water run -off. More acute examples include the presence of toxic and 

nuclear wastes that can render land uninhabitable or poison drinking water, but more typically 

these pollutants increase risks for humans or harm wildlife. They may also render land infertile. 

An emerging area of concern is antibiotics. Environmental land restrictions may relate to 

preserving habitats, watersheds, green space or arable land, protecting species, or preventing 

certain activities due to general environmental concerns. 

Carbon Regula tion 

Our focus in this category is the impact of current and future policy initiatives that seek to 

reduce the amount of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases being emitted at a national 

and global level. In this category, we do not seek to anticipate the likelihood of climate change 

or the natural consequences of climate change and its impact on rated entities (those direct 

hazards are included in the following two categories). We score carbon emission regulation 

separately from air pollution because r egulatory implications are potentially very wide -ranging 

and more difficult to predict than for traditional pollutants, given the scope of activities that 

produce carbon dioxide. For these reasons, we focus on the existing and likely future policy 

response s and their potential impact on credit quality. Please see Moody ’s Approach to 

Assessing the Credit Impacts of Environmental Risks , November 2015, and Environmental Risks: 

Moody's To Analyse Carbon Transition Risk Based On Emissions Reduction Scenario Cons istent 

with Paris Agreement , June 2016. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis 

447 

Water Shortages 

Water shortages may be caused by a decrease in available water supplies or an increase in 

demand. Water supplies may decrease due to drought (including from climate change), the 

pollution or diversion of waterways, over -pumping of aquifers, or real estate development in 

watersheds. Water demand may increase due to population growth, urbanization, general 

economic development, or changes in economic activities (e.g. irrigation farming, shale -gas 

frackin g). 

Natural and Man -made Hazards 

Natural and mad -made hazards include changing trends in the global climate that are typically 

chronic in nature. They include the trend of warming, as illustrated by rising mean 

temperatures globally, and other slow -moving trends such as rising sea levels. This category 

also covers low probability, high -severity events arising from a variety of sources, including 

(without limitation) weather events such as hurricanes, earthquakes or floods (including 

coastal flooding), regul ations on activities that may cause them, industrial disasters, and 

nuclear incidents. While the occurrence of a singular, isolated event may not be the direct 

result of climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) notes that the 

pr obability and frequency of such shocks (e.g. damaging cyclones) will increase at higher 

temperatures and/or greater extremes in temperatures and precipitation. 

Our heat map points to 16 sectors with “very high” or “high” nominal 

exposure to carbon regulation 

Our heat map points to 16 sectors with “very high ” or “high ” nominal exposure to carbon 

regulation, accounting for $3.7 trillion in rated debt ( Figure 27 -6). These sectors tend to be 

among the most carbon -intensive industries globally, such as utilities and power companies, 

and/or where regulations governing emissions are tightening rapidly, such as airlines. 8 Of the 

16 sectors with “very hi gh ” or “high ” nominal exposure to carbon regulation, 10 have 

immediate or emerging “Elevated Risk ” overall credit exposure. The remaining six score 

“Moderate Risk ” for a variety of reasons, including diversification of business model or ability 

to pass on costs.       

> 8See Unregulated utilities and power companies –Global: Carbon transition brings risks and opportunities, June 2018, and
> Passenger Airlines –Global: Pricing power, route mix to determine credit implications of carbon transitio n, April 2018. Chapter 27

448 

Figure 27 -6 Carbon regulation will have a tangible impact on the most exposed 

sectors. Sectors with “very high” or “high” exposure to carbon regulation (in 

US$ billion) 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Alongside market (for example, demand substitution) and technology risks, we consider 

regulatory risks as one of the key determinants in assessing the credit effects of carbon 

transition at an entity level for the most exposed sectors globally ( Figure 27 -7). 9 In the absence 

of substantial counterbalancing initiatives, the transition to a lower carbon future will likely 

result in increasing pressu re on the affected companies ’ credit profiles. 

Figure 27 -7 Regulation is a key determinant in assessing the credit impact of carbon 

transition on companies 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service   

> 9We seek to incorporate all material credit considerations, including those related to environmental, social and governance
> elements, into our credit rating analysis. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

449 

Thirteen sector s have “very high” or “high” nominal exposure to air pollution 

Thirteen sectors ($3.5 trillion in rated debt) are scored as having “very high ” or “high ” nominal 

exposure to air pollution, which we define as including greenhouse gases that have been 

regulated as pollutants outside of concerns about their contribution to global warming. They 

include nitrous oxides, sulfur oxides, chlorofluorocarbons and particulate matter. 

As  Figure 27 -8 illustrates, a similar cross -section of industrial sectors is exposed to both air 

pollution and carbon regulation. These sectors are typically susceptible to more stringent 

environmental enforcement of particulate emis sions and air pollution. Environmental policies 

focused on air pollution often result in forcing an industry to move toward low -carbon 

products, even in the absence of any actual carbon regulations. For example, automobile fuel 

efficiency standards and smo g regulations are moving the industry toward alternative fuel 

vehicles that also reduce carbon intensity. And policies to reduce mercury and acid gas 

emissions from power generation have resulted in the shutdown of coal -fired generation, 

which has also red uced carbon emissions. 

Figure 27 -8 Industrial sectors tend to have significant exposure to both air pollution 

and carbon regulat ion. Selected sector exposure to air pollution and carbon 

regulation (bubble si ze in US$ billion) 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Fourteen sectors, including central and local governments in developing 

economies, score “high” for natural and man -made hazards; four score 

“high” for water shortages 

Natural and man -made hazards, and water shortages constitute physical environmental risks, 

potentially as a result of climate change. Hazards can relate to changing trends in the global Chapter 27 

450 

climate that are typically chronic in nature. They include the trend o f warming, as illustrated 

by rising mean temperatures globally, and other slow -moving trends, such as rising sea levels. 

Hazards also encapsulate the occurrence of episodic events, including natural disasters or 

extreme weather events (such as storms, floo ds, wildfires, drought and cyclones). 

Physical risks can affect an issuer ’s operations and capital spending directly, or have indirect 

effects such as supply chain disruptions or market volatility. 10 While most sectors – particularly 

those reliant on large tangible assets and extensive supply chains – tend to have some degree 

of vulnerability to such risks, geographical footprint clearly matters. Indeed, where an issuer 

operates (or where its main markets are located), coupled with the location of its main 

suppliers, will significantly affect its exposure to natural and man -made hazards. 

Figure 27 -9 Majority of sectors have “moderate” or “high” exposure to natural and 

man -made hazards. Selected sector exposure to natural and man -made hazards (in 

US$ billion) 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service    

> 10 Moody’s contributed to a report titled Advancing TCFD Guidance on Physical Climate Risks and Opportunities produced
> on behalf of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and Global Centre of Excellence on Climate
> Adaptation in May 2018. Among other issues, the report outlines how physical climate risks and op portunities can influence
> an issuer’s creditworthiness. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

451 

Figure 27 -10 25 sectors with “moderate” or “high” exposure to water shortages. 

Selected sector exposure to water shortage s (in US$ billion) 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

Six sectors have “very high” or “high” exposure to soil and water pollution, 

and land use restrictions 

As illustrated in  Figure 27 -11 , we identify six sectors with “very high ” or “high ” exposure to 

this category, including mining, commodity and specialty chemicals, and shipping – with the 

latter specifically exposed to water pollution. 

Figure 27 -11 Mining, commodity and specialty chemicals, and shipping are among 

the most exposed. Sectors with “high” or “very high” exposure to soil/water 

pollution and land use restrictions (in US$ billion) 

Sour ce: Moody's Investors Service 

# 3 Framework to assess carbon transition risk for corporate sectors 

We published our report “Non -financial companies – Global: Framework to assess carbon 

transition risk for corporate sectors ” in September 2019, which outlines ou r approach to Chapter 27 

452 

creating a scoring tool that provides a standalone assessment of one specific ESG risk, namely 

carbon transition risk. 11 

Moody ’s carbon transition assessment (CTA) tool provides a consistent, transparent and 

verifiable means to analyse carbon transition risk for rated non -financial companies. This 

report explains the framework, scoring system and data that informs the scoring of our CTAs. 

We will initially apply the framework to our analysis of sectors that we identify as having “very 

high ” or “high ” exposure to carbon transition risk 12 .

In September 2018, we published an update to our environmental heat map (first published 

in November 2015) identifying sectors with significant exposure to carbon transition risk. As 

discussed further above, ou r heat map points to 16 sectors with “very high ” or “high ” nominal 

exposure to carbon regulation, accounting for $3.7 trillion in rated debt. These sectors tend to 

be among the most carbon -intensive industries globally, such as utilities and power companie s, 

and/or where regulations governing emissions are tightening rapidly, such as airlines. 

# 4 The impact of environmental, social and governance risks on bank 

# ratings 

ESG risks are becoming more significant 

Some ESG risks are well -established drivers of bank creditworthiness. Governance quality, for 

instance, has long been a key contributor to bank credit strength. Nevertheless, ESG risks have 

become more significant for the banking sector in recent years. Th is is principally due to 

evolving regulations, policy measures, market developments, and underlying changes in social 

attitudes as a result of which banking sector activities previously considered acceptable are 

now increasingly challenged. 

Social risks, f or instance, have become more pronounced for banks after the global financial 

crisis contributed to a negative shift in popular attitudes towards banks. This has made 

customer backlashes against business practices deemed to be socially unacceptable, a soci al 

risk, more likely. Similarly, the transition to a low carbon economy, accelerated by the 2015 

Paris Agreement, is gradually increasing environmental risk for banks. These include risks 

associated with investments in technologies which may become obsolet e as less carbon -

intensive alternatives emerge. Overall, we believe that growing awareness of climate change 

and its consequences has played a key role in increasing the relevance of ESG risks. 

ESG risks typically affect banks ’ creditworthiness through the same channels as conventional 

risks. For instance, an increase in customer defaults can result from an environmental hazard 

such as drought, just as it can from an increase in interest rates or unemployment. Similarly, 

an inadequate commercial strategy an d socially unacceptable business practices can both 

result in a loss of customers, hitting profitability. 

Banks are exposed to ESG risks directly, but also indirectly through their balance sheets, given 

their role as lenders and investors. Governance -relat ed risks have historically had the most 

direct impact on bank creditworthiness. Environmental risks primarily affect banks indirectly        

> 11 See “Non -financial companies –Global: Framework to assess carbon transition risk for corporate sectors”,
> Moody’s Investors Service, September 2019.
> 12 See “Automotive manufacturing –Global: Substan tial variation exists in automakers' carbon transition risk
> profiles”, Moody’s Investors Service, November 2019. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

453 

through their investment and lending decisions. Social risks can also arise indirectly, for 

example when the credit qualit y of a borrower weakens because of social considerations. 

Environmental risks may also influence bank capital in the future, as regulators may 

incorporate environmental considerations into banks' prudential requirements. The quality of 

a bank ’s governance can itself influence its exposure to environmental and social risks, with 

better -governed banks likely to face fewer such risks. 

Sustainable finance is influencing banks' behaviour 

Sustainable finance has become a key theme globally in recent years, driven by international 

agreements aimed at promoting investments that take account of ESG considerations. The 

most important of these include the Paris Climate Agreement (December 2015), the UN 2030 

Agenda for Sustainable Development (September 2015) and the Eu ropean Commission Action 

Plan on Sustainable Finance (March 2018). 

The rise of sustainable finance has put banks under particular pressure for two reasons. Firstly, 

banks are the backbone of the global financial system, and consequently play a key role in 

financing the projects required to establish a sustainable economy. Secondly, banks ’ expertise 

in credit risk management makes them uniquely qualified to ensure that increased funding for 

sustainable assets and activities does not come at the expense of fi nancial stability. 

Regulators and policymakers are one of the main driving forces in the shift towards sustainable 

finance. Although banks are exposed to regulatory and policy risks as they affect their 

investment decisions, the level of environmental regu lation directly aimed at banks is currently 

low. However, we expect this to change as a result of a gradual increase in regulation designed 

to: (1) ensure that the financial system is resilient to climate -related risks; and (2) support the 

implementation o f environmental policies. For example, the UK's Prudential Regulation 

Authority has already proposed to incorporate environmental considerations into banks ’

prudential frameworks. 

Sustainable finance is not driven solely by regulation. Bank stakeholders a re becoming 

increasingly aware of ESG issues, and are demanding improved ESG management. This is 

illustrated by investors ’ rapid integration of ESG factors into their asset allocation decisions. 

Signatories to the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI ), which take ESG considerations 

into account in their investment policies, had combined assets under management of USD82 

trillion in 2018, an increase of 19% from the previous year. Pressure to meet ESG targets also 

arises from bank shareholders exercisin g their voting rights according to ESG criteria, as well 

as from bank customers. 

In this context, banks are increasingly under pressure to re -focus their strategy and business 

models on sustainability, and to integrate ESG considerations into their investm ent decisions. 

The rise of sustainable finance offers banks opportunities to unlock new lending markets, and 

to reinforce their relationship with clients, for instance by advising them on the impact of ESG 

factors on their businesses. Banks can also reinfo rce their franchise value through strong 

management of ESG factors. 

However, it also potentially exposes banks to increased capital constraints, asset stranding, 

and fines or litigation in the event of noncompliance with new regulations. New regulation wil l

also add compliance costs, and banks may forgo currently profitable businesses because of 

the way they might develop over the long -term. At the same time, engaging in or facilitating 

activities with a significant negative environmental impact may inflict reputational damage on Chapter 27 

454 

banks, tarnishing their brands. Increased credit risk can also arise from regulatory incentives 

to promote sustainable finance as they have the potential to distort risk measurement. 

Bank exposure to reputational damage largely depe nds on how aware their stakeholders are 

of ESG issues, but we believe that the risk is more material for larger banks. This is because 

any negative externalities they create will affect a larger number of people, given their large 

size and broader geograph ic footprint. 

ESG risks are captured in our bank credit analysis 

Our assessment of a bank ’s baseline credit assessment (BCA), a measure of its standalone 

credit strength ,13 is based on five key financial ratios and three qualitative factors. These are 

in ou r view the key indicators of how likely the bank is to default in the absence of external 

support. Any positive or negative impact from ESG considerations would influence our 

assessment of these eight indicators, affecting our overall view of the risk of b ank failure in 

turn. 

Strong corporate governance is at the core of a bank ’s financial health. Our qualitative 

adjustment for corporate behaviour measures governance risk directly. However, the absence 

of an explicit corporate behaviour adjustment for most banks does not indicate a lack of 

governance strengths or weaknesses, rather that their governance quality is already reflected 

in other rating factors. The impact of governance risk is typically greatest in our assessment of 

asset risk, as a poor risk gov ernance framework can lead to severe deterioration in asset quality. 

Governance risk can also materially affect profitability via fines or regulatory sanctions 

because of governance breaches. 

Environmental and social risks have historically had a low impac t on banks' credit profiles, but 

their influence can still be material. Environmental factors can increase risk in banks ’

investment portfolios, and therefore lead to a deterioration in asset risk. If they cause financial 

losses, or if banks forgo profitab le businesses on environmental grounds, they can also weigh 

on profitability. 

Social risks are less likely to affect asset quality, but they can have a material impact on 

profitability, for example through litigation, regulatory fines, or regulatory measur es that 

constrain earnings. Social factors can also have a positive impact on profitability, as in the case 

of banks which grow thanks to financial inclusion initiatives. 

The potential inclusion of ESG considerations in banks ’ prudential frameworks may als o affect 

our assessment of their capital adequacy. A number of recent regulatory proposals would 

incorporate environmental considerations into bank capital requirements. Regulators may also 

incorporate ESG risks into their supervisory work, for instance by taking account of banks' 

resilience to climate change when conducting stress tests. 

Reputational damage because of poor ESG performance can affect banks ’ profitability and 

liquidity. The loss of customers whose ESG expectations have not been met may affec t a bank's 

business volumes and therefore its earnings capacity. Customers may also withdraw their 

funds, and the banks ’ issuances may attract less market interest, as investors increasingly 

integrate ESG considerations into their investment decisions.   

> 13 Moody’s rating approach for banks builds around four components, of which the baseline credit assessment (BCA) is the
> most sensitive to the i mpact of ESG factors. For further details, see “Rating Methodology: Banks Methodology”, Moody’s
> Investors Service, November 2019. Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis

455 

Figure 27 -12  shows the rating factors that make up Moody ’s baseline credit assessment (BCA) 

methodology, with a brief description of how our assessment cap tures ESG risks, directly or 

indirectly. 

Figure 27 -12 ESG risks relate to rating factors. Moody's bank rating methodology 

Source: Moody’s Investors Service 

ESG factors can also influence bank ratings through the Macro Profile, an assessment of banks ’

operating and economic environment. The Macro Profile draws heavily on three of the rating 

factors used in the sovereign rating methodology 14 , and ESG considerations are included in the 

assessment of each o f these factors. One of them, institutional strength, is directly and closely 

linked to governance risk, while environmental and social risks are indirectly related to all 

sovereign rating factors. 

Governance is the main ESG risk for banks 

Governance qual ity is particularly important for banks because they operate with higher 

leverage and are generally more confidence -sensitive than corporates, particularly regarding 

their funding arrangements. The consequences of a governance breach can go beyond the 

imme diate impact, such as a financial penalty or asset quality deterioration. In some cases, 

there can also be reputational damage leading to franchise erosion, resulting in a loss of 

business, or customers withdrawing funds.   

> 14 See “Rating Methodology: Sovereign Ratings Methodology”, Moody’s Investors Service, November 2019. Chapter 27

456 

We do not assign a score for quali ty of risk governance when determining a bank ’s financial 

profile, which reflects our view of its solvency and liquidity. Rather, our assessment of 

governance quality influences the scores that we assign to the different solvency and liquidity 

scorecard fa ctors. 

In some cases , however, credit considerations related to corporate governance are not fully 

captured in any of the solvency or liquidity factors on our scorecard. To determine such banks' 

BCAs, we apply a qualitative adjustment to their financial pr ofile. This adjustment typically 

reflects idiosyncratic corporate governance issues captured through behavioural aspects of a 

bank, which we assess under a broad qualitative framework which we term “corporate 

behaviour ”. 

We assess corporate behaviour aroun d six factors: key person risk, insider and related -party 

risk, strategy and management, dividend policy, compensation policy and accounting policy. 

Social risk includes a wide range of potential hazards 

Social risks arise from a bank ’s interaction with it s stakeholders and society at large. This is the 

broadest of the three ESG risks, and typically affects credit quality through litigation, as well 

as reputational, operational, and regulatory channels. Social risks generally have a moderate 

impact on bank credit quality. Although social risks in some cases are high, banks' financial and 

operational flexibility, and their long track record of adjusting to emerging social issues, act as 

mitigants. 

Banks are exposed to social risks directly through their deali ngs with customers, employees, 

and other stakeholders. Examples include the possibility of regulatory penalties or 

reputational damage for failing to treat customers fairly. Social risks can also stem from 

external factors such as legislative changes promp ted by underlying changes in social attitudes. 

Regulations requiring banks to prioritize lending to particular sectors of the economy are an 

example. 

Banks are also exposed to social risk indirectly through their lending and investment decisions. 

The most significant social risks for banks are those they are directly exposed to, as their 

portfolio flexibility and diversification help mitigate risks from their indirect exposure. 

The social risks that private sector issuers generally are exposed to fall into five categories :

customer relations, human capital, health and safety, responsible production and 

demographic and societal trends. 

Environmental risk exposure is generally low but increasing 

Environmental risks take a number of different forms. Our global environmental risks heat map 

identifies the five categories of environmental risk that are most material to an issuer's credit 

quality. 

Banks' current balance sheet exposure to environmental risk is generally low. Their own 

environmental footprint does not typically raise credit concerns, and their main exposure to 

environmental risks is indirect, through their investment and lending decisions. This indirect 

exposure is less significant for banks that are well diversified both by industry and geography. 

Mor eover, the relatively short duration of bank loans provides lenders with some ability to 

rebalance their portfolios as stranded assets and other environmental risks emerge over time. 

However, we expect environmental risks to become more significant for ban ks in the future, 

particularly as the transition to a low carbon economy accelerates, the physical effects of Moody’s Approach to Incorporating ESG Risks into Credit Analysis 

457 

climate change increase, and climate policy changes the regulatory environment. The impact 

of these developments on bank credit strength will depe nd on how quickly they take place, 

with longer time frames giving banks greater opportunity to adapt to changed circumstances. 

It will also depend on the level of engagement that policymakers and regulators seek from 

banks to meet their environmental objec tives. Ch apter 28 

458 

# ISS ESG Co rporate Rating and Applications 

By 

ISS 1

# Abstract 

Many companies today operate in a world characterized by enormous environmental 

challenges including climate change, biodiversity losses, overexploitation of natural resources, 

and pollution. The ISS ESG Corporate Rating is a highly granular, sector -specific and risk -

oriented methodology that provides investors with a way to ascertain the degree to which 

companies are exposed to and manage such risks and to assess whether companies contribute 

to or obstruct sustainable development goals. The ESG Corporate Rating can also serve to 

identify particularly progressive companies, for instanc e in relation to mitigating climate -

change, and the development of indices. 

Keyword s: ESG, sustainability ratings, environmental ratings, sustainability performance, 

environmental performance , climate change 

# 1 Introduction 

The ISS ESG Corporate Rating ori ginated from Frankfurt -Hohenheimer Leitfaden, a

comprehensive set of indicators conceived at the Goethe University in Frankfurt am Main in 

the late 1990s to assess companies ’ sustainability performance. Over the years, the ISS ESG 

has continuously refined and calibrated the sector -specific methodology to incorporate 

industry standards and best practices, regulatory developments, social debates, and the latest 

trends in science and technology. Global norms and conventions such as the UN Global 

Compact, the U N Universal Declaration on Human Rights, the ILO Core Labor Standards, and 

the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights are the foundation of ISS ESG ’s

philosophy. The rating methodology has thus evolved into a holistic, forward -looking approach 

capturing the most pertinent social and environmental challenges of the 21 st century. It helps 

align investments with global norms and responds to new standards and regulations. It also 

highlights critical company -specific ESG risks typically not considered by traditional credit 

ratings. 

# 2 Methodology 

The corporate rating methodology rests on a two -pronged approach. The positive criteria , the 

backbone of the methodology, assesses the sustainability performance of companies ’

management systems and operations along the entire value chain, and the impacts of their 

product/service portfolios. The ratings draw on a pool of more than 800 indicators, the 

majority of which sector -specific. Each sector is analyzed based on a selection of 

approximately 100 social, envi ronmental and governance -related indicators. The total number    

> 1This chapter was written by Alexander Hellwig, Senior Associate at ISS, email: alexander.hellwig@iss -esg.com . The author
> would like to thank Kristina Rüter and Karsten Greye for their continued support and i nputs. ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications

459 

and their weightings depend on a company ’s inherent ESG impact profile and concomitant 

risks. ISS ESG employs particularly stringent performance requirements for business activities 

considered t o entail elevated risks and negative impacts on the society and the environment. 

This holds true for companies from sectors such as oil & ga s, petrochemicals, and metals & 

mining. 

Each indicator typically comprises a content element (either one or several sub -indicators) and 

a coverage. The latter examines to what extent the relevant operations of a company are 

covered by the policy, strategy or management measures under scrutiny. The basic rationale 

is that isolated company initiatives alone may not lead to satisfying results. Conversely, an 

underlying downgrading mechanism ensures that poor or average content is not upgraded 

simply because it was implemented at the corporate level. Content and coverage are graded 

separately and add up to the total indicat or performance score (see  Table 28 -1 for an example). 

Table 28 -1 Indicator example – design and operation of wind power plants 

Performance requirements  Weight 

1.Responsible 

site selection 

Company commitment to refrain from sites in 

protected areas and areas of high biodiversity 

value. Prioritization of brown field sites over 

greenfields. 

> Individual score

25% 

> Total indicator score

Coverage  Percentage of relevant operations covered 

2.Environmental 

impact 

assessments 

The company conducts comprehensive 

environmental impact assessments prior to 

construction that cover relevant biodiversity 

aspects. 

> Individual score

25% 

Coverage  Percentage of relevant operations covered 

3.Onshore wind 

power plants 

The company carries out adequate measures 

to protect birds and/or bats, and engages in 

continuous monitoring of environmental 

impacts. 

> Individual score

50% 

4.Offshore wind 

power plants 

The company carries out adequate measures 

to protect marine life, including noise 

reduction and the mitigation of impacts from 

lines. Continuous monitoring of 

environmental impacts. 

Coverage  Percentage of relevant operations covered 

The scoring mechanism can be illustrated by these aforementioned indicators. If a company 

systematically excludes wind farms in protected areas or areas of high biodiversity and 

prioritizes brown fields, all the (content -related) requirements are met by re sponsible site 

selection. However, the coverage of this approach ultimately determines the indicator grade. 

If less than 20% of the relevant operations are covered, the company is assigned a D+ (based 

on a twelve -point rating scale ranging from A+ (excelle nt performance) to D - (poor Ch apter 28 

460 

performance)). In case coverages exceeding 20%, 50% or 80%, the indicator scores a B+, A and 

A+, respectively. 

The indicators are either qualitative or quantitative and address management aspects, 

operational performance and cor porate transparency. In addition, trend analyses and strategy -

related assessments help identify corporations with particularly progressive and future -proof 

business models. For each sector, four to five key topic areas are defined, reflecting the most 

mate rial sustainability issues (see also breakout 2 for the importance of capturing sector -

specific risks). They are assigned a weighting of at least 50%. All the indicators are individually 

weighted, evaluated, and aggregated to yield an overall score. 

The po sitive criteria previously mentioned are complemented by an assessment of 

controversial business practices . ISS ESG ’s norm -based research monitors corporate 

compliance with recognized international norms and guidelines on human rights, labor 

standards, env ironmental protection and business malpractice as a critical gauge of ESG 

performance. Each controversy is examined along several dimensions, including the degree to 

which a company ’s misconduct has been corroborated by an authoritative source (verificatio n), 

the severity of impacts, company involvement and accountability for the transgression 

(severity), and the prevalence of relevant countermeasures (remediation). The continuum of 

controversy classifications ranges from potential to moderate, severe and v ery severe 

assessments. By causing a downgrade – 20% for moderate, 50% for severe, and 80% for very 

severe cases – in the affected topic sections of the corporate rating, controversies exert a direct 

bearing on a company ’s ESG performance. As such, the sco re of the topic area ‘climate change 

strategy ’ is, for instance, downgraded in case of a climate -related misconduct. In order to paint 

a sufficiently accurate and objective picture of a controversy, information is gleaned from 

independent sources and from the company in question as a part of a comprehensive 

feedback process. 

The final ESG performance, an aggregation of the analysis of both the positive evaluation 

criteria and controversies, is reflected in a twelve -point rating scale from A+ (excellent 

pe rformance) to D - (poor performance). The performance assessment at an indicator - and 

topic -level makes use of the same grading scale. In 2019, ISS ESG also introduced a decile 

ranking of a company ’s overall performance against those of its industry peers. A rank of 1 

indicates a high relative performance, whereas 10 points to a low relative performance. 

The ISS ESG Corporate Rating assesses companies ’ sustainability performance on an absolute 

best -in -class basis. The so -called ISS ESG Prime status takes ac count of prevailing risks and 

impacts in each sector and denotes companies that meet ISS ESG ’s ambitious sustainability 

performance requirements. Companies in high -risk sectors such as oil & gas, for instance, have 

to meet more demanding standards than tho se in low -risk sectors to obtain the ISS ESG Prime 

status. 

The ratings are updated on an annual basis to ensure that companies reporting such as newly 

published annual and sustainability reports are continuously integrated into the assessments. 

Event -driv en updates in relation to major controversies, mergers or significant company 

transactions are equally conducted on a rolling basis. Lastly, a comprehensive dialogue process 

with the rated issuers is carried out once every two to three years.  

> 2https://www.theguardian.com/us -news/2019/oct/08/california -pge -power -shutdown -wildfire ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications

461 

The corporat e rating methodology is reviewed regularly to meet the latest developments in 

science, technology, society and the regulatory landscape. 

# 3 Environmental aspects of ISS ESG ratings 

The ISS ESG Corporate Rating has two main components: social responsibility a nd governance 

as well as the environment. These two elements are weighted in accordance with the 

underlying risk and impact classification of each sector. We will focu s particularly on 

environmental aspects and explain how the rating and its underlying dat a can be used by 

investors. 

By default, the environmental rating has three integral parts (see  Table 28 -2 for a high -level 

overview). The section on environmental management (standard set of indicators) includes 

several topics relevant for all sectors from a risk perspective. 

Table 28 -2 Components of the environmental rating 

1 Environmental management (standard set of indicators) 

Environmental management systems 

Energy management systems, energy use reduction targets, energy use by 

fuel type 

Climate change strategy: inventories, reduction targets and action plans, 

disclosure of risks and mitigation/adaptation strategies 

Water risk and impact management 

Management of environmental risks in the supply chain 

2 Environmental management (sector -specific indicators) 

Assessment of environmental impacts of the product/service portfolio in 

relation to the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs) 

Indicators specific to industry risks and impacts 

3 Eco -efficiency 

Time -series analyses of relevant resource use efficiencies (e.g. energy, 

freshwater) and output efficiencies (e.g. greenhouse gas emissions, waste, 

pollutants) 

The standard set of environmental topics is complemented by a range of indicators for the 

specific risk profiles of the various industries covered by ISS ESG (section also includes the 

product portfolio assessment) and an analysis of resource use as well a s output efficiencies. 

Each indicator is characterized by specific performance requirements often based on 

international standards and frameworks. The indicator ‘Greenhouse gas emission reduction 

targets and action plans ’, for instance, requires companies to set science -based targets in line 

with the 2°C scenario adopted by the Paris Agreement to achieve the best possible grade. In 

doing so, ISS ESG draws on the work of the Science -Based Target Initiative. The targets need 

to be underpinned by comprehensive action plans with a clear set of measures, subgoals and 

progress reports. Ch apter 28 

462 

The overall picture that emerges when analyzing the environmental performance of all the 

companies covered by ISS ESG ’s universe shows severe shortcomings in all sectors. As shown 

in  Figure 28 -1, where companies ’ environmental performances are rated from A (best) to D 

(worst), the average across all industries is only D+ and theref ore largely falls short of 

expectations. More importantly, many of the sectors particularly exposed to environmental 

risks owing to their inherent business models do not fare significantly better. 

Figure 28 -1 Environmental performance of selected high -risk industries (as at end 

2019) 

This subpar performance of high -risk industries holds true for almost all components of the 

environmental rating. Automobile manufacturers are among those companies that some what 

buck the trend. Their performance in general environmental procedures and the resource 

efficiency of their operations is clearly above the average. However, they generally perform 

poorly in sector -specific risks and valid contributions to the SDGs. Th e main focus of their 

corresponding indicators is on product lifecycle assessments, material efficiency, the reduction 

of substances of concern, energy and fuel efficiency, and new mobility concepts. This 

observation of wide -spread underperformance is clea rly linked to the major upheaval faced 

by the industry. 

Another sector that we analyzed in depth is electric utilities. Many companies are shifting their 

operations to renewable sources of energy, significantly contributing to the mitigation of 

climate ch ange and a more sustainable global energy system. The ISS ESG Corporate Rating 

strives to ascertain to what extent utility companies mitigate adverse environmental impacts 

from their energy generation and power grid operations. Relevant parameters include air, 

water and soil emissions, waste management, and the protection of biodiversity. In addition, 

the carbon intensity of power generation and companies ’ strategies promoting renewable 

energy feature strongly in the assessment. 

Overall, the environmental performance of the companies under our study doesn ’t match the 

scale of challenges confronting their sectors, exposing critical deficiencies in their risk ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications 

463 

management frameworks. Nevertheless, progressive companies that are partic ularly mindful 

of environmental risks do exist in most industries. The following  Table 28 -3 illustrates some 

positive examples. 

Table 28 -3 Environmental strengths and weaknesses of selected industry leaders (as 

at end 2019) 

Environmental strengths and weaknesses (non -exhaustive) 

Ø rsted AS (Electric Utilities) 

+ Comprehensive climate change mitigation strategy (including science -based targets) 

+ Sound supplier environmental standards 

+ High -and=increasing share of using renewables 

+ Ambitious strategies to promote renewables 

+ Comprehensive measures addressing adverse environmental impacts from renewable 

power generation and power grid operations 

- Limited evidence of taking measures to reduce environmental impacts from fossil fuel -fired 

power plants (air emissions, solid waste and wastewater) 

- Insufficient evidence of monitoring and mitigating impacts on freshwater sources 

Kellogg Company (Food & Beverages) 

+ Convincing climate change mitigation strategy, including science -based targets and 

comprehensive measures aimed at reducing the negative carbon impact of crop farming 

along th e value chain 

+ Sound supplier environmental standards 

+ Reasonable measures to promote sustainable soil and biodiversity management in 

agricultural production 

+ Using comparatively high share of certified palm oil 

+ Sound measures to ensure water conservation in agricultural production along the value 

chain 

+ Strategy and/or measures in place designed to reduce food waste in the supply chain and 

in company operations 

- No clear evidence of monitoring and mitigating impacts on freshwater sources 

- Low shares of raw materials/products from certified organic farming sources 

- Limited measures in place to reduce environmental impacts of packaging 

Outokumpu (Metals & Mining) 

+ Comprehensive climate change mitigation strategy (including science -based targets) 

+ Reasonable supplier environmental standards 

+ Comprehensive measures to ensure safe handling of hazardous materials in mining and 

ore processing 

+ A higher share of recycled materials in steel production 

+ Sound measures to promote recycling of scrap metal 

+ Sound procedures managing waste water, hazardous waste and air emissions 

+ Sound measures to ensure facility safety and emergency management 

- A significant share of energy comes from nuclear power and coal 

- Limited evidence of measures to monitor and mitigate impacts on freshwater sources 

- Only some indications suggesting adequate tailings and waste rock management 

In recent years, ESG discussions have mostly revolved around climate change, eclipsing other 

major environmental challenges. A topic drawing more attention today is biodiversity 

conservation, in part due to the publication of the Global Assessment Report b y the 

Intergovernmental Science -Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) in 

May 2019 and other news reports highlighting distressing levels of global biodiversity decline. 

These developments have also piqued the interest of the invest ment community. The critical Ch apter 28 

464 

issue of biodiversity loss will be brought into global focus by the 15th meeting of the 

Conference of the Parties (COP 15) to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which will 

give new impetus to protection initiatives. The conference was originally set to take place in 

China in 2020 but is likely to be postponed until 2021. 

Companies ’ biodiversity impacts are closely linked to their business models and activities. ISS 

ESG has therefore developed a range of indicators for the specific impacts of each sector. 

Industries in the spotlight include construction, chemicals, food & beverages, household & 

personal care products, metals & mining, oil & gas, paper & forest products, pharmaceuticals 

& biotechnology, and utilities. A total of 30 biodiversity -related indicators are applied across 

different sectors, typically focusing on corporate policies, conservation strategies and 

management measures designed to curb negative effects. Two of the most commonly used 

metrics look at the extent to which operational biodiversity risks and impacts are addressed 

and whether companies address the sensitivity of protected areas. Some sectors are also 

particularly subject to supply chain -related risks, underscoring the pivotal importance of 

sustainable procurement practices and corresponding compliance measures. 

# 4 Applications of ISS ESG corporate rating 

The ISS ESG Corporate Rating can be used in many ways. With a granular, sector -specific and 

risk -oriented methodology, it can be used in a w ide range of applications, giving rise to a 

variety of ESG products, some of which are presented below. 

SDG solutions assessment 

A key element and impact component of the ISS ESG Corporate Rating is the SDG Solutions 

Assessment (SDGA), a tool that lets i nvestors align their investment decisions with the 

achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGA 

identifies to what extent a company ’s products and services contribute to or obstruct the 15 

overriding sustainability objec tives, eight of which pertain to environmental matters. These 

eight objectives include global challenges such as the mitigation of climate change, sustainable 

energy use, sustainable agriculture and forestry, the conservation of water, the optimized use 

of materials, the promotion of sustainable buildings, and the preservation of both marine and 

terrestrial ecosystems. 

The assessment takes account of companies ’ unique and distinctive business impacts with 

regard to each of the objectives, which are evalua ted along a continuum from significant 

obstruction ( -10), limited obstruction ( -5), and no net impact (0), to limited contribution (+5), 

and significant contribution (+10). An exemplary overview of product impacts on climate 

change mitigation is depicted i n Figure 28 -2:

Figure 28 -2 Illustration of product impacts on “Mitigation of climate change ”ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications 

465 

The analyses are predicated on a classification of companies ’ products and services and their 

respective revenue shares. The results can be displayed as revenue percentages, objective 

scores or the aggregated SDG Solutions Score. The SDGA thus helps investors identify both 

sustainability laggards and leaders in relation to the 15 objectives. The following graph 

illustrates the aggregated SDG Solutions Score for a select group of sectors and focuses 

exclusively on environmental objectives: 

Figure 28 -3 SDG Solutions Score – Environmental 

As a general rule, the number of companies across the different industries making significant 

contributions to the SDGs is somewhat limited. In many cases, it is special -solutions providers 

that stand out. Unsurprisingly, companies primarily engaged in the provision of renewable 

energy and energy -efficient equipment, for instance, tend to obtain a positive overall score. At 

the other end of the spectrum, oil exploration and product ion commonly run counter to the 

achievement of climate change mitigation goals, whereas natural gas is widely seen as a 

transition fuel (neutral evaluation for the time being). However, some nuances exist in the oil 

& gas sector as companies with a strong focus on biofuel production (particularly second -

generation) or renewable energy generation manage to cancel out some of the negative 

effects of their traditional oil business. 

The assessment of other sectors shows a more varied picture. In the automobile industry, for 

example, nearly all companies are seen as impeding global environmental efforts. 

Nevertheless, outliers such as Tesla and BYD demonstrate that more progressive business 

models concentrating on alternative fuels are possible. The electric uti lities sector is marked 

by wide -ranging scores, a testament to the fact that many companies still largely rely on fossil 

fuels for energy generation, while others are increasingly shifting to renewable sources. A 

prime example of this transition is the Dan ish utility company Ørsted AS, which recently 

divested its oil and gas operations. The company is in the process of converting all of its coal -

fired power plants to sustainable biomass and has become a major player in wind power 

generation. 

Lastly, in th e mining industry a substantial divergence of impacts on the SDGs can also be 

observed. The sector undoubtedly has significant environmental impacts, is generally very 

water - and energy -intensive and a major contributor of greenhouse gas emissions. Still, the 

scope of environmental impacts is largely determined by production processes and final metal Ch apter 28 

466 

utilization. The multitude contexts of applications and possible uses of the products make it 

difficult to clearly attribute the impacts on the individual SDGs . However, many corporations 

solely engage in the extraction of highly sensitive materials with enormous ecological 

footprints (e.g. gold, diamonds) or operate in highly sensitive ecosystems. On a positive note, 

some companies have geared their business mo dels towards metals recycling (particularly 

aluminium), thus making valuable contributions to the circular economy. A few other players 

are involved in the manufacturing of lightweight metals that promote fuel efficiency in the 

automobile and aviation indu stry. 

Index development 

The highly granular ISS ESG Corporate Rating and its comprehensive underlying data can also 

be used for the development of (thematic) indices. Asset managers acquire index licenses for 

the development of various financial products. They can, for instance, track indices via 

exchange traded funds (ETFs) or use indices to design their own benchmarks. ISS ESG 

collaborates with index providers to develop solutions based on high quality, reliable, and 

relevant ESG data. 

In 2007, the Hanover Stock Exchange and IS S ESG (then oekom research AG) jointly developed 

the Global Challenges Index (GCX) . Since its inception, the GCX has had a 174 -percent rate of 

return of, outperforming several other leading indices. 3 The GCX comprises the shares of 50 

companies that help t ackle the following seven global challenges: 

▪ mitigating climate change 

▪ ensuring the adequate provision of drinking water 

▪ stopping deforestation and promoting sustainable forestry 

▪ protecting biodiversity 

▪ dealing with population growth 

▪ alleviating poverty 

▪ supporting responsible governance structures 

Multi -level safeguards are in place to ensure a consistent sustainability performance by all the 

companies listed in the GCX. They are premised on the application of performance standards, 

exclusion criteria ( covering both controversial business areas and practices) and meaningful 

contributions to the above -mentioned fields of action. The approach is bolstered by 

continuous monitoring efforts, entailing a six -monthly rebalancing of the index coupled with a 

revi ew by an independent expert panel . In doing so, the GCX singles out companies with 

outstanding sustainability credentials and allows investors to benefit from these companies ’

competitive advantage in light of global transformation and the concomitant risk s and 

opportunities. 

Another practical application of the ISS ESG Corporate Rating targeting a distinct impact area 

is illustrated by the newly developed Solactive ISS ESG Beyond Plastic Waste Index . The index 

was devised by Solactive and ISS ESG and only covers companies that tackle the growing plastic 

waste and contribute to the shift to a more circular economy. More specifically, these 

companies offer solutions for reducing plastic pollution, efficient plastic recycling, enhanced  

> 3https://www.dasinvestment.com/vermoegensverwalter -mark -uwe -falkenhain -nachhaltige -investments -rechnen -sich ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications

467 

plastics reusability and the development of viable substitutes for plastic -based products. 

Current index constituents include Brambles Ltd., a supplier of reusable pallets, crates, and 

containers, and BillerudKorsnäs AB, which specializes in pulp and paper manufacturing and 

renew able packaging materials 4. The index is available for licensing and may be used as a basis 

for ETFs and structured products, benchmarking purposes or as a starting point for customized 

index strategies. 

Climate solutions 

Climate change has undoubtedly beco me one of the most prominent issues in the investment 

community in recent years, not least because of mounting regulatory pressures and 

discussions related to financial risks. The ISS ESG Corporate Rating lays the foundation for 

holistic data insights help ing investors gain a better understanding of their exposures to 

climate -related risks. The Carbon Risk Rating (CRR) is an exemplary case assessing a company ’s

climate management performance. The CRR has two components: Carbon Performance Score 

(CPS) and Ca rbon Risk Classification (CRC). The former draws on more than a hundred 

indicators of a company ’s ability to manage climate -related risks through its value chain (see 

Table 28 -4). For each company, a certain subset of indicators is applicable (typically 15 to 30 

parameters). The assessment of these indicators is compiled into the Corporate Rating. The 

grades are added up according to their relative weight ings in deriving the Corporate Rating, 

thus yielding a CPS from 1.0 (poor performance) to 4.0 (excellent performance). 

The CRC measures a company ’s exposure to carbon -related risks from its main business 

activities. It is derived from a proprietary class ification system predicated on the GHG emission 

and energy intensity of production (including outsourced services and the transportation of 

products), and the GHG emission and energy intensity of the use of products and services. The 

resulting CRC classifi es the climate risk exposure of an industry on a scale from 1.0 (very high 

exposure) to 4.0 (very low risk exposure or positive opportunities outweighing risks). 

A company ’s Carbon Risk Rating (CRR) is calculated as the weighted sum of the company ’s CPS 

and its CRC (w represents the weighting of the CRC, which is automatically assigned depending 

on the value of the CRC): 

CRR = w * CRC + (1 – w) * CPS 

More than a status quo assessment, the Carbon Risk Rating delivers a comprehensive climate 

and carbon perf ormance analysis giving due consideration to forward -looking targets and 

strategic transformation processes.   

> 4https://www.solactive.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/08/Press -Release -Solactive -and -ISS -ESG -create -new -Solactive -
> ISS -Beyond -Plastic -Waste -Index.pdf Ch apter 28

468 

Table 28 -4 Corporate Rating indicators feeding into the Carbon Risk Rating 

Exemplary cross -sectoral indicators 

Position on climate change 

Greenhouse gas emission inventory 

Emission reduction targets and action plans 

Disclosure of climate change risks and mitigation strategy 

Greenhouse gas emission and energy intensity 

Energy management 

Business travel and transport 

Impacts of the product portfolio: ‘Mitigating climate change’ and 

‘Sustainable energy use’ 

Strategy shift towards a more environmentally beneficial product 

portfolio 

Exemplary industry -specific indicators – Electric Utilities 

Share of renewables in electricity generation and trend 

Carbon intensity of energy generation and trend 

Strategy to promote renewable energy 

Thermal efficiency of a company’s fossil -fired power plants 

Other climate -related data and the state of general climate disclosures are discussed in more 

detail in Chapter 33 of this NGFS Occasional Paper. 

# 5 Conclusion 

The ISS ESG Corporate Rating, its underlying data and derived products provide investors with 

diverse options to realize specific in vestment strategies. Investors can also assess companies ’

sustainability performances on an indicator, a topic or overall and ascertain how the selected 

players measure against their peers and industry leaders. 

More specifically, the applications include the targeted selection of stocks and bonds, portfolio 

and index construction, and reporting. Positive criteria screening, ESG integration, exclusions, 

best -in -class approaches and the alignment with global norms and standards are some of the 

widely used me thods. Other popular applications include impact investing strategies, which 

intend to generate measurable social or environmental impacts alongside financial returns, 

and efforts to engage directly with companies (engagement and voting). The ISS ESG Corpo rate 

Rating can be instrumental in supporting all of the aforementioned sustainable investment 

strategies and applications. 

ESG ratings are embedded in a dynamic and fast -paced environment with regulatory 

developments, societal trends and shifts in customer expec tations. Sustainable finance 

initiatives are emerging in many parts of the world. At the forefront of this development, the 

EU is devising a classification system, referred to as taxonomy, for economic activities that can 

be considered green or sustainable investments. Financial market participants are expected to 

use the taxonomy to disclose the sustainability of financial products, providing investors with 

transparent and clear information. These disclosures are expected to indicate to what extent 

a product contains taxonomy -compliant green economic activities (as a percentage, calculated 

based on revenue). Economic activities are deemed environmentally sustainable or green if ISS ESG Corporate Rating and Applications 

469 

they contribute to one of the six environmental objectives without harming other objectives 

while adhering to minimum social safeguards. 

Outside the EU, several other markets are also devising their own sustainable finance 

standards. ESG ratings must evolve to account for the latest developments and ensure that 

investor s are able to respond to multitude regulatory requirements or expectations. Ch apter 28 

470 

# Bibliography 

CICERO. (2017). Shades of Climate Risk: Categorizing Climate Risk for Investors .

CICERO. (2018). Climate scenarios demystified: A climate scenario guide for investor s.

CICERO. (2019). Physical climate risk: Investor needs and information gaps .

Clapp, C., & Sillmann, J. (2019). Facilitating Climate -Smart Investments. One Earth, 1 (1), 57 -

61. 

Huppmann, D., Rogelj, J., Kriegler, E., Krey, V., & Riahi, K. (2018). A new sc enario resource for 

integrated 1.5 °C research. Nature Climate Change, 8 (12), 1027 -1030. 

IEA. (2018). World Energy Outlook 2018 .

Riahi, K., van Vuuren, D. P., Kriegler, E., Edmonds, J., O'Neill, B. C., Fujimori, S., Tavoni, M. 

(2017). The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and 

greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global Environmental Change, 

42 , 153 -168. 

Rogelj, J., Popp, A., Calvin, K. V., Luderer, G., Emmerling, J., Gernaat, D., Tavoni, M. (2018). 

Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase below 1.5 °c. Nature 

Climate Change, 8 (4), 325 -332. 

Sutton, R. T. (2019). Climate scien ce needs to take risk assessment much more seriously. 

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 100 (9), 1637 -1642. 

TCFD. (2017). The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -Related Risks and 

Opportunities 

UNEP FI. (2018). EXTENDING OUR HORIZONS -- Assessing credit risk and opportunity in a 

changing climate: Outputs of a working group of 16 banks -- piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations PART 1: Transition -related risks & opportunities .

Wagner, G. (2015). Climate shock the economic consequence s of a hotter planet . Princeton: 

Princeton : Princeton University Press. 

Weber, C., McCollum, D., Edmonds, J., Faria, P., Pyanet, A., Rogelj, J., Kriegler, E. (2018). 

Mitigation scenarios must cater to new users. Nature Climate Change, 8 (10), 845 -

848. Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in Sustainable Lending and Investing 

471 

# Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in 

# Sustainable Lending and Investing 

By 

Olaf Weber 1

University of Waterloo 

# Abstract 

This paper discusses the use of complex statistical methods as well as AI methods for ESG 

assessment in lending and investing. Until to date, AI has not been used commercially to 

conduct integrate ESG criteria into lending and decision making. Lending appr oaches mostly 

use discriminant and regression functions, including logistic regression that is able to process 

categorical data. In investing, analyses are mostly based on regression models, such as those 

based on Carhart ’s and French and Fama ’s studies. I n contrast to financial data, however, ESG 

data is qualitative and has to be gathered from reports. In these cases , AI could be able to 

improve the integration of ESG into financial decision making through the use of data 

gathering and analysis tools. 

Keyw ords : lending, investment, artificial intelligence, ESG 

# 1 Introduction 

Statistical and AI based tools have a long tradition in credit risk assessment and in other risk 

assessment fields in finance and banking ( Weber, 1997 ). In credit risk assessment, multiva riate 

statistical algorithms have been used since the 1960s ( Altman & Saunders, 1997 ). Particularly, 

the discriminant analysis approach by Altman (1968) revolutionized credit risks assessment. 

Later, in the 1990, banks and other lenders started to implemen t decision support systems 

that also have been called expert systems to support credit risk assessment ( Weber, 1997 ). 

Also, AI tools, such as rule -based systems ( Puppe, 2012 ), fuzzy systems ( Yager & Zadeh, 2012 ), 

and neural networks ( West, 2000 ) have been researched and used since the 1990s and 

complemented complex statistical approaches of credit risk assessment. 

In addition, investment decisions and financial market analyses used statistical approaches 

such as regressions ( Carhart, 1997 ) to analyze the financial market performance of stocks. Also 

in this field, AI methods, such as artificial neural networks, expert systems and hybrid 

intelligence systems have been used successfully ( Bahrammirzaee, 2010 ). 

Later, these methods have also be en used to integrate environmental, social, and governance 

criteria into commercial credit risk assessment ( Weber et al., 2015 ), portfolio risk analyses 

(Battiston et al., 2017 ), and ESG ratings of companies ( Weber et al., 2008 ). The use of AI tools 

in ESG assessment, however, is still in a nascent phase, and to the best knowledge of the author,                   

> 1Author: Olaf Weber is aProfessor at the School of Environment, Enterprise and Development, email:
> oweber@uwaterloo.ca. In addition, he holds the position as the University of Waterloo Research Chair in Sustainable
> Finance and is Senior Fellow of CIGI. Chapter 29

472 

no applications have been reported. While ESG assessment in credit risk management mainly 

relies on statistical methods, such as regression analyses, ESG assessment in investment 

decisions mainly relies on the calculation of alpha based on Carhart ’s model and the 

application of regression analyses and time series models. 

This Chapter will introduce complex quantitative methods that have been used to integrate 

ESG fac tors into credit risk assessment and investment decision making. Examples are taken 

from commercial credit risk assessment, ESG analyses of companies, and low -carbon 

investment decisions. Furthermore, we will present some conclusions on why and how AI 

coul d and should be used in ESG assessment. 

# 2 Intended users of the study 

This study is intended for lenders, investors, and financial regulators. Lenders and investors 

will gain insights about how complex statistical approaches as well as AI are able to increas e

the validity of their risk assessment procedures through the integration of ESG criteria. 

Furthermore, regulators might integrate ESG criteria into the risk assessment of the banks and 

investors they regulate. To date, with the exception of China and the Bank of England, no 

financial regulators has addressed climate and environmental challenges in their risk 

assessment and risk evaluation of chartered banks and other financial institutions. The 

presented methods and results might help them to introduce ES G risks into their risk 

assessment procedures and practices because they are based on quantitative analyses. 

# 3 Credit risk assessment approaches 

The lending business has been one of the first financial service s to try to integrate ESG criteria 

into business decisions because they have been affected by the introduction of environmental 

laws and regulations that address the trade of contaminated sites and the liabilities of 

polluters for environmental impacts ( Weber & Remer, 2011 ). The first credit defaults 

inf luenced by environmental risks occurred in 1990s ( Scholz et al., 1995 ). Since then, 

environmental risks have usually been integrated into commercial credit risk and project 

finance assessments. Consequently, the lending business has been the first field of banking to 

introduce systematic assessment procedures for environmental, social and governance 

impacts. 

Most models to integrate ESG risks into credit risk assessment are based on discriminant 

analytic and regression models used for conventional credit ri sk assessment. The conventional 

models and their use are described in Altman and Saunders (1997) and in Caouette et al. 

(1998) . The quality of the prediction of the models is often evaluated by calculating the Area 

under the Receiver Operating Characterist ic (AUROC) (Zhou et al., 2009 ). 

An example for a function for the conventional discriminant analysis used for credit risk 

prediction is 

Z = β1x1 + β2x2 + ⋯ + βnxn

where β1, β2,…, βn,= discriminant coefficients 

x1, x2,…, xn,= explanatory variables Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in Sustainable Lending and Investing 

473 

For conventiona l systems, independent variables might be financial variables, such as working 

capital / total assets, retained earnings / total assets, etc. ( Altman, 1968 ).

Similar to discriminant analysis, logistic regression strives to predict the probability that a 

cr edit belongs to the group of defaults or non -defaults ( Laitinen, 1999 ). The function for the 

logistic regression looks as follow s:

Π = exp [B0 + ∑ BiXi 

> n
> i=1

]

1 + exp [B0 + BiXi]

Where 

Π = conditional probability that the company is risky 

X1, Xn, … Xn= explanatory variables 

B1, Bn, … Bn= parameters of the logistic regression model 

Again, financial or management indicators have been used as explanatory variables to predict 

the default probability. 

The third statistical approach to predicting credit risks is the linear regression a pproach that 

assumes that the dependent variable is not categorized in two groups but is continuous. The 

function can be described as follows: 

Y = B0 + ∑ BiXi

> n
> i=1

+ e

Where 

Y = credit risk rating 

X1, Xn, … Xn= explanatory variables 

B1, Bn, … Bn= parameters of the line ar regression model 

# 4 Integration of ESG risks into commercial credit risk assessment and 

# credit portfolio management 

Based on these models ESG indicators have been integrated into credit risk assessment 

systems to understand the contribution of ESG indicators to credit risks and to improve the 

predictive validity of the credit risk assessment through the addition of indi cators. If ESG 

indicators are correlated with the credit risk they should be able to increase the explanation 

of variance r 2 of the discriminant or regression functions. 

Hence, one study used discriminant analysis to analyze whether adding ESG criteria inc reases 

the validity of the credit rating in commercial lending ( Weber et al., 2010 ). The original 

function used 33 criteria that are used in a conventional credit risk assessment system. 

Furthermore, 31 economic sustainability criteria, 15 environmental, a nd 6 social criteria have 

been added ( Weber, 1997 ). The results indicated a significant increase in correct default 

predictions of the function that includes the ESG criteria compared to the function without Chapter 29 

474 

ESG criteria. The ratio of correct predictions w ithout ESG criteria has been 78.9 percent while 

the ratio of correct predictions with added SESG criteria has been 86.6 percent which is 

significantly higher. 

A similar approach based on logistic regression has been used by Weber et al. (2015) to analyze 

the effect of adding ESG criteria to the credit risk rating systems in Bangladesh banks. The 

advantage of logistic regression models is that the independent variables can be categorical or 

continuous. Furthermore, the model does not assume normal distributi on of the variables. In 

this study, 31 economic sustainability indicators, 16 environmental, and 7 social criteria have 

been added to the conventional assessment system used by Bangladesh banks that is based 

on 20 indicators addressing financial risks, bus iness risk, management risk, and relationship 

risk. Again, adding ESG criteria through a multivariate regression analysis increased the 

predictive validity of the credit risk assessment system. While the indicator for variance 

explanation R 2 = 0.21 for the conventional credit risk assessment system it increases to R 2 =

0.472 if ESG criteria are added to the function. In this case even the use of ESG criteria alone 

increased the predictive validity of the system to R 2= 0.398. 

A third example of the use of co mplex statistical approaches is the analysis of the connection 

between green lending and non -performing loans in Chinese banks. Based on studies that 

found a positive connection between having a high ESG performance and financial 

performance ( Friede et al. , 2015 ), a study used a two -stage least -square regression analysis to 

analyze the connection between the green credit ratio of a bank on their non -performing loans 

ratio. 

The two -stage model looks as follows: 

First stage: X̂ = γ0 + γ1Z + γ2W + u

Second stage: Y = β0 + β1X̅ + β2W + u

Where 

X̅ == predicted management ’s decision on the proportion of green credit in terms of total loans, 

Y = NPL ratio, 

Z = instrumental variable (type of bank), 

W = exogenous variables (credit quality, Return on Assets (ROA), cost efficiency, solvency, size 

of bank). 

The results of the two -stage least -square regression can explain 39 percent of the variance of 

the non -performing loan ratio. Hence, again, multivariate statistical algorithms are able to 

explain the influence of ESG performance on financial performance. 

# 5 Using ESG indicators to analyze corporate financial risks 

In addition to commercial lending, multivariate approaches have been used to analyze the 

connection between the corporate sustainability performance and the financial perform ance 

of firms. Often regression models are used. Some studies use regression models to calculate 

abnormal returns based on Carhart ’s ( 1997 ) or Fama and French ’s ( 2004 ) models, while other Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in Sustainable Lending and Investing 

475 

studies use statistical methods to predict corporate financial performance based on corporate 

sustainability performance. 

One example that uses logistic regression ( Anderson, 1984 ) is a study by Weber et al. (2008) 

that employs ESG criteria to predict accounting indicators, such as EBITDA margin (EBITDA 

margin), Retur n on Assets (ROA), and Return on Equity (ROE) as well as financial market 

indicators, such as Total Returns (TR). Independent variables ESG drivers and outcomes have 

been used in this analysis. To calculate ESG performance the following regression function has 

been used: 

Environment = β1 * materials + β2 * energy + β3 * water + β4 * biodiversity + β5 * emissions + 

β6 * products and services + β7 * compliance and expenditures + c 

Social = β1 * employment + β2 * labour management relations + β3 * health and safety + β4 *

training and education + β5 * diversity and opportunity + β6 * human rights + β7 * society + β8

* product responsibility + c 

Governance = β1 * stakeholder profile and engagement + β2 * governance structure, 

management systems and overarching policies + c. 

The results indicate that the statistical approach is useful to show that ESG performance can 

explain corporate financial performance with regard to EBITDA margin, ROA, and ROE. 

However, it cannot predict TR, because there might be too many other important influences 

on TR ( Cerin & Dobers, 2001 ) or that the shareholders do not integrate sustainability 

performance into the price of the company shares, as suggested by Schaltegger and Figge 

(2000) .

Another study with a similar goal that address es the connection between ESG performance 

and financial performance of Chinese banks used panel regression to analyze the impact of 

ESG performance on financial performance over time ( Weber, 2017 ). To analyze Granger 

causality ( Granger, 1969 ) a time -lagged approach has been used to analyze cause -and -effect 

between ESG and financial performance. Compared to the methods above, time -lagged panel 

regression delivered better information about cause -and -effect. It was possible to explain 46 

percent of the varianc e in total assets and 52 percent of the variance in net -profits using a 

time -lag approach with one - and two -year delays for a sample that offered data for 5 years. 

# 6 The use of AI to improve ESG assessment 

There is no doubt that the integration of ESG data i s useful for financial decision makers ( Monk 

et al., 2019 ). However, though statistical analyses help to integrate ESG into lending and 

investment decision making, AI might be able to contribute to a better integration. 

Until to date the discussion about whether and how ESG should be integrated into financial 

decision making is ongoing. While particularly early studies suggested a trade -off between the 

ESG and financial performance ( Bauer et al., 2005 ), more recent studies found that ESG and 

financial perf ormance go hand in hand ( Cui et al., 2018 ; Friede et al., 2015 ). One reason for 

these mixed results might be the heterogeneity of ESG ratings ( Berg et al., 2019 ) caused by 

differences in measurement and because of subjectivity. 

AI may improve the collecti on and data as well as its analysis ( In et al., 2019 ). New technologies 

are able to find and code information automatically. For instance, tools such as Twarc are able Chapter 29 

476 

to analyze Twitter with regard to ESG related tweets. These tweets , including responses , can 

be analyzed to assess the ESG performance of a company. 

Furthermore, AI provides methods to analyze mixed data. In contrast to financial data, ESG 

data can be text data, categorical data, and quantitative. Many statistical methods are not able 

to proc ess different types of data. AI methods, such as machine learning or neural networks, 

however, are able to process different types of data. Furthermore, these methods are able to 

recognize patterns without assuming a certain distribution of the data, such as normal 

distribution. Since, ESG evaluation usually does not follow statistical distributions, AI methods 

might be better suited to simulate human decision making that statistical methods. 

# 7 Potential applications and outlook 

Although the use of statistical methods is great progress in analyzing the impact of ESG data, 

AI methods might be useful to achieve more detailed insights about the connection between 

ESG and financial performance. The following sections present a number of potential 

applications of AI that can help enhance the performance of ESG analysis. 

• Mixing of quantitative and qualitative data. A number of AI methods are able to 

process a mix of quantitative and qualitative data. Often ESG performance can be 

analyzed using qualitative data. One example is the analysis of ESG and CSR reports. 

Currently, most analyses are conducted by researchers that analyze reports through 

keyword searches or text analyses. Though these tasks are supported through 

software -based text analysis tools, they are often a long -term and error -prone task. AI 

methods that are able to analyze texts and extract performance indicators m ight be a 

next step in using AI for ESG analysis. For instance, the company RepRisk 

(www.reprisk.com ) uses machine learning to extract information about the ESG 

performance of companies from information available on t he internet, including 

reports. This information can be extracted and analyzed through machine learning to 

monitor firms with regard to their ESG performance. 

• Integrate both quantitative and qualitative data. Furthermore, AI methods are often 

able to inte grate both, quantitative and qualitative data into their analyses. Since, ESG 

data is often qualitative, methods, such as neural networks, rule -based systems, and 

tools based on fuzzy logic might be helpful to analyze the connection between ESG 

and financi al risks. Neural networks, for instance, have been used to analyze corporate 

credit risks. The systems cluster balance sheet information and qualitative 

management evaluation to calculate commercial credit risks ( Baetge et al., 1996 ). 

• Conducting non -linear analyses. AI tools are also able to conduct non -linear analyses 

in contrast to many statistical approaches used in the literature. Some studies found 

non -linear relations between ESG and financial performance ( Wagner & Blom, 2011 ). 

Analyzing non -linear or fuzzy relationships, however, are not strengths of statistical 

methods. Therefore, we propose to analyze the usefulness of AI methods to analyze 

ESG. Non -parametric nearest neighbor classification, for instance, is able to classify 

commercial borrowers wi th regard to their credit risk based on the similarity of their 

balance sheets ( Weber, 1997 ). 

• Creation of high frequency data. AI methods might also be helpful to create more 

frequent ESG data. Often financial analysts and researchers complain about the 

fr equency of ESG data because the data is gathered annually based on corporate ESG Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in Sustainable Lending and Investing 

477 

reporting or ESG databases, while financial data is much more frequently available. 

Hence, AI might be able to analyze media and stakeholder feedbacks on the ESG 

performance o f firms to create real -time ESG performance data. This data can be 

integrated in standard models that analyze financial data. In China, high frequency 

data on environmental performance of companies (such as penalties imposed by 

environmental regulators, me dia coverage of negative news, and emission data) have 

been used by Tsinghua University to create ESG indicators. 

• Working with small databases. Multivariate statistical algorithms need relatively big 

databases to produce robust results. However, rule -ba sed systems, an AI application, 

might be able to analyze the ESG performance of firms without a high number of data 

points. Furthermore, it might be able to create rules for cause -and -effect based on 

heterogeneous data instead of correlations that often ca nnot be explained. Fuzzy rule -

based credit scoring systems, for instance, are able to develop rules than can classify 

commercial loans with regard to their risk ( Gorzałczany & Rudziński, 2016 ). The 

advantage of such systems is that the results can be bette r interpreted because they 

are based on rules and not on statistical classification. Chapter 29 

478 

# Bibliography 

Altman, E. I. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate 

bankruptcy. The Journal of Finance, 23 (4), 589 -609. 

Altman, E. I., & Saunders, A. (1997). Credit risk measurement: Developments over the last 20 

years. Journal of Banking & Finance, 21 (11 -12), 1721 -1742. 

Anderson, T. W. (1984). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis, John Wiley & 

Sons.  New Yo rk .

Baetge, J., Kruse, A., & Uthoff, C. (1996). Bonitätsklassifikationen von Unternehmen mit 

Neuronalen Netzen.  Wirtschaftsinformatik, 38 (3), 273 -281. 

Bahrammirzaee, A. (2010). A comparative survey of artificial intelligence applications in 

finance: arti ficial neural networks, expert system and hybrid intelligent systems. 

Neural Computing and Applications, 19 (8), 1165 -1195. 

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Schütze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A climate stress -

test of the financial system. Natur e Climate Change, 7 (4), 283 -288. 

Bauer, R., Koedijk, K., & Otten, R. (2005).  International evidence on ethical mutual fund 

performance and investment style. Journal of Banking & Finance, 29 (7), 1751 -1767. 

Berg, F., Koelbel, J. F., & Rigobon, R. (2019). A ggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG 

Ratings. 

Caouette, J. B., Caouette, J. B., Altman, E. I., & Narayanan, P. (1998). Managing credit risk: 

the next great financial challenge (Vol. 2): John Wiley & Sons. 

Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutu al fund performance. The journal of finance, 

52 (1), 57 -82. 

Cerin, P., & Dobers, P. (2001). What does the performance of the Dow Jones Sustainability 

Group Index tell us? Eco-Management and Auditing: The Journal of Corporate 

Environmental Management, 8 (3), 123 -133. 

Cui, Y., Geobey, S., Weber, O., & Lin, H. (2018). The impact of green lending on credit risk in 

China. Sustainability, 10 (6), 2008. 

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2004). The capital asset pricing model: Theory and evidence. 

Journal of economic p erspectives, 18 (3), 25 -46. 

Friede, G., Busch, T., & Bassen, A. (2015). ESG and financial performance: aggregated 

evidence from more than 2000 empirical studies. Journal of Sustainable Finance & 

Investment, 5 (4), 210 -233. 

Gorzałczany, M. B., & Rudziński, F. (2016). A multi -objective genetic optimization for fast, 

fuzzy rule -based credit classification with balanced accuracy and interpretability. 

Applied Soft Computing, 40 , 206 -220. 

Granger, C. W. (1969). Investigating caus al relations by econometric models and cross -

spectral methods. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society , 424 -438. 

In, S. Y., Rook, D., & Monk, A. (2019). Integrating Alternative Data (Also Known as ESG Data) 

in Investment Decision Making. Global E conomic Review, 48 (3), 237 -260. 

Laitinen, E. K. (1999). Predicting a corporate credit analyst's risk estimate by logistic and 

linear models. International review of financial analysis, 8 (2), 97 -121. 

Monk, A., Prins, M., & Rook, D. (2019). Rethinking Alte rnative Data in Institutional 

Investment. The Journal of Financial Data Science, 1 (1), 14 -31. 

Puppe, F. (2012). Systematic introduction to expert systems: Knowledge representations and 

problem -solving methods : Springer Science & Business Media. 

Schaltegger, S., & Figge, F. (2000). Environmental shareholder value: economic success with 

corporate environmental management. Eco-Management and Auditing: The Journal 

of Corporate Environmental Management, 7 (1), 29 -42. 

Scholz, R. W., Weber, O., & Michal ik, G. (1995). Ö kologische Risiken im 

Firmenkreditgeschäft. Kreditrisiken aus Umweltrisiken.  Economica und Deutscher 

Sparkassenverlag, Bonn , 1 -49. Statistical and AI Tools for ESG Assessment in Sustainable Lending and Investing 

479 

Wagner, M., & Blom, J. (2011). The reciprocal and non-linear relationship of sustainability 

and financial pe rformance. Business Ethics: A European Review, 20 (4), 418 -432. 

Weber, O. (1997). Integration von Wissensmodulen bei der Kreditvergabe [Integration of 

Knowledge Modules into the Credit Decision Process](Vol. 7). Lang: Frankfurt aM .

Weber, O. (2017). Corpo rate sustainability and financial performance of Chinese banks. 

Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal .

Weber, O., Hoque, A., & Ayub Islam, M. (2015). Incorporating environmental criteria into 

credit risk management in Bangladeshi banks. Journal of Sustainable Finance & 

Investment, 5 (1 -2), 1 -15. 

Weber, O., Koellner, T., Habegger, D., Steffensen, H., & Ohnemus, P. (2008). The relation 

between the GRI indicators and the financial performance of firms. Progress in 

Industrial Ecology, an Int ernational Journal, 5 (3), 236 -254. 

Weber, O., & Remer, S. (2011). Social banks and the future of sustainable finance (Vol. 64): 

Taylor & Francis. 

Weber, O., Scholz, R. W., & Michalik, G. (2010).  Incorporating sustainability criteria into 

credit risk manag ement. Business Strategy and the Environment, 19 (1), 39 -50. 

West, D. (2000). Neural network credit scoring models. Computers & Operations Research, 

27 (11 -12), 1131 -1152. 

Yager, R. R., & Zadeh, L. A. (2012). An introduction to fuzzy logic applications in intelligent 

systems (Vol. 165): Springer Science & Business Media. 

Zhou, L., Lai, K. K., & Yen, J. (2009). Credit scoring models with AUC maximization based on 

weighted SVM. International journal of information technology & decision making, 

8(04), 677 -696. Chapter 30 

480 

# Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and 

# Applications 

By 

RepRisk 1

# Abstract 

Many financial institutions and corporations are turning to ESG rating agencies and ESG data 

providers to help them identify ESG factors in their investment portfolios as well as in their 

own operations. ESG rating agencies and data providers offer a wide range of products. 

However, each agency has developed its own research scope, scoring methodology, and 

sources of raw data to assess a company ’s corporate sustainability and ESG factors. This 

chapter gives an overview of ESG rating and data providers and t heir scoring approaches. It 

further outlines ESG -related investment products and investment strategies. 

Keywords: rating agencies , ESG , SRI , CSR , impact investing , due diligence , AI, SRI indices 

# 1 Background to ESG investing 

The last decade has seen a surging interest in environmental, social, and governance (ESG) 

issues, amid recognition that non -financial risks, often referred to as ESG risks, can have an 

impact on the future financial performance of companies. As a result, institutional and retail 

in vestors are increasingly incorporating ESG factors, as well as traditional financial analysis, 

into their investment decision -making processes. 

Various reports and academic studies have shown that portfolios that integrate ESG factors 

into financial analys is have outperformed over the medium to long term. 2 In 2016, a study 

produced by Barclays found “that a positive ESG tilt resulted in a small but steady performance 

advantage ” and that “no evidence of a negative performance impact was found .”3

There are al so clear signs that investors are embracing sustainable investing. According to the 

2018 Global Sustainable Investment Review, sustainable investing assets were just over USD 

30 trillion at the beginning of 2018, a 34 percent increase from 2016. 4

As of Oct ober 2019, the United Nations Principles for Responsible Investing (PRI) had more 

than 2,500 signatories, representing over USD 80 trillion in assets under management. 5               

> 1This chapter is written by Stella Kenway, Senior ESG Research Analyst, email: stella.kenway@repriskcom (Author),
> Alessandra Oglino, Senior ESG Advisor, ale ssandra.oglino@reprisk.com (Editor), Gina Walser, Head of Marketing and
> Communications, email: gina.walser@reprsik.com (Editor).
> 2https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3004689 ;https://www.bcg.com/publications/2019/asset -
> managers -seize -lead -sustainable -investing.asp x;https://us.allianzgi.com/en -us/institutional/sustainability/sustainable -
> ideas/how -do -esg -factors -impact -portfol io -performance
> 3https://www.investmentbank.barclays.com/content/dam/barclaysmicrosites/ibpublic/documents/our -
> insights/esg/barclays -sustainable -investing -and -bond -returns -3.6mb.pdf
> 4http://www.gsi -alliance.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/GSIR_Review2018.3.28.pdf
> 5https://www.lazardassetmanagement.com/research -insights/lazard -insights/green -bonds -growing -role -in -esg -Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications

481 

Signatories of the PRI agree to implement six voluntary Principles, including three tha t relate 

to ESG issues: 6

• We will incorporate ESG issues into investment analysis and decision -making 

processes. 

• We will be active owners and incorporate ESG issues into our ownership policies and 

practices. 

• We will seek appropriate disclosure on ESG issues by the entities in which we invest. 

Islamic finance, sometimes known as Sharia investing, which excludes investments in sectors 

that do not fit with the principles of the Muslim religion, such as the production and sale of 

alcohol, pork, pornography, gamb ling, and military equipment, has also grown considerably. 

The Malaysia Islamic International Financial Center estimated that the global Islamic assets 

under management totaled USD 70.8 billion in March 2017, up from USD 47 billion in 2008. 7

# 2 History of ES G investing 

In Europe, ESG investing, known originally as socially responsible investing (SRI), can trace its 

roots back 200 years to when faith -based movements, such as the Christian Methodists and 

the Quakers, called on their followers to avoid investin g in entities that made a profit from 

certain products and activities, such as alcohol, tobacco, weapons, or gambling, that harmed 

the community. Sharia investing dates back to the beginning of Islam in the seventh century. 

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries some philanthropic investors used their 

wealth to support socially beneficial ventures. 

It was in the 1960s, however, that investors began deselecting companies, such as weapons 

manufacturers, that were accused of fueling the conflict in Vietnam. A decade later, investors 

also began excluding companies operating in South Africa due to concerns over the country ’s

Apartheid regime. The 1980s saw a growth in social concerns related to investment decisions, 

and by the 1990s 400 US corporati ons agreed to join the Domini Social Index, which measured 

their social and environmental performance. In recent years, concerns about climate change 

have been driving sustainable investing. The UN -backed 2015 Paris Climate Accord has 

triggered calls for c ompanies to disclose and reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and 

provided momentum for investors to consider climate and environmental factors in their 

portfolio selection. 

At the beginning of the new millennium, the prevailing assumption was that compa nies would 

have to accept lower profits in order to maintain ethical principles. This concept changed, 

however, due to a growing recognition that non -financial factors can affect a company ’s

financial performance. Therefore, investment managers that take s uch ESG factors into 

consideration could potentially reduce risk and even improve the performance of their 

portfolios. A 2009 report published by the UN Environment Programme Finance Initiative 

(UNEP FI) entitled, “Fiduciary Duty, ” concluded that: “we beli eve that the global economy has 

now reached the point where ESG issues are a critical consideration for all institutional    

> investing
> 6http s://www.unpri.org/pri/an -introduction -to -responsible -investment/what -are -the -principles -for -responsible -
> investment
> 7https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/shariah -compliant -fu nds.asp Chapter 30

482 

investors and their agents. ” 8 In 2017, InvestmentNews reported that the new generation of 

investors, which includes millennials as well as women, also favor socially responsible investing. 

Early names for responsible investing included such terms as “green investing ”, “eco -investing ”,

“socially responsible investing (SRI) ”, “sustainable investing ”, and “ethical investing ”. However, 

in the financial services sector, “ESG investing ” and “impact investing ” seem to have now 

become the most widely accepted terms. 

# 3 ESG rating agencies 

The measurement of non -finan cial risks can be difficult, and asset managers and financial 

institutions are increasingly turning to ESG rating agencies and ESG data providers to help 

them identify ESG risks and opportunities in their portfolios. Unlike financial rating agencies, 

whose services are paid for by the entity that is seeking a rating for itself, the services of ESG 

ratings agencies are paid for by investors. 

Each ESG rating agency has developed its own methodology to research and assess a 

company ’s corporate sustainability or social impact. Some ESG rating agencies combine both 

financial and non -financial data, while others provide only non -financial information. This data 

helps investors analyze ESG risks and identify trends. 

There has been considerable consolidation of ESG rating agencies over the past few years. 

Some agencies have merged or have been taken over, and there are some new players in the 

market. Examples include: In July 2017, the US financial services firm Morningstar acquired a 

40 percent stake in Sustainalyt ics, an ESG ratings agency headquartered in the Netherlands. 9

In April 2019, Moody ’s Corporation acquired a majority stake in Paris -based Vigeo Eiris 10 (itself 

a merger of Paris -based Vigeo and UK -based EIRIS which took place in 2015), and in August 

2019, t he London Stock Exchange Group proposed an all share acquisition of Refinitiv, an ESG 

data provider jointly owned by the Blackstone Group and Thomson Reuters. 11 Some major 

agencies have entered into research partnerships with local agencies or opened region al 

offices in order to enhance their geographic coverage, while others have partnered with 

specialist agencies to enable them to provide specific data on issues such as greenhouse gas 

emissions. For example, in March 2018, the proxy advisory firm Instituti onal Shareholder 

Services bought the German -based rating agency Oekom Research. In the same month 

Sustainalytics acquired certain assets from the Indian -based research company Solaron 

Sustainability Services to boost its coverage of Asia. 

# 4 ESG -related pro ducts and services 

The major ESG rating agencies and data providers offer a wide range of products: 

Norm -based analysis 

Companies are assessed according to their compliance with international standards and 

conventions such as the Universal Declaration of H uman Rights (UNDR), the conventions of 

the International Labor Organization (ILO), and the 10 Principles of the United National Global    

> 8https://www.unepfi.org/fileadmin/events/2009/roundtable/WS14McQuillen.pdf
> 9https://www.sustainalytics.com/esg -investing -news/morningstar -acquire -stake -sustainalytics/
> 10 https://ir.moodys.com/news -and -financials/press -releases/press -release -details/2019/Moodys -Acquires -Majority -
> Stake -in -Vigeo -Eiris -a-Global -Leader -in -ESG -Assessments/default.aspx
> 11 https://www.lseg.com/resources/media -centre/press -releases/proposed -all -share -acquisition -refinitiv -create -
> financial -markets -infrastructure -leader -future Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications

483 

Compact (UNGC). Any incidents that conflict with these standards are then categorized 

according to severity as well as th e quality of the company ’s response. 

ESG analysis of companies 

ESG rating agencies use their own proprietary methodology to analyze a company ’s ESG 

performance and compare it with the company ’s own policies. Most agencies use 

international standards such as the World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety 

Guidelines, the IFC Performance Standards, the Equator Principles, the OECD Guidelines for 

Multinational Enterprises, and the ILO Conventions as a benchmark for their analysis and to 

provide an over all rating for the company. 

Evaluation of portfolios 

Many ESG rating agencies offer investors an ESG risk assessment at the portfolio level, which 

allows investors to compare their exposure to ESG risks across different portfolios. 

SRI indices 

Some ESG rating agencies analyze selected issuers included in traditional indices (e.g., Dow 

Jones Sustainability Index, FTSE4Good) to create an SRI index. Companies are eager to be 

included in such indices as it highlights their commitment to sustainabili ty. 

Analysis of countries 

Some ESG ratings agencies have developed methodologies that allow them to give an ESG 

rating to countries. Such analysis is usually based on major international conventions as well 

as from data from such entities as the World Ban k and Transparency International. 

Controversy alerts 

These alert services warn investors of new ESG violations and controversies associated with 

companies in their portfolio. 

Corporate engagement 

Most major ESG rating agencies offer engagement services whereby the agency has direct 

contact with the company concerned – often in the form of sending questionnaires – to assess 

the company ’s response to an ESG risk incident or allegation. 

Governance an d proxy voting 

Shareholder voting allows shareholders to influence a company ’s corporate governance and 

social responsibility commitments. Specialized agencies deliver the required documentation 

to shareholders to allow them to vote for, or against, the re solutions presented. 

Green bonds verification 

Green bonds, also sometimes known as climate bonds or SDG -linked bonds, are fixed -income 

financial instruments linked to climate change solutions and other environmental projects. 

Some ESG rating agencies prov ide verification services to check whether the bonds align with 

Green and Social Bond Principles. 

# 5 Methodologies used by ESG rating agencies 

Most ESG rating agencies and data providers measure a company ’s ESG performance by 

analyzing data points across different categories of sustainability criteria (e.g. emissions, waste 

management, transparency, executive compensation, etc.). This analysis is used to create 

sustainability scores, which are used by asset owners and managers in their investment 

strategie s, for CSR and sustainability reporting, and supply chain monitoring. Chapter 30 

484 

However, each ESG rating agency has developed its own research scope, incorporating 

different categories of sustainability, different measurements, and different weightings in the 

over all ESG score. There is also a divergence in the types of raw data sources used by ESG 

rating agencies and ESG data providers. 

ESG rating agencies 

Most traditional ESG ratings agencies analyze the performance of a finite selection of listed 

companies by b asing their analysis on information obtained from the companies themselves; 

for example, performing a content analysis of corporate communications, such as the 

company ’s Corporate Responsibility Report and website, to flag certain keywords related to 

ESG i ssues. Some agencies collect data about ESG performance by sending questionnaires to 

the companies that are being assessed, and engage with stakeholders such as NGOs, 

government bodies, or trade unions. Most agencies use international standards, such as th e

ILO Conventions, the UN Global Compact, and the Declaration of Human Rights, as a 

benchmark for their analysis. They then use their own methodologies to analyze the data and 

determine a rating for each company. The ratings and analysis are usually update d two or three 

times a year. 

ESG data providers 

The increasing demand for reliable and timely ESG data has given rise to ESG data providers 

that use technology – such as artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms – to 

screen vast quantities of unstructured data from sources external to a company, such as news 

articles, NGO reports, social media and other sources. Automated search tools using pre -

defined keywords linked to specific ESG issues (e.g., climate change, water scarcity, labor 

relati ons, corporate governance, etc.) can scan vast quantities of data to identify risk incidents 

and controversies related to a company ’s ESG performance and sustainability. This data can 

then be used to compile ESG scores and metrics, which are used by client s such as banks, 

institutional investors and investment managers for due diligence and risk management. 

Specialist ESG data providers 

Specialist ESG data providers have developed expertise in niche markets. Some providers 

assign ratings to countries by us ing publicly available data from sources such as the World Bank, 

Eurostat, and Transparency International, while others focus on single issues such as climate 

change, water scarcity, plastic pollution, or CO 2 emissions. There are also a growing number of 

alternative data providers that rely on non -traditional sources; for example, satellite images 

can be used to monitor risk incidents such as oil spills or natural disasters such as forest fires. 

However, these AI systems and machine learning algorithms are only as powerful as the quality 

of the data upon which they are built. To solve for this challenge, leading ESG data providers 

combine artificial intelligence with human intelligence by training analysts how to use a rules -

based methodology to evaluate raw data. This system of quality control ensures that the final 

research and analytics are relevant and actionable. These annotated or curated data points 

can also be used to train machine learning algorithms, ultimately making them faster and more 

accurate o ver time. By combining the best of both the machine and human worlds, these AI -

driven data providers can show whether a company ’s policies actually translate into 

performance on the ground – in effect, providing a “reality check ” on whether a company 

walks the walk instead of just talking the talk. 

The timeliness, granularity and availability of such data – and the scope and scale of the 

underlying databases – makes these datasets ideal as inputs into quantitative investing 

strategies. The longer the datas et, the better it can be used to back -test trading strategies or 

conduct research. This is an important differentiator among AI -driven ESG data providers, Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications 

485 

since some firms have an unbroken time series of high -quality data that dates back more than 

10 years , while other firms may only have a few years of data or rely on back -filled data, which 

tends to be less reliable. 

Scoring methods 

ESG rating agencies and ESG data providers have developed their own scoring methodology 

to assess a company ’s corporate sust ainability performance. The scores of many ESG rating 

agencies follow the methodology of credit rating agencies, and are expressed as a letter grade, 

usually ranging from A+ – D-, with an A grade denoting a high level of corporate sustainability. 

ESG data providers more frequently use numeric values. Other ESG scoring systems include 

percentages, heat maps, Boolean logic (true/false statements), and “traffic light ”

classifications. 

# 6 Categories of sustainable investment 

Institutional investors take different approaches when it comes to sustainable investing. Some 

rely on ESG integration strategies, while others primarily employ exclusionary or negative 

screening strategies. There is also thematic investing, which focuses on investing in a specific 

theme such as those defined by the UN ’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and impact 

investing, which seeks to generate a measurable positive social or environment impact. The 

Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA) has defined seven categories of sustainab le 

investment: 12 

Negative/exclusionary screening : the exclusion from a fund or portfolio of certain sectors, 

companies, or practices based on specific ESG criteria 

Positive/Best in class screening : investment in sectors, companies or projects selected for 

positive ESG performance relative to industry peers 

Norms -based screening : screening of investments against minimum standards of business 

practice based on international norms, such as those issued by the International Labour 

Organization, the Universal D eclaration of Human Rights, and the United Nations Global 

Compact Principles 

ESG integration : the systematic and explicit inclusion by investment managers of 

environmental, social and governance factors into financial analysis 

Sustainability themed invest ing : investment in themes or assets specifically related to 

sustainability such as clean energy, green technology, or sustainable agriculture 

Impact/community investing : targeted investments aimed at solving social or environmental 

problems and including c ommunity investing, where capital is specifically directed to 

traditionally underserved individuals or communities, as well as financing that is provided to 

businesses with a clear social or environmental purpose 

Corporate engagement and shareholder action : the use of shareholder power to influence 

corporate behavior, including through direct corporate engagement, filing or co -filing 

shareholder proposals, and proxy voting that is guided by comprehensive ESG guidelines   

> 12 http://www.gsi -alliance.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/GSIR_Review2018.3.28.pdf Chapter 30

486 

According to the GSIA, although most g lobal investors, particularly those in Europe, rely on 

negative or exclusionary screening, ESG integration has been widely adopted by US, Canadian, 

Australian, and New Zealand -based investors, and grew by 69 percent between 2016 and 2018. 

Japanese investor s reportedly rely more on corporate engagement and shareholder action. 

In addition to the above -mentioned approaches to sustainable investing, many investors also 

invest via CSR or ESG index products. CSR or ESG indices were developed at both national an d

international levels to establish a benchmark for companies involved in sustainable activities, 

and provide the basis for many ETF products. Many companies dedicate considerable 

resources to maximize their chances of being included in one of the major CS R Indices. 

# 7 Challenges facing ESG rating agencies and ESG data providers 

ESG ratings agencies have been the subject of recent criticism, with some investors skeptical 

about the reliability of such data. The controversy mainly revolves around inconsistenci es in 

the ESG scores provided by different rating agencies for the same company. A 2018 report 

published by the Asian investment bank CLSA and the Asian Corporate Governance Association 

warns: “the quality and comparability of ESG data remains hotly contes ted and we would 

caution against over -reliance on simple ESG scores. ”13 A graph from the report was published 

in an FT article in December 2018 highlighted the lack of consistency among company ratings 

by different providers. 14 

Such inconsistencies may aris e because each ESG rating agency uses its own methodology and 

those methodologies have often changed over time. Agencies may base their analysis on 

different definitions of ESG performance and may adopt different approaches to measuring 

such performance, e specially by giving different weights to certain ESG factors in the final 

score. For example, one agency might include tax optimization as one of its criteria, while 

another may not, leading to differences in the final rating. 

Agencies may also use differ ent indicators to measure the same ESG issue. For example, a 

firm ’s gender equality could be evaluated on the basis of the number of female staff in 

management positions, or by comparing the salaries of male and female staff, or both. A study 

published in the Journal of Applied Corporate Finance confirmed that inconsistencies lead to 

significantly different results for the same group of companies, and cited as an example over 

20 different ways companies report their employee health and safety data. Similarl y, a study 

published by MIT and University of Zurich researchers entitled, “Aggregate Confusion: The 

Divergence of ESG Ratings, ” found that “measurement divergence ” (i.e., the different ways 

ESG criteria are measured) explains more than 50 percent of the i nconsistencies across ESG 

ratings (Berg et al., 2019) .

Most ESG rating agencies primarily measure the self -reported sustainability of a company ’s

operations and do not take into account the ethical impact of the business activities. This may 

lead them to rate a weapons manufacturer as high as a manufacturer of solar panels. When it 

comes to adverse impacts and risks, self -reported information may not be reliable and sources 

from third -pa rties are needed to help assess whether a company ’s policies and processes are 

translating into actual performance on the ground. 

ESG rating agencies that rely on questionnaires may also find that socially responsible 

companies are more likely to respond than companies that are less concerned about corporate   

> 13 https://corporate -citizenship.com/2019/03/26/message -to -the -sceptics -sustainability -is -the -future -of -investing/
> 14 https://ftalphaville.ft.com/2018/12/06/154 4076001000/Lies --damned -lies -and -ESG -rating -methodologies/ Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications

487 

responsibility. This bias could of course be solved by mandatory and standardized disclosures 

of information. While many government and regulatory agencies (particularly those in Europe) 

are actively w orking towards instituting mandated disclosures, it may be several years before 

the current patchwork of different frameworks evolves into a single universal standard (or 

standards). 

Another shortcoming among some ESG rating agencies and data providers is their limited 

coverage of private companies, emerging markets companies, and infrastructure projects, all 

of which tend to have less available data about them than large, listed companies in developed 

countries. While some data providers focus only on tho se companies where data is relatively 

easily accessible, other data providers take a broader approach that allows them to cover a 

larger section of the market. 

Data providers that exclusively use artificial intelligence also face the challenges of sortin g the 

vast quantities of data obtained from automated searches into relevant and actionable insights 

that can be used to make better -informed investment and business decisions. These AI -driven 

data providers have also been criticized for focusing on the sp eed rather than the relevance of 

the information, resulting in a lot of data “noise. ”15 

# 8 How do companies use ESG ratings and ESG data? 

Different types of companies have different uses for ESG ratings and ESG data. For a large 

corporation, an ESG rating or data point may provide senior managers with a better 

understanding of their business risks and potential areas of improvement. For example, a food 

or beverage company may discover that it uses significantly more water and energy resources 

than any of its c ompetitors, a sign of operational inefficiencies that may have a material impact 

on that company ’s share price and future financial prospects. 

For banks and insurance companies, ESG data could be used as an input into due diligence and 

risk management. Bot h banking and insurance professionals are often responsible for deciding 

whether to extend a loan (or an insurance policy) to a particular business, and at what interest 

rate (or insurance premium). These professionals rely on ESG data to evaluate the rele vant ESG 

risks for a business, which can then be used to estimate the chances of a default or a coverage 

trigger and thereby determine an appropriate risk -return trade -off. 

By far the biggest consumers of ESG ratings and data to -date are institutional inv estors and 

investment management firms. This should come as no surprise given that ESG factors are well 

understood to affect a company ’s performance, and therefore have the potential to affect an 

investor ’s portfolio and financial returns. But there is a w ide disparity in how the investment 

community incorporates ESG data into their research and investment processes, which is 

reflected in the earlier section on “Categories of sustainable investment. ”

In general, ESG data is used as one of many inputs to gui de investment decision -making. For 

some investors, a low ESG rating or a high frequency of ESG risk incidents is reason enough to 

exclude a company from a portfolio (i.e., negative screening). Likewise, some investors may 

prefer to only invest in companies that score above a certain ESG rating threshold or have 

minimal controversies (i.e., positive screening). Other investors may take a more nuanced 

approach that considers the overall risk -return profile for a particular investment based on 

that company ’s f inancial and non -financial performance. The most sophisticated investors will   

> 15 https://www.ipe.com/investment/asset -class -reports/small -and -mid -caps/e sg -awareness -grows/10033571.article Chapter 30

488 

use ESG data to measure and report on a company ’s performance on certain ESG issues, and 

also use shareholder engagement tactics to pressure a company to improve. 

As the quality and quantity of ESG data have improved, so too has the range of approaches 

aiming at mining the data for investment risks and opportunities. Some investment firms are 

using a number of external ESG data and research sources to complement their own in -house 

research and investment processes, thereby allowing them to get a more complete picture of 

a company ’s behavior and intentions. A growing number of firms are also looking at ways to 

incorporate ESG data into their quantitative investing strategies, which rely on AI and machine 

learning algorithms to parse through large datasets at hyper speeds looking for material signals. 

These different approaches and use cases all come with their respective advantages and 

disadvantages. But there is a broad consensus i n the marketplace that ESG ratings and ESG 

data can, at the very least, be used to better inform business and investment decisions. 

# 9 Outlook for ESG ratings 

The ESG Ratings sector is changing fast, and there is a growing call for open and transparent 

disclo sure standards and transparency in ESG reporting and scoring. Traditionally, 

sustainability reporting has been primarily driven by voluntary initiatives such as the UN Global 

Compact and the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). However, legislation such as t he UK Bribery 

Act, the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the UK Modern Slavery Act, the Dodd -Frank Conflict 

Mineral Disclosure Provision, and the EU Directive for Multinational Enterprises are now 

forcing companies to tighten up their due diligence process es. 

There are also calls for clear legislation on responsible investing and ESG disclosure. In March 

2019, the EU Parliament agreed on new rules governing disclosure on sustainable investments 

and sustainability risks. 16 In July 2019, the US held its first congressional hearing on ESG issues 

and the chair of the committee urged the US Securities and Exchange Commission to establish 

ESG disclosure standards. 17 The UN -supported Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) has 

launched the ESG in Credit Risk and Ratings Initiative, which aims to ensure that ESG factors 

are considered in credit risk analysis. As of January 2019, 146 investors had signed up to the 

initiative. 18 

As investors increasingly embrace the concept that ESG criteria can affect a company ’s

fi nancial performance, credit rating agencies are beginning to analyze ESG data when 

assessing corporate bond issuers. In January 2019, Fitch Ratings announced the launch of ESG 

Relevance Scores to show the impact of ESG on credit rating decisions. 19 John Ber isford, 

President of S&P Global Ratings, has also confirmed that: “At S&P Global Ratings, our analysts 

work to ensure that we provide essential insights into ESG factors as they relate to the financial 

markets. ”20 Moody ’s has also confirmed that it consider s ESG issues when making credit 

decisions. 21       

> 16 https://europa.eu/rapid/press -release_IP -19 -1571_en.htm
> 17 https://www.greenbiz.com/article/us -congress -just -held -its -first -hearing -esg -issues -whats -next
> 18 https://www.unpri.org/credit -ratings/esg -credit -risk -and -ratings -part -3-from -disconnects -to -action -areas -
> /3996.article
> 19 https://www.fitchratings.com/site/pr/10058528
> 20 https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/products -benefits/products/esg -in -credit -ratings
> 21 https://www.ft.com/content/c1f29e0c -6012 -3ac5 -9a05 -13444b89c5ec Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications

489 

Banks, investors and other organizations are increasingly demanding quality ESG data as they 

realize the materiality of ESG risk incidents, which can lead to compliance, reputational, and 

financial risks. As St ate Street points out: “Quality data is the lifeblood of investment analysis. 

While “quality ” can be defined in several ways, most investors agree that consistency and 

comparability in the availability of data across companies are essential elements of an effective 

data set. ”22   

> 22 https://www.ssga.com/investment -topics/environmental -social -governance/2019/03/esg -data -challenge.pdf Chapter 30

490 

# Bibliography 

Berg, F., Kölbel, J., & Rigobon, R. (2019). Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG 

Ratings. MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5822 -19. 

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3438533 Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications 

491 

# Appendix 

List of Ma jor ESG Rating Agencie s (information as of November 2019) 

Name  HQ 

Bloomberg 

Headquartered in New York City, and with 167 locations around the world, Bloomberg 

provides financial software tools, data services, and news via its Bloomberg Terminal. 

The company also provides ESG data on publicly listed companies. 

US 

EcoVadis 

Headquartered in Paris, EcoVadis provides a collaborative platform to monitor the 

sustainability per formance of supply chains. 

France 

ISS -Ethix -Oekom 

Institutional Shareholder Services Inc. (ISS) provides corporate governance and 

responsible investment solutions including  governance research  and 

recommendations; RI data, analytics, and research; end -to -end  proxy voting and 

distribution solutions; turnkey  se curities class -action claims management ; as well as 

global  governance data and modeling tools .

US 

MSCI ESG Research 

Headquartered in New York, MSCI ESG Research provides research, ratings, and 

analysis of the environmental, social and governance -related business practices of 

companies both in developed and emerging markets. MSCI ESG Research data and 

ratings are used in the construction of the MSCI ESG In dexes. 

US 

Sustainalytics (Morningstar owns 40% as of 2017) 

Based in Amsterdam, and with offices in 17 cities around the world, Sustainalytics 

rates the sustainability of listed companies based on their  ESG performance. In 

January 2019 Sustainalytics acquired GES International, a provider of engagement, 

screening, and fiduciary voting services to institutional investors. 

The 

Netherlands 

Refinitiv (acquisition by LSEG underway) 

With headquarters in London and New York, Thomson Reuters Refinitiv is a provider 

of financial markets data and infrastructure. The company, founded in 2018, is jointly 

owned by  Blackstone Group  LP and  Thomson Reuters . In August 2019, the  London 

Stock Exchange Group  agreed to buy the company in an all -share transaction valuing 

Refinitiv at USD 27 billion. 

US 

TruCost (acquired by S&P in 2017) 

Based in London, TruCost estimates the  hidden costs  of  the brown  use of natural 

resources by companies.  S&P Dow Jones Indices  acquired a controlling stake in 

Trucost in October 2016. 

UK 

Vigeo EIRIS (acquired by Moody’s in 2019) 

The Vigeo Eiris group, headquartered in Paris and London, evaluates organizations ’

integration of social environmental and governance factors into their strategies, 

operations and management – with a focus on promoting economic performance, 

responsible investment and sus tainable value creation. Since April 2019, Vigeo Eiris is 

a subsidiary of Moody's. 

France Chapter 30 

492 

Main ESG Data Providers (Information as at January 2019) 

Name  HQ 

Arabesque 

Founded in 2013 and headquartered in London, Arabesque is a global asset 

management firm that integrates ESG big data with quantitative investment 

strategies. 

UK 

RavenPack 

Headquartered in Marbella, RavenPack is a big data analytics provider for financial 

services. 

Spain 

RepRisk 

Headquartered in Zurich, RepRisk is the only provider to combine AI and human 

intelligence to screen publicly -available information and identify material ESG and 

business conduct risks related to companies and infrastructure projects around the 

world. 

Switzerland 

SenseFolio 

Based in Chicago, SenseFolio tracks and assesses a company ’s ESG involvement by 

using artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms. 

US 

TruValue Labs 

Headquartered in San Francisco, TruValueLabs uses machine learning and natural 

language processing for artificial intelligence powered engines to analyze 

unstructured data in real time, extract relevant metrics, and turn them into material 

insights. 

US Overview of ESG Rating, Data Providers and Applications 

493 

Specialist ESG Data Providers 

Name  HQ 

CDP (formerly Carbon Disclosure Project) 

CDP is a not -for -profit organization that runs the global disclosure system for 

investors, companies, cities, states and regions to manage their environmental 

impacts. 

UK 

Maplecroft 

Maplecroft analyzes key political, economic, social, and environmental risks  related 

to c ountries, regions, and local sites. 

UK 

South Pole Group 

South Pole is a Swiss carbon finance consultancy founded in 2006 in Zurich. 

Switzerland 

SigWatch 

SigWatch tracks and an alyzes NGO concerns and campaigns. 

UK 494 

# Part IV Cross -Cutting Issues Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

495 

# Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to 

# Measur ing the Climate Performance of Investments 

by 

Carbone4 1

# Abstract 

Carbon Impact Analytics (CIA) is a methodology developed by Carbone 4, leveraging its 13 

years ’ experience advising corporates in all sectors on their carbon footprint assessment and 

decarbonization strategies. It enables an in -depth analysis of the carbon performance of assets, 

including: carbon footprint of the whole value chain (including indirect emissions), the 

emissions savings from the contribution to the low -carbon transition and a forward -loo king 

analysis capturing decarbonization ambition. It aims to both measure the (negative and 

positive) impact of assets on climate and the climate transition risk of financial portfolios. Used 

by asset managers, asset owners, index providers and banks, the database built by Carbon4 

Finance based on the CIA methodology enables 1) all financial actors to report on their climate 

performance and understand the carbon dependency of their portfolios; 2) financial 

institutions to develop active and passive investme nt strategies regarding climate transition 

(impact and/or risk related); 3) banks to implement a green weighting factor. 

Keyword s: carbon footprint, scenario alignment, climate performance, transition risk, impact 

assessment 

# 1 Purpose of the study/methodolog y

Carbon Impact Analytics (‘ CIA ’) is an innovative suite of methodologies to measure financial 

assets ’ climate impact and identify their contributors to the low -carbon transition. 

CIA is based on a bottom -up assessment of corporate, institutional, asset or sovereign climate 

impacts and can measure the climate performance of any kind of portfolio (loans, bonds, 

stocks etc.). It assesses the key carbon metrics (induced emissions scope 1, 2 and 3 and 

emissions savings) of the underlying activities financed by the lender or investor. 

The approach was developed to be applied to listed equities and bonds, green bonds, 

sovereign bonds, private equity and debt, loans and real assets (infrastructure, real estate and 

natural resources). For listed securities, Carbone 4 develops a dataset of metrics covering 

10,000 companies based on public financial data. For sovereign, all countries have been 

assessed. For real assets and infrastructure, we applied the method on several specific 

portfolios. 

The risk metrics can be use ful to various financial actors:      

> 1This chapter is written by Clémence Lacharme, senior consultant at Carbone 4 ,email: clemence.lacharme@carbone4.com ;
> Jean -Yves Wilmotte, manager at Carbone 4 ,email: jean -yves.wilmotte@carbone4.com. Chapter 31

496 

- to asset managers or institutional investors to measure and manage the risks on their 

portfolio and assets and to engage with the underlying components (TCFD or the French 

article 173 reporting); 

- to commercial banks to app reciate the risks on their clients and markets, integrate the 

transition risks on their analytics and to feed their sustainability risk ratings (ex: 

integration of green supporting factor in credit risk ratings); 

- to regulators and financial actors in stres s test approaches. Indeed, CIA metrics capture 

the vulnerability of issuers, enabling a bottom -up approach in stress -test models. 

The full methodology is available online ( CIA & Carbon4, 2018 ). 

# 2 Fundamental components 

The fundamental concept of CIA relies on the fact that transition risk comes from misalignment 

of real carbon emissions of companies and how the emissions should be reduced to achieve 

climate outcomes. For example, for two competitors, the one with the best climate impact 

(the less emissions f or the same service) will be less at risk than the other, he will pay a smaller 

carbon tax, he will need less CAPEX to be on track, whatever the type of financial impact, it 

will be smaller. The main challenge is then to calculate properly this climate imp act, and this 

is made possible with the following components. 

- Bottom -up approach for more information, data precision, comparability, and qualitative 

analysis. 

- Value chain assessment including scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions, to shed light on the “real ”

carbon dependency of assets. 

- Assessment of emissions savings: going beyond carbon footprinting to measure 

contribution and steer investments towards assets best positioned for the low -carbon 

transition. 

- Forward -looking analysis: where are your assets headed? Rati ng system comparing 

company strategy, targets, and investments to 2-degree scenarios and sectoral 

benchmarks. 

# 3 Detailed methodology 

Focus on high -stakes sectors 

The stakes for the low -carbon transition vary by economic sector. Roughly 80% of worldwide 

GHG emissions are generated by some sectors, on which transition efforts must be focused. A 

similar conclusion can be made about levers to reduce emissions and provi de low -carbon 

innovations; some sectors have more to contribute than others. Therefore, the CIA 

methodology distinguishes high -stakes sectors from low -stakes sectors and carries out a very 

detailed analysis for high -stakes sectors in order to focus the ana lysis effort on assets that have 

a material impact on the carbon performance of the portfolio. Carbon4 Finance develops 

sector -specific indicators and calculation modules to factor in the specificities of each sector. 

This in -depth assessment of portfolio constituents covers all operating segments and is based 

on several operational and company -specific data: production volumes (tons of steel, MWh Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

497 

per source, etc.), production or sales locations, energy efficiency of the process, sources of 

supply, etc. Thi s operational data is collected from various reports made publicly available by 

the company (annual, CSR and ESG reports). For low -stakes companies, Scope 1 and 2 data is 

provided, based on the emissions reported by the companies, after a consistency check . When 

and only when Scope 1 and 2 data has not been published by the company, the analysis is 

based on the company ’s revenue and its sector. An average ratio (emissions/M€) is calculated 

per sector on a representative sample of companies. This statistical ratio is then applied to the 

company ’s revenue to estimate its GHG emissions. 

The bottom -up advantage 

CIA measures the carbon footprint of companies through a detailed bottom -up approach. Each 

issuer is analyzed individually and in a discriminating manner before consolidation of results 

at the portfolio level. CIA therefore delivers results at both the portfolio level and at the level 

of each analyzed company. This methodological choice allows for the comparison of the 

carbon performance of companies withi n the same sector, contrary to statistical 

methodologies, which calculate the carbon footprint based on sectorial ratios. This method is 

ideal for distinguishing best in class and laggards within sectors. In designing a streamlined 

methodology for portfoli o and portfolio carbon analysis, Carbon4 Finance made the explicit 

choice to privilege a bottom -up method, as opposed to a statistics -based approach, such as an 

input -output (I/O) model. Here stands the comparison between a bottom -up approach and an 

Input -Output model. 

Table 31 -1 Comparison between CIA’s bottom -up approach and an Input -Output 

model 

Bottom -up 

Carbon4Finance 

Input -Output 

model 

Use of physical emissions factors (rather than 

monetary EFs)  Yes  No 

Data precision and certainty level  High  Low 

Estimation of emissions savings (focus on 

opportunity not just risks)  Yes  No 

Ability to capture forward -looking trend 

(alignment of investments and targets with 2 -

degree goals) 

Yes  No 

Enables intra -sector comparison (best in class) and 

stock -picking  Yes  No 

Enables dialogue with companies on what and 

how they can improve  Yes  No 

Adapts to level of information reported by the 

company (e.g. fuel efficiency of vehicles produced 

when available vs. average) 

Yes  No Chapter 31 

498 

CIA was designed by engineers, specialized by sector, and is the result of Carbone 4’ s 10 years 

of experience in performing life -cycle GHG assessments in all economic sectors. Carbone 4 

cofounder Jean -Marc Jancovici developed the Bilan Carbone® method for the ADEME, 

reference accounting methodology in France which went on to influence international 

standards. Carbone 4 strongly contributed to the working group for the ISO 14069 and 

associated guide which specifies rules for GHG emission s accounting. Carbone 4 was also 

involved in the Finance for Tomorrow working group to support the construction of the 50 

ClimActs launched on the One Planet Summit in December 2017. Last but not least, Carbone 

4 is represented among the TEG (Technical Exp ert Group) on sustainable fi of the European 

Commission that is establishing EU -wide standards on green taxonomy. 

CIA relies on physical emissions factors ( i.e., tCO 2e per tonne of oil combusted) derived from 

real emissions measurements, not from statistic al averages based on revenue. Emissions 

factors used by Carbone4 are sourced by independent regulatory authorities: 

- IEA (International Energy Agency) 

- ADEME (French Energy and Environment Agency) 

- FAOSTAT (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nati ons) 

- UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) 

- FCBA (Institut Technologique Forêt Cellulose Bois -construction Ameublement), etc. 

The bottom -up approach is a useful way to underline the strong link between economic 

activity and climate imp act. The revenues breakdown by activity is done for each company 

analyzed. For a diversified group such as Bouygues, the GICS sector does not reflect the 

diversity of the company activities. Therefore, the CIA methodology differentiates itself from 

the Out put/Input approach by giving a comprehensive vision of the economic activity in the 

results. 

The precision of this approach also limits the uncertainty on the output results as illustrated 

in  Figure 31 -1below. It gives a clear vision of the real impact of high -stakes company within a 

portfolio. Uncertainty is a major factor in the decision process, as conclusions can be easily 

reversed depending on the de gree of uncertainty. For example, a company with a low carbon 

impact and high uncertainty vs high carbon impact but certainty on the data provided. Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

499 

Figure 31 -1 Comparison of the order of magnitude of the uncertainties depending 

on the methodology 

Calculation of induced emissions 

Carbon4 ’s experience in carbon footprinting dates back to 2007. Indirect emissions 

(categorized in Scope 3) are predominant for many sectors of activity. The only way to gauge 

systemic transition risk is to apply a full value chain approach, which includes Scope 3 

emissions. 

The inclusion of all emission scopes is necessary in order to capture climate challenges in an 

exhaustive way. Carbon4 Finance recognizes the imperative to examine Scope 1, 2, and 3 

emissions, both induced and saved by corporate entities. This need is illustrated in  Figure 31 -2

below. 

Figure 31 -2 Example of the importance to include scope 3 emissions in GHG 

assessments 

In the above compariso n of two listed companies, we see that analyzing only Scope 1 & 2 

emissions leads to the wrong conclusion. When only Scope 1 & 2 emissions are considered, 

windows manufacturer Saint -Gobain appears more emissions intensive. However, once Scope 

3 emissions a re considered, oil and gas company Total becomes more emissions intensive. Chapter 31 

500 

Total is economically dependent on the downstream combustion of its fossil fuels, and thus 

on its Scope 3 emissions, that depends on the type and volumes of fuel traded. Scopes 1 an d

2 are recalculated, and if the result is consistent with the issuer ’s reported emissions, we retain 

the issuer ’s reported emissions. Scope 3 is always calculated, which ensures a consistent 

approach within a sector. 

Calculation of emissions savings 

In or der to evaluate the alignment of a portfolio with the low -carbon transition, it is necessary 

to look beyond the carbon footprint and evaluate a company ’s capacity to contribute to the 

low -carbon transition: reduce its emissions, decarbonize its customers, etc. CIA measures 

emissions savings (scopes 1, 2 and 3) to steer investments towards solutions for the low -

carbon transition. Induced and saved emissions (scopes 1, 2 and 3) are calculated over the 

same scope of activity and the same period. Inclusion of e missions savings is important in 

order to help understand how disruptive an underlying firm is, either through more efficient 

processes or carbon -efficient products or services. A firm in a highly carbon intensive sector 

could contribute significantly to d ecreasing emissions by creating a disruptive product or 

process. 

The assessment of the emissions savings is based on the comparison of the induced emissions 

of the company with a reference scenario. This reference scenario is sector -specific. Emissions 

sav ings are always calculated to ensure a consistent approach within a sector, even when 

internationally recognized reference scenarios are unavailable for a sector. The principles of 

the reference scenario are described in  Figure 31 -3.

Figure 31 -3 How the reference scenarios are designed in CIA 

In addition to the absolute figure of induced or avoided emissions, the extent to which a firm 

reduces GHG emissions relative to its total emissions is a key performance indicator. 

Note: emissions savings cannot be subtracted from the induced emissions. Emissions savings 

are not a physical indicator but represen t the difference between the emissions induced by 

the company and a baseline scenario. They provide information on the company's Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

501 

contribution to global emissions reduction. On the contrary, induced emissions represent the 

amount of CO 2e physically emitted by the company and therefore cannot be added to 

emissions savings. To calculate an overall performance indicator, we divide the emissions 

savings by the induced emissions. This ratio is called the CIR: Carbon Impact Ratio, which is an 

indicator of the clim ate performance of a company. 

Figure 31 -4 Example of the added value of the emissions saving in the assessment 

of the climate performance 

In the above example ( Figure 31 -4), when only Scope 1, 2 & 3 emissions are considered, Saint -

Gobain and Rockwool Int, insulation manufacturer , have a similar carbon impact. Once 

emissions savings are considered, Rockwool Int h as the strongest contribution in terms of 

emissions savings and consequently a better Carbon Impact Ratio (CIR)3 than Saint -Gobain: 

CIR Saint -Gobain = 0.23 < CIR Rockwool Int = 0.44. 

Calculation methods vary by sector and include reduced emissions (based on changes in 

carbon intensity over the past 5 years) and avoided emissions ( i.e., against an IEA 2°C scenario). 

Forward looking rating 

In order to evaluate the company's long -term strategy, we examine four criteria: 

- the company ’s long -term strategy and the e volution of its business model regarding the 

low -carbon transition; 

- the investments in R&D and projects related to low carbon activities; 

- the reduction target of scope 1&2 emissions intensity; 

- the reduction target of scope 3 emissions intensity. 

The rating of each criterion is adapted to each sector, based on sectoral benchmarks and on 

IEA ’s ETP scenarios. 

For example, in the power sector, the decarbonization strategy, investment and target will be 

positioned toward IEA ’s scenarios for the power sector. 

Figure 31 -5 illustrates the forward -looking analysis principles. Chapter 31 

502 

Figure 31 -5 Principles of the forward -looking analysis 

The overall rating: how do we calculate it? 

An overall rating is provided for each activity, and then consolidated at company level. This 

rating seeks to assess the company ’s impact on climate change and its c ontribution to reducing 

GHG emissions, while taking into account induced emissions, emissions savings, and the 

forward -looking analysis (indicators detailed in the following). It means that this overall rating 

aggregates the current and the future climate performance of the company. Principles are 

summarized in the following figure. 

Figure 31 -6 Principles of the overall rating 

This rating is sector -based, which allows benchmarking within sectors and between sectors. 

We believe that this overall rating, due to its comprehensiveness (quantitative and qualitative Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

503 

indicators, current and future performance) is especially adapted for use by Central Banks as 

a Green Weighting Factor. 

Companies with a high contribu tion to the low -carbon transition (CIA rating of A) would be 

considered “green ” and be rewarded with more advantageous risk -weighted factor, whereas 

companies with a rating of E would be considered brown and receive less favorable risk -

weighted factor. 

It provides a synthetic view of the climate performance, positive or negative, of the corporate 

analyzed. It takes into account quantitative as well as qualitative information specific to the 

underlying corporate. It points out the most carbon intensive compa nies among a given sector. 

Plus, the consistency in the methodology allows the comparison of overall rating across sectors, 

in order to identify best and worst in universe and drive capital allocation. 

# 4 Input and output metrics/data 

CIA is a sector -specific approach to measure corporate energy and climate performance. The 

overall rating detailed above is calculated based on the aggregation of individually calculated 

Key Climate Indicators at issuer level. Then they are consolidated at portfolio level. 

These indicators are summarized in the following table. 

Figure 31 -7 Indicators provided by Carbon Impact Analytics 

# 5 Case study: analysis of a company with CIA methodology 

Let ’s take an example of the analysis of a company in the Energy sector, such as ENI. The 

following chapter presents an example of the analysis and data we can use and generate for 

ENI. 

The first step will be to identity all the activities of the company and the associated breakdown 

of the revenu es. ENI will have activities in the oil value chain, natural gas value chain, electricity 

production and chemicals. 

The second step is to identify the “activity data ” that quantifies the physical flows of the 

different activities. For the oil and gas acti vities, these activity data are the fossil fuels reserves 

and volumes treated on the value chain: exploration and production, trading, transportation, 

refining, supply. For the electricity production, the produced volume by energy source is Chapter 31 

504 

needed. For the chemicals activity, it is the produced volumes by type of product. This 

information comes from the public information of the company: annual report, website, CSR 

repor t. 

All this information is entered in the sectoral calculation modules. They will multip ly the 

activity data by the corresponding emission factor (ex: how many tons of CO 2 are emitted into 

the atmosphere when an oil barrel is burned) resulting in calculating the direct and indirect 

carbon footprint: scopes 1, 2 and 3 emissions. 

Scopes 1&2 emi ssions will be compared to the reported scopes 1&2 emissions, and if 

consistent, reported figures will be used. 

The t hird step is to calculate the emissions savings. For oil and gas activities, only reduced 

emissions on scopes 1+2 are assessed, no emissions savings are calculated for the scope 3 

emissions. The gather ed information is the evolution of the carbon intensity in the last five 

years to calculate how many tons of CO 2 have been reduced. Same principles also appl y to the 

chemicals industry. For the electricity production, the calculation will be based on avoided 

emissions compared to a sectoral 2 degrees scenario for power. The carbon intensity 

(tCO 2/MWh produced) of the company will be compared to the IEA ’s 2DS scenario in 10 years. 

If the c ompany ’s carbon intensity is below the scenario, the avoided emissions will be 

calculated by multiplying the difference between the scenario and the company ’s intensity by 

the produced volumes (MWh). 

All the activity induced emissions and emissions savings will be consolidated at the issuer level. 

The fo urth step consists in performing a forward -looking analysis of the company, based on its 

main activity. In our example, it is oil and gas. 

- Company ’s strategy : The Company is well aware of its climate change impact and 

considers the environment as a top priority in its long -term strategy, but without a 

quantified target of shifting its activity towards renewable energy. It does plan on 

doubling its renewables capacity by 2025, but mainly for its own energy nee ds. 

- This results in a score equals to 2 on 4 (1 being the best score) on this sub criteria. 

- Company ’s investments in low carbon activity: The weight of 'energy transition' 

investments is less than 2% of the company's turnover, but the company dedicated ~37 %

of its R&D expenditures to low -carbon technologies, including renewables, biorefining 

and energy efficiency. 

- This results in a score equals to 2 on 4 (1 being the best score) on this sub criteria. 

- Company ’s emission reduction target: Although the compan y didn't set a reduction 

target for its absolute Scope 1&2 emissions, it aims at reducing its carbon intensity by 2% 

each year – the targets are always recomputed in a percentage per year to be assessed 

and compared - and it has set a Zero Gas Flaring targ et for the year 2030 - currently, 9,37% 

achieved. 

# - This results in a score equals to 2 on 4 (1 being the best score) on this sub criteria. 

The actor will thus be scored 2 on 4 for the forward -looking analysis. 

A global rating will be calculated at activity level. It will be based on the following indicators: Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

505 

- Oil&gas: Carbon intensity of scope 3 fossil fuel emissions 

- Electricity: Carbon intensity of electricity mix 

- Chemicals: Carbon Impact Ratio = reduced emissions / induced emissions 

- + forward looking analys is 

This global rating will be calculated at issuer level based on an average weighted by the 

revenues. 

Figure 31 -8 Overall rating calculating for our example 

# 6 Case study: analysis of a portfolio with CIA met hodology 

The portfolio analysis will be performed by the users/clients of the database on the dedicated 

platform. To do so, the portfolio needs to be imported through a csv file describing it with to 

columns: 

- ISIN code to identify the issuer, 

- Amount invest ed in the selected currency. 

In a few second, all the indicators will then automatically be consolidated at portfolio level 

(including double accounting retreatments). The typical output of this analysis in presented in 

the following figure. Current performance 

(Reference indicators) 

Future performance 

(Forward-looking rating) 

> CIA Overall Rating

# 2     

> Carbon intensity of the energy produced Carbon Impact Ratio Carbon intensity of electricity mix
> ABCDEChapter 31

506 

Figure 31 -9 Output of a portfolio analysis (1/2) Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

507 

Figure 31 -10 Output of a portfolio analysis (2/2) 

Then top 5 and worst 5 by indicators are disclosed. Chapter 31 

508 

# 7 Limitations of the current approach future development 

For listed institutions, we cover all the major listed corporates of the developed countries, 

especially those listed within the Stoxx 600, SBF 120, S&P 500, and MSCI World. For institutions 

which are bond issuers (c orporates and sovereigns), we initiated in June the coverage of the 

largest EURO Investment Grade issuers, including the main listed in the Bloomberg Barclays 

EURO Aggregate index. We extend the scope of our data base in bottom -up on demand to 

cover all st rategic exposure or investment in a portfolio. 

A statistical approach derived from the core bottom -up approach enables to cover the largest 

portfolios, as soon as sector and revenues can be identified. 

The planned future developments are: 

- an update of the methodology for summer 2020 with an integration of the 2°C or 1.5°C 

alignment of companies that have defined a scientific and realistic target. In CIA 

methodology, Energy sectors already have this approach, but we want to take advantage 

of the methodologic al efforts put in place by companies. 

- Integration of the pathway to carbon neutrality assessment. A reflection is underway with 

the Net Zero initiative that Carbon 4 has implemented, which aims to define what a 

scientific and robust carbon neutrality for companies means. 

- The alignment of CIA ’s green share with the EU taxonomy. 

# 8 Conclusion 

The CIA approach enables to provide relevant climate data in a world where reported data is 

clearly incomplete and inconsistent. The inclusion of GHG scope 3 emissions re mains a “must 

have ” when addressing climate change challenges, and CIA constitutes a solution to address 

it. Looking at the opportunity side with the emission savings is also important to bring a proper 

vision of a company ’s climate performance. 

If CIA ena bles reporting at portfolio level, its strength is the ability to rank companies within a 

sector. This can be the source of several active and passive strategies, from impact investing 

to transition risk management, for financial markets as for bank loanbo oks. 

This methodology had also been transposed to other asset classes like sovereign, green bonds 

or real assets, constituting a very polyvalent and complete methodology. Carbon Impact Analytics - an Approach to Measuring the Climate Performance of Investments 

509 

# Bibliography 

CIA, & Carbon4. (2018). Carbon Impact Analytics: How to measure the con tribution of a 

portfolio to the energy and climate transition. Chapter 32 

510 

# Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing 

# Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets 

By 

ISS 1

# Abstract 

Potential climate change implications pose risks to established investment positions. A key to 

understanding those risks is by measuring the carbon footprint and emissions that companies 

and fac ilities produce. Increased regulatory pressure has increased the visibility of these data 

collection efforts, which has brought increased participation, but also a need for common 

practices. Organizations like the TCFD seek to bring commonality to climate reporting in -line 

with current financial disclosure practices. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol gives guidance on 

standardized reporting practices, however, wide variation of actual data persists. Different 

methods to turn reported data into usable data exist, including carbon footprinting and carbon 

intensity comparisons. Despite social and regulatory backing, an overwhelming minority of 

companies effectively report their emissions, creating a challenge for analysts. Analysts are 

faced with data challenges such as incompleteness, source discrepancy, time lag, or timeframe 

creep. Scenario analysis is a useful tool for investors to conduct forward -looking assessments, 

to analyse multiple pathways of action for the companies long -term sustainability. The 2°C 

scenar io is a common example offering multiple degrees to which the earth will warm over a

given time frame, allowing investors to limit emission in order to stay aligned with a certain 

pathway. Being able to measure company environmental impacts are the first step to setting 

them on a path of change. 

Keyword s: TCFD, carbon footprint, GHG protocol, exposure, carbon intensity, data quality ,

point -in -time analysis, sustainable, scenario analysis 

# 1 Measurement of investors’ carbon footprint 

Carbon footprint measures the absolute current emissions exposure that investors have 

through their investments. An investment portfolio ’s carbon footprint is the sum of each 

portfolio company ’s most recently reported emissions, proportional to the amount of stocks 

(or bonds) held in the portfolio. 

ISS ESG helped pioneer this type of assessment for equity portfolios 10 years ago. Since then, 

diversified approaches for several asset classes have emerged. This section examines the key 

considerations and the primary approaches for calculating the most commonly used metrics 

for equity and fixed income portfolios as outlined by the TCFD. 

The three key steps to evaluate the carbon footprint of an investment portfolio are:           

> 1This chapter is written by Fredrik Fogde, Vice President, Head of Data Research of ISS, email: Fredrik.Fogde@iss -esg.com;
> Dr. Guido Lorenzi, Data Research Associate, email: Guido.Lorenzi@iss -esg.com; and Graeme Wilson, Data Research
> Associate, email: Graeme.Wilson@iss -esg.com. Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets

511 

1) Determination of the annual emissions f or the underlying entity; 

2) Determination of investors ’ ownership or exposure to the emissions of the investee; 

3) Aggregation of entities ’ emissions present in the portfolio, according to the chosen 

measure for ownership and intensity metrics. 

The key challen ge for investors related to point 1) concerns the reliability and the availability 

of emissions for underlying securities. Despite the increased regulatory pressure on 

companies to report emissions, in 2019, only ca. 3700 companies reported emissions 

world wide. Moreover, there are several discrepancies and methodological inaccuracies with 

regard to reported numbers (see  Challenges  for additional details). 

The emissions aggregation on the portfolio level also present its challenges. The 

implementation of the TCFD recommendations gave a strong impulse to the development of 

methodologies to assess portfolios ’ carbon footprints. As a result of this process, th ree main 

portfolio metrics have gained a diffusion level that makes them widely accepted by investors. 

These are emission exposure, relative carbon footprint, and weighted average carbon intensity. 

A detailed description of the above methods is given in th e next sections. 

Emission exposure 

The greenhouse gas emissions exposure that an investor is attributed as a result of its 

investments is the main outcome of a carbon footprint assessment. It essentially determines 

a portion of the indirect emissions of a n investor. In particular, this emissions category 

(category 15 of Scope 3) is specified in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol 2 (see the section 

Reporting under the Greenhouse Gas Protocol ), which is one of the most commonly adopted 

frameworks that companies use as an accounting methodology to estimate their emissions. 

In order to implement a carbon footprint analysis of an investment portfolio, the first step is 

to determine the part of an underlying companies ’ carbon footprint can be attributed to the 

investor. This most often done by determining the “ownership ” of the investor of an investee. 

The ownership is defined as the portion of the security held by the investor. The ownership 

calculation is influenced by the type of the portfolio (pure equity, mixed or pure fixed -income) 

and by the investors ’ preferences. For equity portfolios, 3 the investor ownership has 

traditionally been calculated by dividing the va lue invested in a certain holding by the 

corresponding market capitalization. However, the need to analyze portfolios including fixed -

income securities requires an alternative measure of the company value. Although there is no 

standard, outstanding debt or enterprise value 4 are the most common proxies to estimate the 

ownership for each entity in the portfolio. The current trend in the market shows that an 

increasing number of investors are using enterprise value as the denominator for both pure 

equity, pure fixed income, and mixed portfolios. This choice reduces complexity and double 

counting, and favors comparability among portfolios containing different types of holdings. 

Moreover, this approach is recommended by the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Finan cials           

> 2“GHG Protocol establishes comprehensive global standardized frameworks to measure and manage greenhouse gas
> (GHG) emissions from private and public sectors operations, value ch ains and mitigation actions” ( http://ghgprotocol.org /)
> 3Equity methodologies are mainly used to assess pure -equity portfolios. In these cases, the company value is represented
> by her market capitalization ( i.e., the value of a company traded on the stock market).
> 4Outstanding debt is the debt that has not yet been repaid in full, while enterprise value is the sum of market capitalization
> and outstanding debt. Chapter 32

512 

(PCAF), that includes several banks and asset managers from all over the world 5, as well as 

being a key metric for performance measurement in EU Climate Benchmarks. 

Absolute carbon footprint 

The calculation of the emission exposure of a portfolio co ntaining n securities, also called 

absolute carbon footprint, is reported in  Equation 1, where enterprise value is used as 

denominator.            

> ∑𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝐸𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> ×
> 𝑛
> 𝑖
> 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜 𝑚 𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖 [tCO 2e]

Equation 1

The absolute carbon footprint is dependent on the size of the portfolio and this limits the 

comparison with other portfolios or with a benchmark. Therefore, larger portfolios including 

fewer polluting companies might have absolute carbon footprints lower than smaller 

portfolios with more polluting companies. Moreover, this approach is sensitive to market 

capitalization and currency fluctuations, but it is historically the first metric used to estimate 

investments ’ carbon footprints, especially because it is easy to communicate and clearly shows 

the investment strategy through the concept of ownership. This metric also gives a 

representation of the absolute impact on the climate by the investor. The absolute number 

can subsequently be compared with more relatable metrics, such as the number of cars taken 

of f the road in terms of CO 2. 

Challenges often faced with this metric includes issues of double counting and lack of 

applicability when looking at other asset classes then fixed income or equity. For derivatives 

for example, the link between investor ownership and the underlying asset are not as straight 

forward. 

Relative carbon footprint 

The comparability of portfolios improves when the emission s are normalized on the size of the 

portfolio. This can be achieved by referring the total emissions exposure to the total capital 

invested in the portfolio ( Equation 2). Essentially, the below calculation equates to the 

Weighted Average Carbon Intensity but using enterprise value rather than revenue. This 

calculation is the metric used in the newly launched EU Climate Benchmarks to track the year 

on year decarbonization requirement. A key discussion point of this metric is the impact that 

a change in company valuation can have on results, where a drop in valuation of a company 

can have a significant impact on the intensity of a company. This makes alignmen t of date of 

holdings and enterprise value used an important part of the calculation. Alternatively, as 

suggested in the EU Climate Benchmark Regulations, yearly average valuations can be applied.                 

> ∑𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝐸𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> ×𝑛
> 𝑖 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 (𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 )[tCO 2e
> M$invested
> ]Equation 2

Carbon intensity 

There are currently two widely used metrics that incorporate total sales of a company as a 

normalizer. In these cases, the emission intensity (expressed in terms of emissions per sales    

> 5https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/ Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets

513 

volume), is used to give an indication of the revenues that a company p roduces per unit of 

emissions. This metric is a good indication of the type of the entities that are included in a 

portfolio. For instance, a portfolio containing a high share of financial companies is more likely 

to have a lower carbon intensity than one which is predominantly composed of energy and 

heavy -industry companies. 

The emissions normalized by portfolio claim on sales measure the efficiency of a portfolio in 

terms of emissions per unit of revenue ( Equation 3).                       

> ∑𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝐸𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> ×𝑛
> 𝑖 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> ∑𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝐸𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> ×𝑛
> 𝑖 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> [tCO 2e
> M$ ]Equation 3

Comparisons with other portfolios and benchmarks are possible with this approach and the 

ownership of a security influences the final result. However, companies selling premium 

products (e.g. Porsche) have a lower intensity than companies selling lower -pri ce products (e.g. 

Tata Motors). This suggests that sales volumes are not a perfect proxy to evaluate companies ’

climate impact. Furthermore, as the emissions and revenue are first summed up separately, 

the effects of the largest contributors and of the out liers can be watered down by companies 

with low emissions and high revenues. 

Weighted average carbon intensity 

The weighted average carbon intensity (WACI) is the key metric recommended in the ‘Metrics 

and Targets ’ pillar section of the Final TCFD Recomme ndation Report ( TCFD, 2017 ). However, 

this approach does not produce a carbon footprint estimation or an indication of absolute 

impact, since a measure of the investor ownership of the entities in the portfolio is not 

included, and cannot be applies in a s imilar way as the relative carbon footprint. In other words, 

the result is not affected by the share of a company that an investor owns, but rather the 

weight that the company has within the assessed portfolio. On the other hand, this metric is 

useful to e stablish a comparison with other portfolios or benchmarks.               

> ∑𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ×
> 𝑛
> 𝑖
> 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> 𝑇𝑜 𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦 𝑖
> Equation 4

The intention of the metric, and the reason for using revenue, is to create a proxy for efficiency 

that can be applied across sectors. Using industry specific indicators as the denominator in 

these c alculations would lead to a more accurate indication of efficiency but would be difficult 

to apply on a portfolio with companies with different types of output. Using revenue as proxy 

for output can be a stretch in many service sectors, and can to a certai n extent favor companies 

with a high degree of potential stranded assets. Oil & Gas companies with high earnings is an 

example of this. 

# 2 Challenges 

As the field of carbon footprinting of investment portfolios is relatively new compared to GHG 

accounting of corporates, as well as the fact that methodology development has been driven 

by investor demand rather than regulation, investors are faced with a few key challenges when 

conducting such an analysis. Chapter 32 

514 

State of reporting 

Despite the increasing focus on re porting, ISS ESG found that from a universe of 25,000 global 

companies, only 15% reported emissions, and out of these, 6% were assessed to be reporting 

incomplete or unreliable numbers and were, thus, discarded. Although the focus on 

transparency and corpo rate reporting has increased, basing assessments on disclosed 

information only would present incomplete pictures of many investment portfolios. For 

instance, among the equity portfolios analyzed by ISS ESG, the percentage of disclosing 

companies generally lies between 65 -70%. This section gives an overview of the current state 

of climate data reported by companies and highlights some common issues of data quality 

that investors should be aware of. 

Reporting under the Greenhouse Gas Protocol 

Under ideal circ umstances, a company would catalog and disclose its full GHG inventory, thus 

making it very simple for analysts to sift through and utilize the data. In practice, it is much 

more difficult to measure and collect this data. Without a common, widely accepted 

mandatory standard, the problem is compounded. However, the Greenhouse Gas Protocol has 

developed one of the most widely accepted standards for disclosing GHG emissions. 

Figure 32 -1 Representation of the standard for emissions accounting according to 

the GHG Protocol .

Data discrepancies between sources 

The widespread application of the above framework does not guarantee that investors will not 

find inconsistencies when looking at corporate emissions data. As an example, companies 

choose through which channels they wish to publish their GHG inventories. C onsidering the 

companies for which emissions were collected in 2018, 21% reported only through 

sustainability or annual reports, 38% reported only through the CDP, and 42% reported via 

both channels. Often, the numbers do not perfectly match between source s. 

One frequent data issue is that emissions reported to different sources can differ. Common 

reasons for this include :

- Stricter frameworks from CDP on what types of reduction activities can be subtracted 

from scope 2 emissions. In CSR reports, companies will for example often subtract offsets 

from scope 2 emissions, something which the CDP framework does not allow. Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets 

515 

- Selective inclusion/exclusion of facilities. The facilities and operations that companies 

include emissions for in their reporting can diffe r between sustainability and CDP reports. 

- Control approach used. The GHG protocol provides three key approaches for how to set 

the boundaries within which to include emissions: financial control, operational control, 

or equity share. These are sometimes ap plied differently when disclosing to different 

sources. 

Incomplete reporting 

While many companies have felt the groundswell social pressure to increase the level and 

quality of their environmental disclosure through CSR and sustainability reports, the goo d

intentions are often met with misguided understanding of how to effectively disclose the 

environmental effects of company activities. Many companies rush into including what turns 

out to be an incomplete accounting of their emissions. While they deserve credit for getting 

the ball moving in the right direction, this often leads to them missing the mark. The three 

most common forms of incomplete public emissions disclosures are loosely termed “no -

number graphs, ” “ intensity only, ” and “total only ”. 

Often, c ompanies will proclaim that their emissions have gone down year over year, perhaps 

also meeting a goal, perhaps also mentioning a percentage with which they have declined 

relative to a base year goal or target. However, when these claims are presented in “no -

number graphs ” without specific absolute inventories, the reliability decreases. The level of 

certainty and completeness that analysts attribute to such disclosures is thus limited. On the 

other hand, some companies do not report absolute emissions but just an intensity metric, 

i.e., a relative value of emissions per unit of production or revenue. This approach is referred 

to as “intensity only ”. When a company discloses an emissions intensity number this is viewed 

as more valid, as the value requires th at the company performed an inventory of emissions in 

order to place it into relation to production. However, the failure to disclose a specific 

inventory devalues the company ’s disclosure. Doing a backwards calculation of the intensity 

to arrive at an emi ssions value is possible, but this is an unreliable method and is not as 

credible as best practice would require the company to disclose the emissions inventory in the 

first place. Similarly, while intensity is a useful measure, it is not an ideal metric f or the quality 

of emissions disclosure. A third type of ineffective reporting is when companies give a single 

total (“ total only ”) for the emissions of the entire organization, without breaking it out by 

operations or by scopes. These instances are ambiguo us and must be qualitatively assessed 

by analysts. Divisions between direct and indirect emissions, business travel, and third -party 

services must be searched for and identified, if possible. 

Data lagging 

A common issue encountered in emissions collection is untimely data disclosure and the 

mismatches in reporting periods that can arise from solely using the latest available emissions 

from each company. Since companies and regions have their own fiscal year periods, which 

can vary widely across the full ca lendar year, it can therefore be difficult to accurately compare 

companies against each other. What is labeled as 2018 data in one platform may cover the 

fiscal year ending March 31 for company A and September 30 for Company B. Likewise, it can 

be difficul t for analysts to correctly time the data collection process for the most current data 

for the coverage universe. If a company publishes its annual report or sustainability report 

after the cutoff date for a data collector ’s cycle, this could lead to a one or even two -year data 

lag, depending on the timing. Some companies only disclose their GHG emissions in a 

sustainability report that is not connected to their annual report and is published arbitrarily 

within the year, thus lagging behind their mandatory financial disclosures. In both cases, Chapter 32 

516 

investors trying to make informed decisions in the present year would be operating with 

outdated data. 

Point -in-time analysis 

While a carbon footprint assessment of a portfolio provides several comparable metrics, the se 

metrics serve only as the starting point towards understanding the climate risks or 

opportunities associated with an investment portfolio. A carbon footprint assessment is a 

point -in -time analysis and, while it measures current performance and impact, i t does not take 

into account forward -looking indicators on how well a company is placed to deal with 

aforementioned physical or transitional risks. For a holistic climate analysis, forward -looking 

indicators. 

Dealing with non -disclosing companies 

With onl y roughly 15% of listed corporates reporting their emissions worldwide, relying only 

on reported emissions for portfolio level analysis would not suffice. Excluding companies that 

do not report could in many cases lead to ignoring the companies most expose d to climate 

related risks, i.e., those companies with high emissions that are not managing this impact at 

all. 

Several approaches towards estimating emissions exist currently in the market the 

methodologies of which can be categorized into overarching me thodologies (Kepler 

Cheuvreux, 2015 ). 

- Industry averages and regression models. Companies that report emissions are grouped 

together and regression models run using financial indicators of the companies to create 

coefficients per sector. 

- Environmentally -ex tended input -output models (EEIO). This approach looks extends 

traditional input -output models to include emissions created from various parts of the 

supply chain for each unit of economic output. 

- Life cycle analysis (LCA). Life cycle databases such as Ec oInvent provide emission factors 

for all raw materials that go into a product. 

The most common approach currently available is one of regression models and certain types 

of EEIOs. ISS ESG use a combination of all three models, where regression models are used for 

Scope 1 & 2 emissions, and a combination of EEIO and LCA for Scope 3. 

For the Scope 1 & 2 emissions database, ISS ESG applies an approach in five steps. 

1) Self -reported emissions are collected from a range of various sources, and aligned in 

terms of fiscal years, ensuring that numbers provided for several companies are in line, 

and so that different fiscal years ’ worth of data is not provided in the same dataset 

2) Self -reported numbers are thoroughly quality -checked for consistency and completeness, 

and the extent to which the reporting methodology aligns with the GHG protocol. Several 

of the issues discussed earlier in this report are discovered in this step. 

3) For any regression model, it is important that these are run on groups that have very 

simil ar carbon emissions profiles. This is something that traditional financial classification 

systems fail to capture. Here ISS ESG has developed a proprietary Climate Industry Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets 

517 

Classification System (CICS). In this step analysts take great care to classify com panies into 

the correct industry from a carbon footprint point of view. 

4) Regression models are then run on the verified data. In most regression approaches 

currently used, revenue is used as the only factor against which to compare emissions 

with. However, for many sectors, ISS ESG research finds very little correlation between 

scope 1 & 2 emissions per revenue. The regression models are thus run on a range of 

financial indicators, where different combinations are used for each industry. 

5) The resulting regr ession models and accompanying financials required are then applied 

to non -reporting companies. For transparency reasons, the adjusted R -Squared for each 

underlying model is also provided to clients. 

This approach was developed in collaboration with ETH Z urich and has been used by investors 

for over a decade. 

# 3 Discussion & outlook 

This chapter has highlighted some of the challenges that investors may face when looking for 

reliable data on which to base carbon metric calculations. Many of these issues are d ampened 

by data providers, who aggregate reported data in a comparable manner, and offer 

estimations for companies that do not report. In addition, the use of different portfolio level 

carbon metrics for reporting on the emissions of the portfolio, can oft en lead to conflicting 

messages from a report. For example, while the WACI may show outperformance against a 

benchmark, the relative carbon footprint could be outperforming to a lower extent, or in 

certain cases actually underperform against the benchmark. The convergence of estimation 

methodologies, the use cases for pure carbon footprint reports, and the use of different 

metrics are thus likely to dominate the discussion around carbon footprinting for the 

foreseeable future. The following section provides some concluding thoughts on these topics. 

Diverging methodologies & use cases for carbon footprinting 

As discussed, approaches for filling the gaps in company reporting differs, and subsequently 

have an impact on the metrics discussed. This is particularly true when revenue numbers are 

both used as the primary input source for estimation, and then subseque ntly as the 

normalization factor to calculate the WACI. A similar argument can be made for companies 

that are yet to generate much revenue, but are none -the -less emitting a significant amount of 

emissions (see Oil & Gas Exploration or Mining companies). Us ing revenue numbers to 

estimate emissions for these companies can often lead to gross underestimations. Conversely, 

while using fixed assets or amount of employees (or other estimations based not only on 

revenue) may lead to a more accurate estimation of t he absolute emissions, but using the low 

revenue numbers as a basis for efficiency will cause the company to be an outlier in terms of 

emissions/revenue and significantly impact the WACI. 

However, despite the differences in approaches described above, and despite some of the 

limitations of looking at backward looking performance, there are still several useful outcomes 

for the investor from a pure carbon footprint analysis: 

1) The fact that there is a need to create estimations for one of the most basic form s of 

climate risk management by companies is an indictment of how far we still need to go in 

terms of putting climate risk on the agenda of companies. Few indexes or funds, unless 

climate themed, are likely to have 100% coverage in terms of reported emissi ons. Chapter 32 

518 

Highlighting these companies, and those in transition -exposed sectors or with high 

estimated emissions, is still a powerful and useful starting point for any type of 

engagement activities. 

2) While several types of scenario analyses that focus on transi tion risk look at a company ’s

alignments with certain types of scenarios, potential changes in carbon pricing is a form 

of transition risk that will have a direct impact on absolute emission numbers. Looking at 

a company ’s emissions exposure, and subsequen tly the aggregated absolute number on 

a portfolio level, can be directly compared to certain carbon pricing scenarios. 

3) A carbon footprint report of a portfolio also serves as a heat map to identify the potential 

hot spots of a portfolio and serve as a sta rting point from which to start looking at sector 

specific, forward looking indicators. By analyzing aspects such as sector contribution to 

portfolio results, top 10 lists and % of disclosed emissions by sectors and regions, 

investors can focus further res earch on areas most exposed to carbon emissions. 

4) Lastly, continuing to apply and calculate metrics based on an ownership approach, paves 

the way for more accurate scope 3 emission reporting by financial institutions, in 

particular the carbon footprint fro m investments. 

While the above use cases are valuable in their own right, a holistic climate risk analysis should 

include a scenario analysis element, whether that be looking at transition risks, physical risks 

or scenario 1.5 degree alignment of the port folio. 

The metrics debate 

While four key carbon footprint metrics were presented in previous chapters, we see an 

increasing preference and use of two in particular .

- The Weighted Average Carbon Intensity – The growing application by investors of the 

TCFD r ecommendations, has led to many investors focusing on this metric for reporting 

and comparison. Several climate -themed indexes have also been launched where carbon 

performance is tracked with this metric. 

- Relative Carbon Footprint – This metric was one of the first metrics to measure carbon 

footprint performance of a portfolio and has been used by investors for over a decade. 

The link to ownership and potential to calculate an absolute number, which in turn can 

be compared to more relatable, still makes it a very applicable number to communicate 

to stakeholders, particularly for asset owners. As stated earlier, this metric has also been 

adopted as the metric with which to track year on year reduction progress for EU Climate 

Benchmarks. 

The launch of the EU climate benchmarks and the inclusion of the relative carbon footprint in 

tracking progress has sparked a debate surrounding which of the two above mention metrics 

are most applicable for tracking performance. Proponents of the relative carbon footprint 

ar gues that several big polluters (particularly Oil & Gas companies), benefit in such an analysis 

due to high recent earnings ( Azizuddin, 2020 ). In addition, the metric is sensitive to outliers in 

cases where revenue numbers are low but emissions significant , and as mentioned earlier, the 

question remains on how suitable revenue is as a proxy for efficiency. One the other hand, the 

relative carbon footprint is sensitive to changes in valuation, as a company increases in value, 

the intensity of the company dec reases. Conversely, in economic downturns, intensity can 

decrease if latest valuations and historic emissions data. This effect can be counteracted by 

using yearly average valuations. Another argument against the use of relative carbon footprint Carbon Accounting Methods for Assessing Carbon Footprint and Intensity of Underlying Assets 

519 

is that di scourages from investments in growth companies, where valuation might still be low, 

and thus potentially resulting in a high intensity, despite relatively low absolute emissions. 

As more and more non -financial companies continue to set quantifiable, scien ce -based 

reduction targets, there will continue to be a wish from financial industry players to have a 

meaningful emissions reduction methodology of their own. What is becoming increasingly 

clear however, is that carbon metrics alone are unlikely to be the answer, and that meaningful 

climate risk reduction strategies needs to take forward -looking indicators into account. How 

to combine these factors into an agreed upon, meaningful metric, will be a key challenge for 

sustainable finance in the years to come. Chapter 32 

520 

# Bibliography 

Azizuddin, K. (2020). EU Climate Benchmarks: The row over carbon intensity metrics 

explained. https://www.responsible -investor.com/articles/eu -climate -benchmarks -

the -row -over -carbon -intensity -metrics -explained. Retrieved from 

Kepler Cheuvreux. (2015). Carbon compass: Investor guide to carbon footprinting. 

https://www.iigcc.org/download/carbon -compass -investor -guide -to -carbon -

footprinting/?wpdmdl=1512&refresh=5e7b5fc6bb36b1585143750 .

TCFD. (2017). Final Report: Recommendations o f the Task Force on Climate -related Financial 

Disclosures. Retrieved from  https://www.fsb -tcfd.org/publications/final -

recommendations -report/ .ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

521 

# ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate 

# Accounting Tool 

By 

EcoAct 1

# Abstract 

ClimFIT (Climate Financial Institutions Tool) is a tool designed to address multi –asset portfolio 

challenges related to climate performance measurement and management. It collects and 

analyses issuers ’ financial and climate data to equip users with an optimal combination of 

Portfolio Climate Key Performance Indicators (Climate KPI s). The Climate KPIs consist of main 

ESG -Climate indicators such as financed emissions, capital carbon intensity, operational 

carbon efficiency, and portfolio exposure to high and low carbon assets. Users benefit from 

insightful information assessed at por tfolio, asset class, sector, geography, issuer, and asset or 

project level. ClimFIT considers multi -level challenges related to the latest changes in 

regulatory and voluntary frameworks and uses recent data. While it is constructed around 

recommended sets of KPIs, it also allows customized settings and bespoke analysis. 

Keywords: portfolio, issuer, assets, indicator, metric, KPI, assessment, climate, carbon, impact, 

performance 

# 1 Purpose of the methodology 

Financial sector challenges 

In order to accelerat e the economic transition, the financial sector should transform itself 

through the integration of a climate -aligned investment strategy combining both climate and 

financial efficiency. Evolving regulations, standards and initiatives around climate issues 

hasten the process of reformation. 

Facing this rapid evolution, Financial Institutions need to grasp, evaluate and manage two 

main interconnected impacts: “impact of '' and “impact on ” investments. 

• The first one is “impact on ”: impact of climate change an d energy transition on 

portfolio performance. This impact determines possible risks and opportunities tied 

to underlying assets and to a portfolio. 

• The second one, named “impact of, ” is the impact of investments on climate change 

and sustainable developme nt. This impact defines an investor ’s contribution to the 

transition towards a carbon -neutral economy or to the 1.5°C -2°C trajectory.     

> 1This chapter is written by Ekaterina Reshetnikova, Finance & Clim ate Expert of Research & Innovation Department, EcoAct.
> Ekaterina, email: Reshetnikova@eco -act.com . The author would like to thank Emilie Alberola, Arnaud Doré, Gauthier Faure,
> Kai Larson, Paul Step henson, Martin Sedgwick, Laurence Guimard, Coraline Barré, Aubin Roy, Fanny Guezennec. Chapter 33

522 

The impacts are not distributed uniformly across sectors, geographies, issuers, and assets 

which results in different implications for different investments and affects overall portfolio 

risks and returns. 

Therefore, asset managers and owners need methods , models, and tools that ensure 

consistency with regulation, recommendations, and standards, that combine growing cross -

sectional data while remaining operational for users and suitable for diversified portfolios. 

These challenges lie at the core of the Cl imFIT concept ( Figure 33 -1), the method and tool 

developed to tackle climate -related impact assessments of investments. The tool provides 

actors with key indicators helping to identify, measure and manage associated performance, 

risk and opportunities. Thus , ClimFIT facilitates investment decision -making, as well as fits the 

specific needs and interests of various capital market actors. 

Purpose of ClimFIT and ClimFIT framework 

The purpose of ClimFIT is to address challenges associated with portfolio climate performance 

and risk assessment, management and disclosure. The tool is designed to: 

• Identify operational efficiency. 

Measure climate performance at p ortfolio, asset class, sector, issuer, and asset level; 

• Manage risk and opportunities. 

Choose the manageable level of exposure to sensitive to changes in policy and market assets; 

• Drive actionable insights. 

Track progress, operationalize target setting and enhance climate -aligned capital allocation; 

• Ensure regulatory compliance. 

Meet mandatory and voluntary reporting requirements and recommendations. 

Thus, ClimFIT helps financial institutions to respond to stakeholders ’ demands, enlarge 

engagement and facil itate disclosure, as well as to ease the integration of climate change 

issues into investment process and strategy. 

Aiming at providing all -inclusive and up -to -date solutions, ClimFIT is in continuous evolution 

and broadening of scope. In this regard it i s important to distinguish the ClimFIT tool from the 

ClimFIT Framework. The tool development is backed by constant research projects – i.e., 

Framework. While the ClimFIT tool is designed to meet the operational needs of capital market 

agents, the ClimFiT F ramework brings wider expertise to bear on the establishment of ESG and 

ESG -Climate “impact of ” and “impact on ” accounting at the portfolio level. Furthermore, the 

research component fosters proactive integration of ongoing market and policy changes and 

al lows the tool to meet the demanding requirements of advanced actors. ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

523 

Figure 33 -1 ClimFIT framework 

Source: EcoAct 

The ClimFIT Framework intends to contribute to overall methodology and data improvement, 

and harmonization across the market. The aim of the framework is to enhance: 

• Development of advanced approaches, accounting rules and data; 

• Harmonization of methodologies, term inologies, indicators and metrics; 

• Transparency and disclosure, robustness and comparability of assessed results. 

Thereby, the Framework supports the development of advanced climate -related accounting 

methodologies, impact measurement and attribution, ben chmarking, proper risk assessment, 

and science -based targets setting. 

# 2 Intended users and application 

Range of users 

ClimFIT responds to needs of a wide range of financial market actors that can be divided into 

two groups. 

• The first one consists of institutional investors, banks, asset and fund managers, 

corporates as investors and issuers, investment advisors, rating agencies, and index 

makers. For banks, insurance companies, pensions and other funds the ClimFIT 

model is a step forward towards better understanding and management of climate -

related drivers for asset price corrections, portfolio composition and rebalancing, 

inflow and outflow management, factor -based strategies development. 

• The ClimFIT framework could also pr ovide insightful information for the second 

group of actors: policymakers, supervisors, professional initiatives and associations, 

standard developers, and R&D departments of financial institutions. Namely, the 

Framework analyses the evolving context and i mplements various assessment Chapter 33 

524 

approaches. It can serve as a basis for (i) identification of best practices, (ii) 

establishment of common rules for climate accountancy at the financial instruments 

and portfolio levels, (iii) improvement of reported and estim ated data at issuers ’ level; 

(iii) better disclosure at portfolio and fund level. 

Scope of assets 

Regarding a coverage, ClimFIT is applicable to multi -asset portfolios and products composed 

of a broad variety of holdings. All industries and geographies (countries and regions) are 

included into assessment. Concerning asset classes, the perimeter includes listed equity, 

corporate bonds, notes, loans, commercial real estate, mortgage; sovereign, municipal, 

multilateral bonds; alternatives including private equities, real estate, infrastructure, lands, 

forests. Listed and unlisted, linked and not linked to physical assets and projects instruments 

are also covered. As regards issuer ’s type, the tool covers corporate, sovereign, supranational, 

sub -sovereign and agency issuers. 

Climate decision -support system 

Based on Climate KPIs, the tool provides actors with ‘navigating ’ information allowing for 

robust, practical, and dynamic steering of capital allocation in terms of climate performance 

and alignment with the 1.5°C -2°C trajectory. 

ClimFIT provides asset managers and owners with a tailored climate decision -support system. 

The tool collects and analyses data to equip users with a combination of Portfolio Climate KPIs. 

The design of the Climate KPIs consider s multi -level challenges related to indicators and 

metrics construction principles that are organized into several recommended sets. The 

synthetization of quantified results serves to produce comprehensive reports and actionable 

information. The tool also contains advanced settings options allowing bespoke configurations 

and customized reports and dashboards ( Figure 33 -2). 

Figure 33 -2 ClimFIT Settings 

Source: EcoAct 

Thus, ClimFIT supports Investors and Managers: financial analysts may use KPIs to anticipate 

the impact of the low carbon transition on a portfolio or an asset in order to: 

• determine the key elements to assess for each type of portfolio and asset class; ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

525 

• accompany the decarbonization of issuers and the economy; 

• address issues of when and how to rebuild capital allocation; 

• define a benchmark to ensure portfolio alignment at different stages of t he transition. 

Concerning the extended application, while being relevant to the process – portfolio or 

investor relation management, ClimFIT also provides assessments suitable for financial 

product structuring and design, such as thematic funds and indice s. Fund structuring and 

product development specialists may rely on the tools ’ functionality to design climate -aligned 

financial products and services. 

Regarding Corporates, the tool helps with providing answers regarding the adjustment of 

investment pla ns and the facilitation of proactive dialogue with investors. Company executives 

might use ClimFiT to assess the firm ’s climate -related attractiveness from investors ’

perspective and ensure future financial inflows. 

# 3 Fundamental components 

Multi -level cha llenges of climate KPIs design 

ClimFIT is constructed around a concept composed of several market -, science - and 

management -related elements. 

The design of Climate KPIs is based on six fundamental components ( Figure 33 -3): 

• Mandatory and voluntary context alignment; 

• Applicability to portfolios diversified across different sectors, geographies, asset 

classes; 

• Climate and transition scenarios integration; 

• Science -based approaches; 

• Finance -smart climate impact attribution; 

• Operationality for a wide range of users. Chapter 33 

526 

Figure 33 -3 Challenges of portfolio climate KPIs design 

Source: EcoAct 

Alignment with context 

Concerning the context alignment, the tool offers settings enabling the production of 

indicators relevant to a targeted regulation or an initiative. Today, to meet mandatory and 

voluntary assessment, reporting requirements and recommendations, fina ncial institutions 

should consider several levels of the framework: 

• World. The Paris Agreement and financial flows consistency with a resilient 

development; 

• G-20. TCFD recommendations, Financial Stability Board (FSB); 

• European Union. EU Regulation 2019/2 088 on Sustainability -Related  Disclosures  in 

the Financial Services Sector, EU Regulation 2019/2089 on Climate Transition and EU 

Paris -Aligned  Benchmarks, on sustainability -related disclosures in the financial 

services sector, EU Directive 2014/95/EU on no n-financial disclosure, etc.; 

• National level. French Energy Transition for Green Growth Act, art. 173 -VI, 2015, UK 

Companies Act 2006. Regional and National frameworks on low carbon transition 

and sustainable finance; 

• Assessment and Reporting initiative s and standards. PRI ESG and Climate reporting, 

CDP Climate Change, CDP Financial Services, GHG Protocol Scope 3 Category 15 

Investments, Bilan Carbone® 2, ISO/CD 14097 Framework and principles for assessing 

and reporting investments and financing activitie s related to climate change 3, guides 

developed by professional associations and initiatives - PCAF, FFA, Climate Action 

100+, Portfolio Decarbonization Coalition, Science -Based Target (SBT), SBT -Financial 

Institutions (SBT -FI) 4 etc.         

> 2French standard on GHG Accounting
> 3Currently the standard is under elaboration, expected to be published in February 2021 .
> 4Currently methods are under development, expected to be published in Autumn 2020 .ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool

527 

From complex and heter ogeneous to essential and harmonised 

In this context, asset owners and managers face growing challenges in terms of climate -related 

financial evaluation, management, and disclosure. Financial sector needs indicators and 

metrics with enhanced relevance for policy and investment decision making, methods capable 

of addressing multi -asset portfolio challenges, and tools processing various sets of historical, 

instant and forecasted data. The ambition behind ClimFIT is to face complex multi -factor 

problems within the financial sector and to pare them  down to the  essentials – metrics and 

indicators. Therefore, the challenge for context aligned KPIs assessment includes a variety of 

existing approaches. Different methodologies use diverse terminologies and definition s, while 

also being constructed around different indicators, metrics, impact attribution rules and data. 

Lack of uniformity causes difficulty related to the necessity of conducting several different 

analyses associated with various requirements. The ClimFI T model helps tackle this challenge 

by proposing various settings and serving as universal tool for multi -purpose assessments. KPIs 

can be calibrated according to any of the above -mentioned requirements and 

recommendations. To enable this functionality, t he tool moved through several phases: 

• examination of existing methodologies and recommendations, 

• harmonization of terminology and introduction of common language, 

• decryption of quantification approaches using common terms and language, 

• classification an d description of indicators, metrics, variables, and data. 

These steps helped to systematize and integrate all existing calculation rules into the ClimFIT ’s

algorithm and settings. The approach fosters results comparability, comprehensive 

benchmarking and progress tracking. 

# 4 Detailed methodology 

Range of KPIs and methodological steps 

The portfolio performance assessment method contains two main sets of indicators: Portfolio 

Climate KPIs and Portfolio Advanced Climate KPIs . The indicators are computed by compiling 

numerous climate, financial and operational data at sectoral and issuer levels using a portfolio 

composition information. 

• The first set of KPIs measures carbon footprint, capital carbon intensity, operational 

cli mate efficiency, and portfolio exposure to high and low carbon assets. 

• The second set of KPIs provides further information regarding the portfolio 

alignment with the 1.5°C -2°C trajectory: SBT - and TCFD -committed and aligned 

assets, portfolio temperature, market -related transition risks & carbon price, green 

and brown assets, contribution to the energy transition, climate performance score 

among issuers and sectors, carbon neutrality & net zero GHG emissions committed 

assets, the 2°C and below 2°C trajecto ries aligned investments. 

As illustrated in  Figure 33 -4, the tool ’s workflow is composed of four parts: 

1. Definition and setting . The workflow starts with a formulation of specific problems 

and the determination of perimeter. This step helps to proceed with right settings 

and deliver the targeted results; Chapter 33 

528 

2. Data collection and preparation . At this stage the tool gathers issuers ’ climate and 

financial reporte d data using information related to portfolio composition. Further 

collected data are processed in order to ensure accuracy and test availability, 

followed by the addition of estimated data if the threshold for reported data is not 

reached; 

3. Assessment . Th e model relies on an algorithm that simultaneously and contextually 

assesses different indicators. The algorithm within the tool relates the different 

metrics and variables at asset, issuer, sector, and geography levels in order to 

attribute the impact gen erated by underlying assets to an investment and aggregate 

it at a portfolio level; 

4. Results and graphics . This stage enables better understanding and communication 

of obtained results. Quantified information can be visualized using a comparison of 

Portfoli o Climate KPIs with those of a chosen benchmark. 

Figure 33 -4 ClimFIT workflow 

Source: EcoAct 

Quantitative and bottom -up methodology 

The computation starts with a compilation of climate and financial attributes of underlying 

assets. It begins at issuer, asset or project level and continues by analysis across and within 

asset classes, industries and geographies. In order to quantify attr ibuted impact, asset specific 

variables are combined with portfolio variables. All variables are divided into three groups: 

portfolio variables, issuer ’s financial and operational variables and issuer ’s GHG emissions 

variables.  Table 33 -1 lists all inputs used by the model. The main inputs are: 

• Ii - market value of an investment ;

• mPV -market value of a portfolio ;

• Oi- financial variable of an issuer ;ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

529 

• Ei- GHG emissions of an issuer ;

• Si - sales or production of an issuer. 

Where Oi is presented with such variables as: Market Capitalization, Enterprise Value, Debt 

Outstanding, Liabilities, Sum of Market Capitalization and Debt Outstanding, Assets; Ei takes 

va lues as GHG emissions according to a recommended Scope; and Si equals Sales, Assets, or 

Production. 

Table 33 -1 ClimFIT inputs 

Variable  Acronym  Variables  Explanatory notes 

Portfolio variables Ii, mPV 

Investment  Im 𝐼𝑖  Amount of investments in 

market or nominal value 

Market value of 

Portfolio  mPV  𝑚𝑃𝑉  Sum of values of assets 

composing a portfolio 

Corporate financial and operational variables Oi, Si

Market 

capitalisation  mCap  Oi Equity value, market value 

Debt 

outstanding  Do  Oi Financial debt, market value 

Enterprise Value  EV  Oi Market Cap + Market Value 

of Debt – Cash and 

Equivalents 

Liabilities  L Oi Liabilities of an issuer 

Sales  S Si Sales of an issuer 

Assets  A Oi, Si Assets of an issuer 

Production  P Si Production of an issuer 

Country financial and operational variables Oi, Si

Debt 

outstanding  Do  Oi Financial debt of a country 

GDP  GDP  Si Gross domestic product of a 

countru country 

GHG Emissions variables Ei

Scope 1  E1 Ei Scope 1 of GHG emissions of 

an issuer 

Scope 2  E2 Ei Scope 2 of GHG emissions of 

an issuer 

Scope 3  E3 Ei Scope 3 of GHG emissions of 

an issuer 

Emissions  E Ei GHG emissions of a country 

Source: EcoAct Chapter 33 

530 

Data sources and key indicators 

The ClimFIT methodology links investees ’ characteristics with investments using information 

about portfolio composition. It associates GHG emissions and economic outputs generated by 

financed activities with securities held by an investor ( Figure 33 -5). As a primary data source 

of information, the tool uses Corporate Reporting, the FactSet, OECD, Eurostat, and EcoAct 

databases. 

The quantification provides such indic ators as: 

• Carbon Footprint or Absolute Carbon Emissions (ACE), expressed in tons of CO 2

equivalent (tCO 2e). The indicator gives an estimation of an investor ’s contribution to 

an issuer ’s absolute carbon emissions. This indicator is known as the concept of 

“financed emissions ”; 

• Capital Carbon Intensity o r Weighted Carbon Emissions (WCE), expressed in tons of 

CO 2 equivalent per unit of currency invested (tCO 2e / $M invested). It provides an 

estimation of the carbon footprint of a unit of currency invested . Computing issuer ’s, 

sector ’s, country ’s, and portfolio ’s capital carbon intensity, the indicator provides 

information on the carbon -related efficiency of invested capital; 

• Operational Carbon Efficiency or Carbon Intensity (CI), expressed in tons of CO 2

equivalent per unit of currency generated by an investee (tCO 2e / $M issuer ’s

sales/assets/product). It evaluates the contribution of an investor to an underlying 

company ’s GHG emissions per unit of revenue or assets generated by the firm; 

• Portfolio Exposu re or Weighted Average Carbon Intensity (WACI), expressed in tons 

of CO 2 equivalent per unit of currency generated by an investee tCO 2e / $M issuer ’s

sales/assets/product. It is derived from the carbon intensity of each individual 

investee and their weight in the entire portfolio. It measures a portfolio ’s exposure 

to high and low carbon intensive companies. ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

531 

Figure 33 -5 ClimFIT process: input, model, output 

Source: EcoAct 

While the approach mainly focuses on providing an overall portfolio assessment it also 

provides users with more granular and actionable insights at asset class, sector, geography 

(countries, regions), issuer, and asset/project levels.  Table 33 -2 summarizes core information 

about Climate KPIs. 

Table 33 -2 ClimFIT outputs 

Indicator  ClimFIT name  Variables  Unit s Level 5

CARBON FOOTPRINT  Absolute 

Carbon 

Emissions 

ACE  Ii , Oi , Ei tCO 2e P, A, 

S, G, 

I, AP 

CAPITAL CARBON INTENSITY  Weighted 

Carbon 

Emissions 

WCE  Ii , Oi , Ei , mPV  tCO 2e / $M invested  P, A, 

S, G, 

I, AP 

OPERATIONAL CARBON 

EFFICIENCY 

Carbon 

Intensity 

CI  Ii , Oi , Ei , Si tCO 2e / $M issuer’s 

sales/assets/product 

P, A, 

S, G, 

I, AP 

PORTFOLIO EXPOSURE  Weighted 

Average Carbon 

Intensity 

WACI  Ii , Ei , mPV , Si tCO 2e / $M issuer’s 

sales/assets/product 

P, A, 

S, G 

Source: EcoAct 

The use of the combination of indicators enables a better understanding of the climate 

performance of a portfolio and assets, allows for the identification of the best and worst               

> 5Levels: P -Portfolio, A -Asset Class, S -Sector, G -Geography, I -Issuer, AP -Asset/Project Chapter 33

532 

performers within a portfolio, and consequently enhances carbon -related risk a nd opportunity 

management. 

# 5 Sample 

A case study of the ClimFIT tool is discussed below with example outputs. Depending on the 

requirements, these outputs are tailored according to recommendations on next steps. 

Portfolio climate KPIs 

Portfolio Climate KPI s are constructed around carbon footprint or attributed GHG emissions 

(ACE), capital carbon intensity (WCE), operational climate efficiency (CI), and portfolio 

exposure to high and low carbon assets (WACI) measured at portfolio, asset class, sector, and 

is suer level. 

Figure 33 -6 Portfolio Climate KPIs 

Source: EcoAct 

5.1.1. Portfolio overview 

Portfolio 

type  Data coverage  Scope  Benchmarking  Levels 

Equity 

Bonds 

100% 

Reported - 96% 

Estimated - 4% 

Scope 1 & 2 

Scope 1, 2 & 3 

Mainstream 

index 

Low Carbon 

index 

Scope 1 & 2 

Portfolio 

Asset class 

Sector 

Issuer 

An initial breakdown of absolute GHG emissions in Scope 1, 2 & 3 is created to highlight the 

key areas of focus, it also further shows the detail of where the emissions occur between the 

types of assets in the portfolio.  Table 33 -3 above shows the emissions associated with Bonds 

and Equities. ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

533 

Table 33 -3 Breakdown of portfolio carbon footprint for Scope 1, 2 and 3 

Source: EcoAct 

In this case, the Scope 1 & 2 footprint is small in comparison to that of the Scope 3 emissions. 

Equities for both Scope 1 & 2 and Scope 3 contain the highest absolute emissio ns and is 

therefore the asset type that will receive the most attention in terms of further analysis.  Figure 

33 -7 below shows the breakdown as percentag es of this portfolio. 

Figure 33 -7 Breakdown of absolute emissions by asset type and associated scope 

Source: EcoAct 

5.1.2. Portfolio level 

The absolute and relative indicators of the portfolio ’s GHG emis sions are analyzed to identify 

and rank the companies within the equities portfolio that emit the most, and least carbon 

emissions: the top 10 and bottom 10 performers.  Table 33 -4 and  Table 33 -5 below are ranked 

by absolute emissions from Scope 1 & 2 due to the mandatory requirements on these 

emissions; weighted Carbon Emissions (WCE) and the investment share % are also shown for 

reference. Scope 3 emissions are shown separately as percentages of ACE and WCE, which 

reflects the larger emissions exposure of Scope 3 emissions within the portfolio. This type of 

analysis identifies the best and worst contributors to a portfolio ’s climate performance, a 

ranking that varies depending on which Scopes of GHG emissions are considered. For instance, 

as demonstrated in  Table 33 -4 below: while Company A has the greatest share of Scope 1 & 2 

emissions, it is Company D that has the highest share of Scope 3 emissions. However, as the 

boundaries of scope 3 differ across each business and sector, this data can be misleading 

without further analysis.                 

> 6% 5% 49% 41%
> 0500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500
> tCO 2eACE Equities scope1&2 ACE Bonds scope1&2 ACE Equities scope3 ACE Bonds scope3 Chapter 33

534 

Figure 33 -8 An alysis of portfolio carbon intensity 

Source: EcoAct 

5.1.3. Issuer level 

Figure 33 -8 shows that regarding the portfolio ’s capital and operational carbon intensity, there 

are three main issuers that bring the results down. More detailed analysis of  Table 33 -2 shows 

that the bottom ten performers represent 16% of investments while accounting for 87% of 

Scope 1 & 2 GHG emissions, or 53% if Scope 3 is included. Regarding the bottom three, 

Companies A, B, C, they account for 41.9%, 20.0%, and 9.5% of GHG emissions, and only for 

3.0%, 4.3%, and 3.7 % of investments respectively. Thus, the portfolio ’s high carbon impact is 

concentrated into a limited number of issuers. The situation is different when Scop e 3 is 

considered, because the associated intensity is distributed among all issuers in a less 

concentrated manner. 

Table 33 -4 Top ten high carbon intensive companies 

Source: EcoAct 

As  Table 33 -5 demonstrates the top ten performers represent 15% of the total investment, 2% 

of Scope 1 & 2 emissions and 20% of emissions when Scope 3 is included in the anal ysis. The 

Scope 3 performance is deteriorated mainly because of only one issuer - Company W from the 

banking sector that is considered as low carbon when Scope 1 & 2 are included and high 

carbon when Category 15 Investments Scope 3 enters the equation. ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

535 

Table 33 -5 Top ten low carbon intensive companies, contributing positively to 

portfolio climate KPIs 

Source: EcoAct 

5.1.4. Sector level 

Sector level analysis shows that portfolio carbon footprint is drive n mainly by such sectors as 

non -energy materials and industrials if scope 1 & 2 are considered.  Figure 33 -9 shows that 

these two sectors account for 76% of the emissions, followed by consumer cyclicals and non -

cyclicals presenting each 7% of overall financed emissions. 

It is important to also revie w the data including the Scope 3 emissions to identify any further 

trends in sectoral carbon emissions.  Figure 33 -9 shows the difference between Scope 1 & 2 

only versus Scope 1, 2 & 3 sectoral contribution. Regarding the full scope of emissions there 

are three sectors impacting the most a portfolio footprint and accounting for 69% of overall 

emissions. Among them consumer cyclicals 31%, Industrials 19% an d Finance 19%. 

Figure 33 -9 Breakdown of sectoral contribution to portfolio emissions, Scope 1 & 2, 

Scope 1, 2 & 3 

Source: EcoAct 

5.1.5. Benchmarking 

Benchmarking portfolio ’s Climate KPIs provides information on the portfolio ’s overall 

performance. The analysis on portfolio carbon intensity, when benchmarked against both 

mainstream and low carbon indices' intensity provides more insights on portfolio ef ficiency. Chapter 33 

536 

Figure 33 -10 Benchmarking portfolio climate KPIs, Scope 1 & 2 

Source: EcoAct 

A comparison of capital carbon intensity (WCE) shows that the portfolio performs better 

compared to both low carbon and mainstream benchmarks. Each unit of currency invested 

thus contributes to a smaller carbon impact. One million euros within the portfolio contributes 

37 tCO 2e which is 2.6 and 3.3 times less compared to low carbon and mainstream indicators 

respe ctively. 

From operational carbon intensity (CI) perspective, after adjusting attributed emissions (ACE) 

by issuers ’ sales, portfolio holdings look more efficient since they emit 63tCO 2e for each million 

euros of sales generated by underling assets. The p ortfolio is 1.4 and 2 times more efficient 

compared to low carbon and mainstream indices' performance. 

Concerning portfolio exposure to high carbon assets or weighted average carbon intensity 

(WACI), the portfolio ’s performance is positioned between indic es, being 1.2 times more 

exposed than the low carbon benchmark and twice less exposed compared to the mainstream 

index. 

It Is interesting to notice that in terms of weighted average carbon intensity the portfolio 

performs worse compared to the low carbon index despite it performs better for the previous 

two KPIs. Due to its design WACI excludes ownership metrics such as market capitalization or 

enterprise value, thus, it does not contain related to enterprise market valuation biases. Being 

constructed arou nd weight of an issuer into a portfolio and its operational carbon intensity 

WACI shows where portfolio risks are concentrated. Despite good carbon -related capital and 

operational efficiency of the portfolio, a comparison across all indicators at once reve als the 

pattern that we see in the mainstream index – accumulation of negative exposure to carbon 

intensive assets while the low carbon index decreases exposure. ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

537 

Such accumulation requires a deeper analysis at issuer level identifying those companies 

brin ging negative exposure to the portfolio.  Figure 33 -11  demonstrates assets taking into 

account their individual operational carbon intensity, attributed to the portfolio emissions as 

well as amount invested. Such analysis reveals that the portfolio exposure is driven by three 

issuers: companies A, B, and C. 

Figure 33 -11 Detailed analysis on portfolio carbo n exposure, Scope 1 & 2, Scope 1, 

2 & 3 

Source: EcoAct 

Portfolio Climate KPIs provide information related to basic understanding of performance 

management of portfolios and underlying assets, whereas additional indicators – including 

SDG, TCFD and SBT -aligned assets – provide a deeper assessment of climate risks and 

opportunities. 

Advanced portfolio climate KPIs 

Advanced Portfolio Climate KPIs provide further information regarding the portfolio alignment 

with the 1.5°C -2°C trajectory: SBT - and TCFD -comm itted and aligned assets, portfolio 

temperature, market -related transition risks & carbon price, green and brown assets, 

contribution to the energy transition, climate performance score among issuers and sectors, 

carbon neutrality & net zero GHG emissions committed assets, the 2°C and below 2°C 

trajectory aligned investments. Chapter 33 

538 

Figure 33 -12 Dashboard: TCFD and SBT -aligned assets 

Source: EcoAct 

Figure 33 -13 Dashboard SDG -engagement, CDP scoring, carbon reduction and 

neutrality of assets 

Source: EcoAct ClimFIT: A Portfolio Carbon & Climate Accounting Tool 

539 

# 6 Future development 

There is an already urgent and growing need for advanced impact accounting rules and impact 

assessment solutions. The current context requires more data and climate and increased 

transition scenario application. Therefore, the roadmap of ClimFIT ’s future d evelopment is 

based on three main axes. 

Broadening of forward -looking and science -based indicators. The current and ongoing 

medium - and long -term considerations regarding alignment with climate scenarios and 

trajectories provide fertile soil for the devel opment of forward -looking indicators .

Development of qualitative and quantitative approaches will be a major concern for future 

development. 

Inclusion of EU Benchmarks and EU Taxonomy indicators . EU regulation of financial markets 

motivates the developme nt of data and solutions. Adaptive and contextualized models 

supported by better data will be vital in helping address the portfolio climate -related 

assessment and management challenges. ClimFiT will implement recommended indicators, 

enabling their quantif ication for large portfolios and indexes. 

Solutions for linking technical issuers with final borrowers . Another obstacle to retrieve 

appropriate data is the absence of a direct link between corporates - borrowers and their 

technical issuers, the later are used as a legal entity to raise funds for corporates. Related 

mostly to fixed -income instruments as bonds, loans, notes, legal and financial structuring - the 

usage of SPV (special purpose vehicles) - impedes the direct link between an investment and 

a financed activity and impact. One of the main focuses of the tool ’s development will be an 

investigation of possible solutions to tackle this issue. Chapter 34 

540 

# CARIMA – A Capital Ma rket -Based Approach 

# to Quantif ying and Manag ing Transition Risks 

By 

University of Augsburg and VfU 1,2

# Abstract 

The impact of uncertainty associated with the ongoing transition towards a green and in 

particular low -carbon economy affects virtually all financial market participants. If the 

transition process accelerates compared to current expectations, the values of carbon -based 

firms are likely to decline, while the values of low -carbon firms will tend to benefit from thi s

development. On the other hand, if the transition process decelerates unexpectedly, the 

reverse could happen. 

The central goal of CARIMA is to quantify exactly those types of risks as well as opportunities 

for firm values via a capital -market based appro ach. Using a factor model, carbon risks are 

simply “extracted ” from the historical returns of global stock prices using the Carbon Risk 

Factor BMG ( Brown -Minus -Green) return time -series. 

The CARIMA concept is essentially directed towards key players in the financial industry, such 

as portfolio managers, who want to take carbon risks in their asset management process into 

account. CARIMA also addresses further stakeholder groups, such as firms, regulatory 

authorities, politicians, and finally scientists. 

Key word s: carbon risk, carbon beta, climate finance, economic transition, asset pricing, factor 

models, carbon risk management 

# 1 Introduction 

The research project Carbon Risk Management (CARIMA), funded by the German Federal 

Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF), aims to quantify the existing risks and 

opportunities for the values of financial assets and respective portfolios in light of climate 

change and the transition towards a green economy, since values of firms, in many cases, also 

depend on the expect ed developments of this transition process. If the transition process 

accelerates compared to current expectations, the values of carbon -based (“ brown ”) firms are 

likely to decline, while the values of low -carbon (“ green ”) firms will tend to benefit from t his 

development. On the other hand, if the transition process decelerates unexpectedly, the 

reverse could happen.                    

> 1This chapter is written by Maximilian Görgen, Research Assistant, Chair of Finance and Banki ng, Faculty of Business
> Administration and Economics, University of Augsburg, email: maximilian.goergen@wiwi.uni -augsburg.de ;Marco Wilkens,
> Professor/ Chair holder, Chair of Finance and Bankin g, Faculty of Business Administration and Economics, University of
> Augsburg, email: marco.wilkens@wiwi.uni -augsburg.de ;Henrik Ohlsen, Managing Director, Verein für
> Umweltmanagement und Nachhaltigke it in Finanzinstituten e.V. (VfU), email: ohlsen@vfu.de.
> 2The project Carbon Risk Management (CARIMA; funding code: 01LA1601) is sponsored by the German Federal Ministry
> of Educati on and Research. CARIMA –A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks

541 

A key challenge for policy is to plan and shape the transition process of the economy in such a 

way that it results in the lowest possible unc ertainties for firm values and thus avoids 

unnecessary welfare losses that will affect not only the firms, but also society as a whole. An 

unstructured transition towards a green and low -carbon economy that does not consider such 

losses would have unforese en consequences. It is therefore vital that the risks arising from the 

uncertainty associated with the transition process be as transparent, quantifiable, and 

manageable as possible. 

The impact of uncertainty associated with the transition process affects virtually all financial 

market participants, as the risks for firm values are directly reflected in the risks for all financial 

assets issued by firms, such as stocks, corporate bonds, loans, and hybrid financial assets. Since 

all these financial assets ar e in turn an integral part of a vast array of portfolios including 

investment funds, pension funds, pensions offices, life insurances, and portfolios by private 

investors, such portfolios are exposed to these risks as well. 

It is therefore a key challenge for investors and financial intermediaries to assess how well 

firms can or cannot adapt to the transition process and to take this into account in their 

investment decisions. An important challenge for central banks and supervisors is to 

understand the im pact of the transition process on the financial institutions they monitor and 

the overall stability of financial markets. 

Risks threatening the existence of firms are particularly worrisome. These ultimately affect not 

only shareholders or lenders, but als o employees, suppliers, and consumers. The transition 

process of the economy must not lead to unnecessary frictions due to an inappropriate 

handling of the associated risks of the transition process, as these risks ultimately determine 

the welfare of all p eople. 

The central goal of CARIMA is to quantify exactly those types of risks as well as opportunities 

for firm values − the so -called “carbon risks ”, also often referred to as “transition risks ”. A

rational handling of these carbon risks is necessary to a chieve the Paris Agreement ’s target to 

keep global warming well below 2°C while avoiding unnecessary socioeconomic losses. 

As far as we are aware, CARIMA is currently the only concept to derive such a risk measure 

based on a capital market -based approach. Compared to other approaches, a crucial 

advantage of CARIMA is that when applying the CARIMA approach using the freely available 

Carbon Risk Factor BMG ( Brown -Minus -Green), there is no need for detailed fundamental 

climate change -relevant information about firms, which is often difficult and expensive to 

obtain or, in the case of many small caps, may not even be available. 

The two -year project carried out by the two peer project partners, the University of Augsburg 

and the Verein für Umweltmanagement und Na chhaltigkeit in Finanzinstituten e.V. (VfU), 

ended in August 2019. The CARIMA concept was presented to financial practitioners at a 

rollout -conference and many other workshops and conferences. The CARIMA handbook as 

well as its related Excel tool and the W orking Paper “Carbon Risk ” (Görgen et al., 2019 )

describe the general approach and contain the key results of the project. The corresponding 

files can be accessed and downloaded free of charge from the project website. 3

The CARIMA concept is essentially di rected towards key players in the financial industry, such 

as professional portfolio managers, who want to take carbon risks in their asset management    

> 3See https://carima -project.de/en/ Chapter 34

542 

process into account. In addition, CARIMA also addresses further stakeholder groups, such as 

firms, regul atory authorities, politicians, and finally scientists. 

# 2 CARIMA – a capital market -based approach 

The core idea of CARIMA is to use fluctuations in stock prices to determine the risks and 

opportunities for single stocks and portfolios. The CARIMA concept th us derives the carbon 

risks directly from historical stock prices on the capital market, where new information about 

the expectations of market participants concerning the transition towards a green economy is 

constantly processed and priced. 

Thus, the CAR IMA concept presents a capital market -based approach where carbon risks and 

opportunities of the economy's transition process can be quantified comparatively easy, since 

they are simply “extracted ” from the historical returns of global stock prices using a Carbon 

Risk Factor BMG (Brown -Minus -Green) in a factor model. 

# 3 Methodology introduction of the CARIMA concept 

This section briefly outlines the different modules of the development and application of the 

CARIMA concept.  Figure 34 -1 shows an overview of the CARIMA concept with its five modules 

A to E. CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

543 

Figure 34 -1 The five modules of the CARIMA concept 

Module A: Master dataset 

The construction and calculation of a Carbon Risk Factor BMG with a high degree of 

discriminatory power requires a huge amount of fundamental information from firms. It is 

crucial that the data allow a sufficiently accurate assessment of a firm ’s change in value in the 

event of unexpected changes in the transition p rocess of the economy. The better firms can 

be divided into highly selective portfolios in this respect, the more efficient the carbon risk 

factor calculated will be. Therefore, data from different databases, namely Thomson Reuters 

ESG, MSCI ESG -Stats and IVA -Ratings, Sustainalytics ESG Ratings, and CDP is used. This data is Chapter 34 

544 

carefully prepared, processed, and combined with capital market data (e.g., return data) from 

Thomson Reuters Datastream. 

The individual ESG databases used have different strengths and weaknesses. By combining the 

databases, some weaknesses in the individual databases are compensated for. For example, 

the dataset contains information on firms that was collected using various approaches, such 

as audited annual reports, external scorings, and ratings, (ESG) analyst assessments and self -

disclosures. By combining the databases, database -specific distortions can be reduced and 

various estimation methods from analysts can be integrated. This gives us an extensive 

selection of firms from which t o calculate a meaningful Carbon Risk Factor BMG .

Module B: Scoring concept 

Module B describes the 55 Carbon Risk Proxy Variables, which are selected to support a 

fundamental assessment of whether firm values (and thus their stock prices) are influenced 

pos itively or negatively by unexpected changes in the ongoing transition process. These 55 

variables are assigned to one of the three group indicators “Value Chain ”, “ Adaptability ”, and 

“Public Perception ”, which represent three impact channels of carbon risk .

The first group indicator “Value Chain ” contains Carbon Risk Proxy Variables that reflect the 

impact of carbon risk across a firm ‘s value chain. This group indicator therefore contains 

variables that deal with all components of a firm ’s value chain – su ch as its production, 

processes, products, technologies, and supply chain. 

The second group indicator “Public Perception ” consists of Carbon Risk Proxy Variables that 

map the influence of carbon risks through another impact channel, so -called public percep tion. 

For example, a firm with low -emission production may still be affected by carbon risks if the 

public believes that the firm is particularly affected by unexpected changes in the transition 

process to a green economy. 

The third group indicator “Adapta bility ” mainly comprises Carbon Risk Proxy variables that 

deal with the strategies, guidelines, and management of a firm. A firm can be prepared for 

unexpected changes in the transition process so that it can respond to these changes 

efficiently. The effec t of the carbon risk on a firm is therefore reduced by a high degree of 

adaptability. 

As part of the development of the CARIMA concept, the selection and allocation of variables 

were discussed and finalized in two specially organized workshop with climate and financial 

experts from NGOs, universities, and consulting firms to ensures the variables ’ ability to 

accurately assess a firm ’s change in value in the event of unexpected changes in the transition 

process of the economy as this is a prerequisite for th e construction of highly selective 

portfolios and thus the efficiency of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG formed based on this 

information. 

In a next step, the information from these 55 variables is condensed into the three group 

indicators via a simple scoring concept in order to calculate the so -called Brown -Green -Score 

BGS for each firm. A detailed documentation of this scoring concept and the aggregation of 

the three subscores to the final BGS can be found in the CARIMA manual. 

This measure ultimately provides a fundamental assessment of the direction and strength of 

the changes in – or in other words risks to − firm values. BGS is determined annually for each 

firm. It is important to note that this scoring concept is only the prerequisite fo r deriving the CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

545 

Carbon Risk Factor, which is described in the next paragraph. It is not an assessment measure 

on its own. 

Figure 34 -2 Assignment of the 55 Carbon Risk Proxy Variables to group indicators 

Module C: Carbon risk factor BMG 

Next, appropriate firms for the factor construction are selected. First, all non -listed firms are 

excluded. In addition, firms in the financial sector are not included, as their carbon risk differs 

significantly from firms in other sectors. For example, banks have almost no direct emissions 

of their own, but they finance firms with high emissions that can be particularly affected by 

carbon risks. Banks may therefore be indirectly affected by carbon risks through their loan 

portfolio, but this may not be reflected in the fundamental data. An in -depth analysis of the 

financial sector ’s carbon risk can be found in the CARIMA manual. 

In addition, only firms that are represented in all four databases and for which data is availabl e

for at least five Carbon Risk Proxy Variables are used for factor construction. These conditions 

are necessary to minimize distortions in the database -specific data collection methodology. 

In total, these criteria lead to a sample of 1,637 listed global firms from 50 countries.  Table 

34 -1 shows the geographical and sectoral distribution of the 1,637 firms selected. Most of 

these firms are based in the U SA, followed by Japan and the United Kingdom. Chapter 34 

546 

Table 34 -1 Geographical and sectoral distribution of the 1,637 firms selected for the 

construction of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG                                                                  

> Country N%Sector N%
> USA 418 25.53 Industry 368 22.48
> Japan 227 13.87 Consumer Cyclical 277 16.92
> UK 193 11.79 Basic Materials 239 14.60
> Canada 97 5.93 Technology 191 11.67
> Australia 75 4.58 Consumer Defensive 167 10.20
> France 66 4.03 Energy 118 7.21
> South Africa 59 3.60 Utilities 104 6.35
> Germany 53 3.24 Healthcare 109 6.66
> Taiwan 48 2.93 Communication Services 64 3.91
> South Korea 36 2.20
> Other Europe 237 14.48
> Other Asia 78 4.76
> Other Americas 37 2.26
> Other Oceania 13 0.79
> Total 1,637 100.00 Total 1,637 100.00

Looking at the sectoral breakdown of the dataset, most firms are active in the sectors 

“Industry ”, “ Consumer Cyclical ” and “Basic Materials ”. The Carbon Risk Factor BMG is 

constructed using firms from numerous countries and various sectors. This ensures that the 

factor contains global information from all sectors of the economy. 

Based on their average Brown -Green -Score BGS , those 1,108 firms (624 “brown ” and 484 

“green ” firms) are then assigned to one of two mimicking stock p ortfolios: the first portfolio 

consists of stocks of “brown ” firms and the other of stocks of “green ” firms. Breakpoints for 

this classification are the terciles of the average Brown -Green -Score BGS .

However, the Carbon Risk Factor BMG should also be as i ndependent as possible from the size 

of a firm. Each firm is therefore assigned the characteristic “small ” or “large ” based on its 

market capitalization, independently of its BGS. This classification is based on the median .

Subsequently, the Carbon Risk Fa ctor “Brown -Minus -Green ” (BMG ) can be formed from the 

historical returns of the four value -weighted portfolios described (brown /small (BS), 

brown /big (BB), green/small (GS) and green/big (GB) following formula 1: 

𝐵𝑀𝐺 𝑡 = 0.5 (𝐵𝑆 𝑡 + 𝐵𝐵 𝑡 ) − 0.5 (𝐺𝑆 𝑡 + 𝐺𝐵 𝑡 ) (5)

The Carbon Risk Factor BMG reflects a hypothetical portfolio that is invested long in “brown ”

and short in “green ” stocks, thus reflecting the return difference between fundamentally 

“brown ” and “green ” firms. 

Of c ourse, it is also possible to consider other ways of constructing the Carbon Risk Factor 

BMG . For example, the threshold value of a characteristic that serves as the basis for the 

sorting into the different portfolios can be varied. Country -specific or sector -specific factors 

are also conceivable, depending on requirements. More information on such modifications 

can be found in the CARIMA manual. 

We check the correlation between BMG and other risk factors and test an orthogonalized 

variant of the factor to ensure that BMG is not already covered by other common risk factors. CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

547 

We also test the scoring concept for robustness by varying the weights for the subscores and 

breakpoints. More details can be found in the CARIMA manual. 

Module D: Factor model 

Module D describes how the carbon risk of practically all stocks and other financial assets, as 

well as the portfolios containing them, can be estimated relatively easily based on the Carbon 

Risk Factor BMG .

Since stock market prices at any time reflect the spee d of the transition process that market 

participants currently assume is occurring and thus which transition path is expected by 

society, the return time series of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG , constructed as a mimicking 

portfolio for carbon risk, contains s uch information in a condensed form. This information can 

be extracted by breaking down the firm's (or generally speaking a financial asset ’s) return time 

series into its individual components using a simple regression analysis. One of these 

components, be sides other known risk components, such as a firm ’s exposure to common risk 

factors like SMB or HML, is a firm ’s carbon risk exposure, which is assessed by the Carbon Beta 

through the Carbon Risk Factor BMG. Thus, the Carbon Beta reflects the capital marke t’s

assessment of the carbon risk of the respective financial asset or portfolio. 

So, who determines the Carbon Beta in the end? The answer is simple: all market participants, 

i.e., all buyers and sellers of the stocks and portfolios under consideration, i.e., all equity 

analysts and other capital market participants worldwide, because they determine the 

changes in stock prices worldwide, from which the Carbon Risk Factor BMG is calculated. It 

can also be said that the Carbon Beta is in principle the aggreg ated assessment of the carbon 

risk (of all participants) on the capital market. 

Only the historical returns of the financial assets or portfolios are required as the dependent 

variable in the regression. The return time series of the explaining variables, such as the 

Carbon Risk Factor BMG and the other factors, are available on the project website and further 

publicly accessible websites, respectively. 

Economic intuition and interpretation of the Carbon Beta 

The Carbon Beta estimates the impacts or effect s on firms, and their values or stock prices, of 

possible changes in expectations that may occur as the present economy moves towards a 

green economy. Sudden changes in expectations regarding the transition process of the 

economy are reflected in the Carbo n Beta. The higher the absolute Carbon Beta value, the 

greater the impact (either upward or downward) on the stock price. 

Estimation of the market ’s carbon risk 

However, there may also be unexpected changes in the transition process that affect all firms 

(“ brown ”, “ neutral ”, and “green ”) to the same or at least a very similar extent. This “general 

market carbon risk ” is not captured with the individual Carbon Betas of the stocks, as it is part 

of the total market risk. In general, the Carbon Beta is used t o estimate the individual risk of a 

stock in relation to the overall market. It thus determines how the value of a stock is likely to 

change in relation to the market as a whole if expectations about the transition process of the 

economy change. The “gener al market carbon risk ” can be estimated through the correlation 

between the market factor and the Carbon Risk Factor BMG . Our empirical research shows a 

(slightly) positive and constant correlation between the (global) market index and the Carbon 

Risk Fact or BMG. This suggests that an acceleration of the transition process of the economy 

towards a green economy will tend to reduce the value of all stocks in the overall market. Chapter 34 

548 

In this context, as already described above, the CARIMA manual offers details on the use of an 

orthogonalized variant of risk factors in the regression model. Here, the correlation between 

BMG and the other factors in the factor model is set to zero without changing its variance 

structure. This ensures that the factor continues to expl ain only those risks that are specific to 

it and does not capture any other systematic effects. 

Carbon Betas quantify risks and opportunities 

The CARIMA concept does not only quantify the risk of losses, but also the chance of profits. 

When talking about r isks in the following, not only negative events ( i.e., risks in conventional 

language), but also positive events (i.e., opportunities in conventional language) are 

considered. In this respect, the Carbon Beta is comparable to the volatility (standard devia tion) 

of equity returns, which is widely used in financial practice. This indicator also subsumes 

opportunities and risks. 

Module E: Applications 

A variety of potential applications for the Carbon Beta is included in Module E. The Carbon 

Beta can be determ ined for different asset classes such as stocks, corporate bonds, loans, 

portfolios, and funds. Furthermore, various country and sector aggregations and 

corresponding analyses are possible. Scenarios for stress testing the values of financial assets 

and po rtfolios can be generated based on the Carbon Beta. In portfolio management, the 

Carbon Beta can be integrated into investment strategies, such as Factor Investing and Best -

in -class approaches and can be used for hedging carbon risks. The potential applica tions 

mentioned here are explained in more detail in the CARIMA manual and supported by 

exemplary Excel applications. 

The CARIMA concept for different user groups 

The CARIMA concept is applicable for both, users who “only ” want to estimate carbon risk 

expo sure, and for advanced users, who want to construct and validate the Carbon Risk Factor 

BMG by themselves. By making the Carbon Risk Factor BMG publicly available, any user can 

start directly with determining the carbon risk of financial assets and portfol ios easily and 

quickly by themselves, since only the historical return time series of the respective financial 

assets or portfolios are needed. 

More detailed explanations of modules A to D are given in the CARIMA manual, which is 

available on the project w ebsite. These explanations address advanced users in particular, who 

would like to adapt and further develop the CARIMA concept to their individual needs and 

have the appropriate resources to do so. 

# 4 Determination of Carbon Beta with the Carbon Risk Factor BMG 

As already described, the CARIMA concept offers a market -based approach to quantify carbon 

risks by using factor models. The relevance of factor models is reflected not only in their 

acceptance as study content at practically all universities, but also in their broad recognition 

in academia and in a wide range of applications in financial practice. 

Factor models as the starting point for the calculation of Carbon Betas 

A typical factor model that is widely used in both financial practice and science is the Carhart 

(1997) four -factor model, which is a further development of the very well -known Fama and 

French (1993) three -factor model, which is again a further development of the Nobel Prize -

winning Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) , Lintner (1965) , and Mossin CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

549 

(1966) . However, the Carbon Risk Factor BMG can in principle be added to any factor model 

as long as no other factor is too highly correlated with the Carbon Risk Factor BMG .

In the following applications, the Carbon Risk Factor “Brown -Minus -Green ” (BMG) extends the 

Carhart model so that it has the following form: 

er i,t = αi + 𝛽 imkt er M,t + 𝛽 ismb SMB t + 𝛽 ihml HML t + 𝛽 iwml WML t + 𝛽 i 

> bmg

BMG t + εi,t  (6)

With: 

• er i,t = return on an asset i minus return on a risk -free investment in period t (excess 

return) 

• er M,t = excess return of the market in period t

• SMB t = return of the global size factor in period t

• HML t = return of the global value factor in period t

• WML t = return of the global momentum factor in period t

• BMG t = return on the global Carbon Risk Factor BMG in period t

• αi, 𝛽 imkt , 𝛽 ismb , 𝛽 ihml und 𝛽 iwml = parameters αi and 𝛽 ix of the Carhart Model 

• 𝛽 i

> bmg

= Carbon Beta of the asset i. This key figure serves a s the central carbon risk 

measure. It is estimated via a simple multiple linear regression according to this 

factor model 

The central idea of factor models is that the returns on assets and thus the overall risks of 

those assets can be broken down into var ious components (“ factors ”). One of these 

components is the sensitivity of an asset ’s value towards unexpected changes in the transition 

process of the economy. Assets can be equities, funds or portfolios. In addition, the CARIMA 

concept is also suitable i n principle for determining the carbon risk of corporate bonds and 

loans. For this, however, some additional considerations and modifications are necessary. 

For example, the carbon risk of corporate bonds can be determined using different factor 

models tha t are specifically designed to explain the returns of corporate bonds, such as the 

models by Fama and French (1993) or Elton et al. (1995) . However, determining Carbon Betas 

for loans is somewhat more demanding, because unlike, e.g., stocks or bonds, there are 

typically no market prices and thus no historical time series of returns for loans. Without these 

time series returns, no direct estimation of the Carbon Beta using a factor model is possible. 

Under certain circumstances, the Carbon Betas of firms ’ st ocks and corporate bonds can be 

used to estimate the Carbon Betas of loans more or less accurately (see  Table 34 -2). More 

information can be found in the CARIMA manual. Chapter 34 

550 

Table 34 -2 Using Carbon Betas from stocks and corporate bonds to determine 

Carbon Betas of loans   

> Carbon Beta of the stock of
> the same firm is known
> Carbon Beta of the stock of
> the same firm is unknown
> Carbon Beta of a corporate
> bond of the firm is known
> Using the Carbon Beta of the
> stock or a corporate bond to
> determine the Carbon Beta of
> the loan
> Using the Carbon Beta of a
> corporate bond to determine
> the Carbon Beta of the loan
> Carbon Beta of a corporate
> bond of the firm is unknown
> Using the Carbon Beta of the
> stock to determine the Carbon
> Beta of the loan
> Using the Carbon Beta of
> comparable firms to
> determine the Carbon Beta of
> the loan

General interpretation of the Carbon Beta 

The Carbon Beta 𝛽 i 

> bmg

of an asset can be interpreted as follows: if the Carbon Beta is greater 

than zero, it can be expected that the value of this asset will fall compared to the market, if 

the transition process of the economy towards a green economy accelerates unexpectedly . If, 

on the other hand, the Carbon Beta is less than zero, the value of this asset will rise compared 

to an average asset in expectation, if the transition process of the economy towards a green 

economy decelerates unexpectedly. The value of an asset with a Carbon Beta close to zero is 

influenced to a market -average extent by the transition process. 

Input for calculating Carbon Betas: Historical returns of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG 

and other risk factors 

One of the explanatory variables on the right side of Equation  (6) is the Carbon Risk Factor 

BMG . BMG is simply a time series of historical returns on a specific hypothetical stock portfolio; 

more precisely , it is the difference between the historical returns from “brown ” firms and 

those from “green ” firms. This time series is illustrated in  Figure 34 -3 on a monthly basis from 

January 2010 to December 2018. 

Figure 34 -3 Monthly returns of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG (2010 -2018) CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

551 

Figure 34 -4 shows the historical cumulative returns of the “brown ” portfolio and the “green ”

portfolio as well as the historical returns of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG . The cumulative return 

on the Carbon Risk Factor BMG is slightly positive in the first years of the reviewed period but 

falls back to zero by the end of 2012. From 2013 to the end of 2015, the cumulative return on 

the factor fell almost steadily to almost –30% overall. During this period, “brown ” firms thus 

had a much lower return than “green ” firms. In the last years of the reviewed period, however, 

there was a slight increase again, so that the Carbon Risk Factor BMG shows a cumulative 

return of –20% overall. 

Figure 34 -4 Cumulative returns of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG and the two 

portfolios “green” and “ brown ”

Ta ble 34 -3 shows descript ive statistics of the monthly Carbon Risk Factor BMG and its 

correlations with other global risk factors of the reference model. The average monthly return 

on the Carbon Risk Factor BMG is negative at −0.25%, the standard deviation is 1.95%. The 

correlations between the Carbon Risk Factor BMG and the market, size, value, and momentum 

factors are all relatively low. As mentioned above, a low correlation with other risk factors of 

the Carhart model is a good first indication for the factor model. 

Ta ble 34 -3 Descriptive statistics and correlations of the Carbon Risk Factor BMG                                     

> Factor Ø Return
> (%)
> Standard -
> deviation (%)
> t-
> stat.
> Correlations
> BMG er MSMB HML WML
> BMG −0.25 1.95 −1.17 1.00
> er M0.76 4.02 1.74 0.09 1.00
> SMB 0.06 1.39 0.37 0.20 −0.02 1.00
> HML −0.00 1.68 −0.02 0.27 0.19 −0.06 1.00
> WML 0.57 2.53 2.06 −0.24 −0.20 0.00 −0.41 1.00 Chapter 34

552 

Input for calculating Carbon Betas: Historical returns of other risk factors 

Other key explanatory variables include the excess returns of the entire stock market er M,t,

SMB t, a global size factor, HML t, a global value factor, and WML t, a global momentum factor at 

the time of t. These factors are available free of charge on the Internet. They can for example 

be downloaded from the Kenneth R. French Data Library 4 or the AQR Data Library 5 . All 

common factors based on the published literature can also be reproduced individually. 

Output: Carbon Betas for stocks 

Figure 34 -5 Carbon Betas of some example stocks 

Figure 34 -5 shows the calculated Carbon Betas for some well -known example firms. It is clear 

that in particular those firms have a high Carbon Beta, which are usually classified as “brown ”. 

On the other h and, especially "green" firms show low Carbon Betas. Similarly, some firms have 

Carbon Betas close to zero, i.e., apart from the general market carbon risk mentioned above, 

they are not exposed to carbon risk. 

It is not surprising that the Carbon Betas of “brown ” stocks are usually more or less positive, 

and the Carbon Betas of “green ” stocks are more or less negative. However, at this point it is 

worth mentioning that it may also be the case that a firm that, e.g., does not burn fossil fuels 

itself and is therefore commonly seen as “clean ”, also has a positive Carbon Beta and belongs 

by CARIMA -definition to the “brown ” firms. 

This could be the case if the firm relies heavily on “brown ” inputs or is a supplier to “brown ”

firms. In this case, an unexpected acceleration in the transition process of the economy could 

be expected to lead to a decline in profits for this “clean ” firm as well, since this firm depends         

> 4See http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
> 5See https://www.aqr.com/Insights/Datasets/ CARIMA –A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks

553 

in turn on firms whose value and business models are negativ ely affected by the unexpected 

acceleration. The same, of course, applies vice versa. 

The level of the estimated Carbon Betas can be used very easily to compare the carbon risk 

exposures of different firms. 

Output: Carbon Beta for portfolios 

In a similar w ay as for stocks, carbon risk can also be determined for portfolios. When assessing 

the current carbon risk in portfolios for today or future periods, respectively, two approaches, 

in particular the top -down and bottom -up approach, are conceivable. In both cases, historical 

return time series serve to estimate a portfolio ’s current carbon risk. The composition of the 

portfolio, or more precisely its change over time, is a key factor in choosing the appropriate 

approach. 

For the top -down approach, only the p ortfolio ’s historical time series of returns must be 

known, while the bottom -up approach requires the current portfolio weights of the individual 

assets and their return time series. 

To determine a portfolio ’s Carbon Beta using the top -down approach, the u ser only needs to 

have the portfolio ’s historical time series of the excess returns. This corresponds to the 

weighted excess returns of the individual stocks in the portfolio. These excess returns are used 

as a dependent variable in the regression, as prev iously described for stocks. Thus, the Carbon 

Beta can be determined directly from the regression Equation  (6). This once again illustrates 

the great ad vantage of the CARIMA concept. For portfolios with any number of different types 

of financial securities, the carbon risk can be estimated with just one regression. 

However, to ensure that this approach does not lead to wrong results in the estimation of 

current Carbon Betas, the composition of the portfolio must, strictly speaking, have remained 

the same over the entire historical period under consideration. Note that the weights of the 

stocks in the portfolio can change automatically over time depending o n the performance of 

stocks in the portfolio. 

If the assumption of a constant portfolio composition over time is (severely) violated, it is more 

reasonable to determine the portfolio ’s Carbon Beta using the bottom -up approach. However, 

for this approach, t he historical time series of (excess) returns of the individual stocks and their 

weighting in the portfolio are required. Subsequently, the Carbon Betas of each stock in the 

portfolio can be determined using Formula  (6). The Carbon Beta of the portfolio is then 

calculated as the weighted sum of the Carbon Betas of the stocks held in the portfolio. 

Output: Carbon Beta of funds 

The following section describe s how to determine the Carbon Beta of funds, in particular, 

equity funds. Equity funds are investment funds that invest their assets primarily or exclusively 

in (individual) stocks. 

Determining the Carbon Beta at fund level is basically analogous to the pr ocedure for 

portfolios, since funds are basically special forms of portfolios that also consist of various 

individual securities. The carbon risk of a fund can thus also be determined bottom -up or top -

down. Nevertheless, some differences between funds and portfolios must be considered. 

Certainly, the main difference is the fact that, unlike a private portfolio, funds are managed 

externally. This typically leads to different degrees of knowledge about the composition and Chapter 34 

554 

the historical time series of returns of the portfolio and fund. In many cases, the historical time 

series of returns is unknown for a private portfolio, while the composition of the portfolio is 

known. In contrast, the historical time series of returns is often available for funds, but the 

(historical) composition of a fund is often unknown. Therefore, the top -down approach is 

particularly relevant for funds. 

Figure 34 -6 Carbon Betas of various example funds 

As an example, the Carbon Betas f or some funds were determined above. Based on a Carhart 

four -factor model extended by the Carbon Risk Factor BMG , a (constant) Carbon Beta for the 

period from January 2010 to December 2018 is estimated using monthly return data. The 

results are visualized in  Figure 34 -6. The US GI World Precious Minerals fund has a high carbon 

risk with a Carbon Beta of 2.59. This suggests that in the event of an unexpecte d change in the 

transition towards a green economy, the fund would be severely adversely affected. However, 

it is also possible to find funds with a negative Carbon Beta that would develop positively in 

the event of an unexpected change in the transition p rocess towards a green economy. This 

applies to ProShares UltraShort Oil & Gas (Carbon Beta –1.92) and to a lesser extent to Triodos 

Sustainable Equity (Carbon Beta –0.20) and UniNachhaltig Aktien Global (Carbon Beta –0.17). 

This is offset by funds such as RobecoSam Sustainable EE and iShares Global Clean Energy ETF, 

for which no Carbon Beta significantly different from zero can be measured. A possible 

explanation for the relatively low (negative) Carbon Betas of these funds is the fact that the 

Carbon Beta estimates the individual carbon risk of a stock (or an asset in general) in relation 

to the market. It thus determines how the value of a stock is likely to change in relation to the 

market as a whole if expectations about the transition process of the ec onomy change. 

However, since funds are mostly very broadly invested, i.e., their returns depend more on the 

movements of the market, the funds ’ return time series primarily load on the market factor. 

In other words, these funds are only affected by the average carbon risk of the market. 

# 5 Further applications of the CARIMA concept 

This chapter presents some more practical applications of the CARIMA concept from a 

perspective of a portfolio manager. In the CARIMA manual, the applications shown in the CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

555 

follow ing as well as further applications are described in detail. Many of these applications can 

also be reproduced with the corresponding Excel tool. 

Management and hedging of carbon risks 

The Carbon Beta enables portfolio managers and investors to manage the carbon risk of their 

portfolios. For example, they can steer the exposure to carbon risks of a certain portfolio to 

the desired level. Portfolio managers can construct “green ” and “brown ” portfolios in a 

targeted manner and speculate on developments that m ay occur in the economy ’s transition 

process (unexpected by the market). Furthermore, portfolio managers can use the Carbon 

Beta to create portfolios that are neutral to carbon risks, in other words, portfolios hedged 

against this risk. In this way, not on ly hedging strategies can be implemented into existing 

portfolio strategies, but also new portfolios and products with a certain carbon risk exposure 

can be generated. 

Example application: hedging carbon risk 

It is assumed that a portfolio manager has vari ous investment opportunities, in this example 

the US Global Investors Precious Minerals Fund, the iShares MSCI World Exchange Traded Fund 

(ETF), and the stock of Vestas. Initially, the portfolio manager is invested solely in the US Global 

Investors Preciou s Minerals Fund. This fund shows a relatively high Carbon Beta of 2.59 and 

can thus be classified as “brown ”. The portfolio manager is now urged by his investors to 

actively reduce the carbon risk of this portfolio. If he includes the stock of Vestas in hi s portfolio 

with a Carbon Beta of –2.13, the carbon risk can be reduced. For example, if the portfolio 

manager opts for an equal weighting of the fund and the stock in the portfolio, the Carbon 

Beta is 0.23. Thus, this portfolio formation enables the manag er to reduce the carbon risk of 

his portfolio. The returns and values of the Carbon Beta of the hedged portfolio and its 

respective underlyings are shown in  Figure 34 -7.

Figure 34 -7 Returns and Carbon Betas of the hedged portfolio and its respective 

underlyings 

Of course, due to the additivity of the betas, it is also possible to achieve other degrees of 

exposure to carbon risks. This example makes clear that portfolio managers and investors can 

use the Carbon Beta to hedge their portfolios easily. In addition, Carbon Betas can be realized 

at almost any magnitude, i.e., any investment strategy can be pursue d through the 

composition of “green ”, “ neutral ”, and “brown ” portfolios. Chapter 34 

556 

Portfolio allocation strategies: “Best -in -class ” approach based on the Carbon Beta 

The idea of a best -in -class approach is to select the stocks with the lowest Carbon Beta in a 

particular group of firms, in this example from each sector. This group of stocks is referred to 

as the “Best -in -class ” portfolio. The other way around, stocks with the highest Carbon Beta 

within their sector are grouped into the “Worst -in -class ” portfolio , i.e., the “brown ” portfolio. 

For these two portfolios, different thresholds for the classification into “green ” or “brown ” are 

conceivable. Such best -in -class approaches are often used for the construction of 

(sustainability) indices. For example, the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index is constructed 

in such a way that the selected firms are among the top ten percent of sustainable firms in 

terms of the defined sustainability characteristics. Such indices serve as benchmarks and thus 

as a basis for ot her financial products. 

Example application: “Best -in -class ” approach 

Figure 34 -8 Best -in -class approach across eleven sectors 

Figure 34 -8 shows an example for this approach and the respective results. The threshold value 

in this example is defined as the median of the Carbon Beta within each sector. Stocks below 

the median of a particular sector are incl uded in the Best -in -class portfolio, while stocks with 

a Carbon Beta above the median enter into the Worst -in -class portfolio for that sector. The 

average values across eleven sectors per portfolio are shown. In this example, a global 

investment universe i s assumed. The global investment universe shows a Carbon Beta of 0.01 

and a Sharpe Ratio of 0.41, whereas the Best(Worst) -in -class Portfolio shows a Carbon Beta of 

–0.50 (0.52) and a Sharpe Ratio of 0.44 (0.39). 

Thus, the difference between the Carbon Beta s of the Best -in -class and Worst -in -class 

portfolios amounts to –1.02, whereas the Sharpe Ratios do not show any major differences. 

In this scenario, portfolio managers and investors can maintain the sector allocation of their 

portfolios with a correspondi ng Sharpe Ratio while simultaneously managing carbon risk via 

the Best -in -class approach. 

Factor Investing taking carbon risks into account 

In Factor Investing, stocks are selected based on certain factors, such as firm size or book -to -

market ratio. The ul timate objective is to generate a stock portfolio that shows certain 

characteristics (exposures) with respect to these factors across all stocks. CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

557 

According to Invesco's Global Factor Investing Study ( Invesco, 2018 ), risk reduction and better 

control over t he risk exposure of a portfolio are key reasons to implement Factor Investing 

strategies. In addition, factor strategies can be used to easily map thematic focuses, e.g., 

regarding ESG risks in the portfolio. 

It can be assumed that the integration of ESG i ssues into Factor Investing will gain in 

importance in upcoming years. It is therefore obvious that carbon risks will also find their way 

into new factor strategies. By taking the Carbon Beta into account, portfolio managers and 

investors can incorporate c arbon risk into the composition of their portfolios. The Carbon Beta, 

for example, can be used to develop a multi -factor strategy aimed at specifying a specific 

carbon risk without deviating from the original investment strategy. This allows portfolio 

mana gers to consider investors ’ preferences for carbon risks in conventional factor strategies. 

Example application: “Factor Investing ” approach 

In the following scenario, a portfolio manager wants to achieve a certain level of carbon risk 

for his portfolio wh ile maintaining the sensitivity (betas) to the risk factors market, SMB, and 

HML. The portfolio manager ’s investment universe consists of global stocks. He determines all 

factor sensitivities for each of these stocks, in other words he uses a multi -factor strategy. The 

sensitivities with regard to the factors market, SMB, and HML are crucial, whereby two 

portfolios with similar sensitivities should exist while being “brown ” or “green ” depending on 

investors ’ preferences. In a three -step procedure, the portf olio manager sorts all stocks into 

portfolios according to their sensitivities with regard to the factors market, SMB, and HML. For 

portfolio formation, a quintile classification is carried out. First, all firms are divided into 

quintile portfolios based o n their market beta. The companies in each of these five portfolios 

are then sequentially divided into further portfolios based on their SMB -beta and finally their 

HML -beta. This results in a total of 125 (5x5x5) portfolios which each show a certain sensit ivity, 

i.e., beta, to the factors market, SMB, and HML. Each of these portfolios is then categorized as 

either a “green ” or “brown ” Carbon Beta portfolio based on the median of the Carbon Betas 

of the stocks in that specific portfolio. Investments can now be made into these portfolios 

according to the multi -factor strategy selected. 

Figure 34 -9 Carbon Betas in Factor Investing 

Figure 34 -9 shows four potential portfolios. If the portfolio manager adopts a multi -factor 

strategy based on the entire investment universe without taking the Carbon Beta into account, 

he obtains a portfolio with a Carbon Beta of –0.02, which is almost neutral to carbon risks. Chapter 34 

558 

From this investment universe, portfolios are constructed with a Carbon Beta below the 

median (“ Green ” Portfolio) and above the median (“ Brown ” Portfolio). These two portfolios 

represent the extreme cases, wit h a Carbon Beta of –0.44 for the “Green Portfolio ” and 0.47 

for the “Brown Portfolio ”, respectively. The other factor loadings, i.e., Beta  MKT, Beta  SMB, 

and Beta  HML, on the other hand, hardly differ at all. 

Generally, a portfolio manager will set a bandwidth for the carbon risk of his portfolio. In this 

case, one could imagine that the portfolio manager prefers a slightly positive Carbon Beta 

between 0.15 and 0.25. He can easily implement this by composing his portfolio accordingly, 

for example by co mbining the “Brown ” and “Green ” Portfolios with different weightings. This 

is demonstrated by the Investor Portfolio with a Carbon Beta of 0.20. The portfolio manager 

can thus realize any level of the Carbon Beta. Again, the betas of the factors market, SM B, and 

HML differ only marginally, while the Carbon Beta can be steered towards any desired level. 

# 6 Conclusion 

CARIMA provides a new measure for financial market actors to assess risks and opportunities 

in stocks and portfolios arising from climate change a nd the transition process of the economy 

towards a green and in particular low -carbon economy, based on capital market information. 

In other words, CARIMA supports the financial sector in the transition process of the economy 

towards a green economy and ca n thus contribute to the overall societal goal of preventing 

welfare losses. 

Nevertheless, a number of related topics in research and practice are relevant for the future. 

Examples include the integrative consideration of carbon risks in asset management, the 

evaluation of carbon risks in derivative financial instruments, and the question how carbon 

risks influence expected returns of stocks and other financial assets. Subsequent work will not 

only fill gaps in scientific and applied research, but will also support the financing of the 

transition process of the economy towards the 2°C target and, where appropriate, the 

fulfillment of further sustainable development goals. CARIMA – A Capital Market -Based Approach to Quantify ing and Manag ing Transition Risks 

559 

# Bibliography 

Carhart, M. M. (1997). On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Finance .

Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., & Blake, C. R. (1995). Fundamental Economic Variables, Expected 

Returns, and Bond Fund Performance. The Journal of Finance, 50 (4), 1229 -1256. 

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the return s on stocks and bonds. 

Journal of financial economics, 33 (1), 3 -56. 

Görgen, M., Jacob, A., Nerlinger, M., Riordan, R., Rohleder, M., & Wilkens, M. (2019). Carbon 

Risk . SSRN 2930897. 

Invesco. (2018). Invesco Global Factor Investing Study 2018 .

Lintner, J. (1965). Security Prices, Risk, and Maximal Gains From Diversification. The Journal 

of Finance, 20 (4), 587 -615. 

Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market. Econometrica, 34 (4), 768 -783. 

Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions 

of Risk. The Journal of Finance, 19 (3), 425 -442. Chapter 35 

560 

# A Review of Methodologies Analyzing 

# Physical Climate Risks 

By 

Institute for Climate Economics (I4CE) 1

# Abstract 

This chapter reviews and compares the approaches developed by several service providers to 

inform financial institutions on their exposures to physical climate risks. We introduce 

common concepts and terminology defining these approaches as “physical climate risks 

analysis in finance, ” and present several available approaches developed by service providers 

to analyze these risks. We also review further details on the underlying meth odologies, and 

discuss the limitations of these methodologies. 

Keyword s: financial sector, physical climate risk, climate services, review 

# 1 Introduction 

In January 2019, the California utility giant PG&E filed for bankruptcy protection with billions 

of doll ars in potential liabilities resulted from damages to its equipment during the 2017 and 

2018 major wildfires. 2 This demonstrated that climate change had already caused major 

financial losses to a major economy. While climate change is materializing and expected to 

continue for decades, financial institutions need to understand how their portfolios are 

vulnerable t o potential impacts of climate change, known as “physical climate risks ”. 

In 2018, only a few financial institutions reportedly conducted analyses on physical climate 

risks, most of which done jointly with external service providers with developed 

methodol ogies to analyze such risks ( Hubert & Cardona, 2018 ). 

This chapter compares the approaches developed by several service providers to inform 

financial institutions on their exposures to physical climate risks. Section two introduces 

common concepts and ter minology defining these approaches as “physical climate risks 

analysis in finance, ” Section three introduces the background of available approaches 

developed by service providers to analyze these risks, and Section four provides further details 

on the unde rlying methodologies, while the final conclusion discusses the limitations of the 

methodologies.                                

> 1Thi schapter is written by Romain Hu bert ,Project Manager, I4CE –Institute for Climate Economics, email:
> romain.hubert@i4ce.org ;and Michel Cardona, Senior Advisor, I4CE –Institute for Climate Economics ,email:
> michel.cardona@i4ce.org . This chapter is based on I4CE’s contribution to ClimINVEST. Project ClimINVEST is a part of
> ERA4CS, an ERA -NET initiated by JPI Climate, with funding from RCN (NO), ANR (FR), NWO (NL) and the European Union
> (Grant 690462).
> 2More detail at: https://fr.reuters.com/article/bankingfinancial -SP/idUKL3N27N41U .A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks

561 

The approaches described in this chapter were those accessible to the authors in 2018 when 

they undertook the ClimINVEST research project. 3 The methodologies w ere not described in 

full detail. 

# 2 Common framework for reviewing the approaches 

The methodologies reviewed in this chapter were developed to inform financial institutions 

about their exposures to potential impacts of climate change. This section presents a common 

framework of physical climate risk analysis in finance. 

Analyzing impac t chains: from climate hazards to financial activities 

2.1.1 Climate hazards are the drivers of physical climate risks 

As shown on  Figure 35 -1, physical climate risks in finance arise from a set of risk drivers called 

“climate hazards ”. The approaches generally define them as persistent or acute changes in 

weather conditions. 4 In reference to the TCFD ’s language, the approaches can focus on “acute 

climate hazards ” defined as changes in frequency, intensity, duration and geographical spread 

of extreme events (e.g., typhoons; heatwaves). They can also cover “chronic climate hazards ”

defined as the gradual changes in the broader climate -related conditions (e.g ., gradual air and 

ocean warming, changing rain patterns including seasonality, intensity, changing wind 

patterns). 

Climate hazards in available approaches also include both the gradual and acute consequences 

of climate change for the natural environment w here human activities take place in, including 

consequences on the natural physical environment (e.g., sea -level rise, drier soils or floods) 

and consequences on animals, plants and ecosystems (e.g., species proliferation, extinction or 

migration). 5

These different categories of climate hazards can compound each other. For instance, a 

gradual sea -level rise can exacerbate coastal flooding, as two types of hazards can occur at the 

same time with compounded impact. 

2.1.2 Climate hazards impact financial activ ities through the real economy 

The available approaches analyzing physical climate risks in finance aim to study how climate 

hazards translate into potential impacts on financial institutions. These methods recognize 

that the potential impacts manifest thr ough the economic entities that institutions finance in 

their portfolios. These entities can be physical assets (e.g., plants and buildings), governments, 

individuals or companies. Therefore, physical climate risk analysis in finance consists in 

analyzing the chain of impact from climate hazards to the financed entities and ultimately the 

financial institutions. 

Exploring the complete chains of impacts step by step, the approaches analyze how a specific 

climate hazard triggers physical impacts on an entity in the real economy, how it leads to 

financial impacts at the scale of the entity, and ultimately how this affects the main categories 

of financial risks, namely underwriting, credit or market risks, that a financial institution is 

exposed to. Indeed, cli mate hazards can cause an entity to be liable for insurance claims,        

> 3The complete information validated by the service providers is available online in annex to I4CE’s 2018 report “Getting
> started on physical climate risk analysis in finance”.
> 4In a few instances, the approaches developed by the service providers define “c limate hazards” in reference to past or
> current climate conditions.
> 5In IPCC reports the consequences of climate change on natural physical systems are called “physical impacts of climate
> change”. Chapter 35

562 

jeopardize its ability to repay loans and generate financial returns for investors. Climate 

hazards may also create macroeconomic impacts with broader implications for financial 

activities .

The implementation of this general “impact chain ” framework has different implications 

depending on the financed entity. 

Relevance of the characteristics of the financed entity 

2.2.1 The general setting of impact chains depends on the type of financed entity 

Different types of physical and financial impacts can be analyzed according to the nature of 

the entity (e.g., a company, a project or a government).  Figure 35 -1 synthesizes the categories 

of physical and financial impacts that can be analyzed when the financed entity is a company. 

Climate hazards can impact the operation sites (e.g., damages to physical installations, losses 

of workforce productivi ty and natural resources available for industrial production). As 

importantly, the company is exposed to climate hazards across its value chain and broader 

business environment. The approaches reviewed in this chapter address different aspects of 

this anal ytical framework and provide various levels of details on specific impacts. For example, 

some approaches present separately the impacts on the suppliers or upstream value chain, 

the market or downstream value chain, and the logistics. 

Figure 35 -1 Propagation channels of climate risks to a company in the real economy 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analysis in finance 

2.2.2 The appropriate level of data granularity depends on the type of financed 

entity 

The developers of the approaches reviewed in this chapter seek to use the appropriate level 

of data according to the type of entity in the portfolio. 

Sectoral and regio nal information may be appropriate for analyzing physical climate risks at 

the scale of governments. For most entities in the portfolios such as corporates, this 

information may be useful 6 but insufficient. The climate impacts on these entities propagate 

along complex channels that may vary with the specific activities of the company. The  

> 6For example, floods in a region may lead to general incr ease in insurance premia, while the company itself may not be
> actually be impacted. A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks

563 

magnitude of impacts may also vary widely with specific characteristics of the entity and its 

environment. 

Two companies operating in the same activity and geographic area may sustain different 

impacts depending on their characteristics. For instance, flood damages to operation sites may 

depend on the elevation of the machines or the resilience of the building materials to water. 

Impacts on the value chain may also depend o n the location of the specific network of key 

suppliers and markets, and on a company ’s bargaining power. Other elements can influence 

the vulnerability and adaptability of the company when facing climate hazards, like its financial 

capacity or insurance c overage. 

Relevance of different time horizons and accounting for future uncertainties 

2.3.1 Uncertain climate impacts can be analyzed from near - to long -term horizons 

The approaches reviewed in this chapter look at the potential impact of climate hazards in 

different timeframes from the current moment to 2100. The potential impact at these 

different horizons depends on the specific types of uncertainties. 

Physical climate risk analysis is relevant for the near term. The trends in climate hazards are 

alread y set for the coming decades, no matter how much we limit GHG emissions 7 . The 

resulting impacts from climate change will depend on short -term decisions that humans make 

to change their systems to adapt. 

Physical climate risk analysis is also relevant for longer -term horizons, when potential impacts 

may be more severe. The evolution of climate hazards in longer -term horizons depends heavily 

on short -term actions to reduce GHG emissions, and the resulting impacts also depend on the 

decisions that humans make on adaptation. In a pessimistic -case scenario where GHG 

emissions continue at the same pace, every region in the world will be exposed to intensified 

climate hazards by the end of the century as analyzed by Mora et al. (2018) . 8 Conversely, the 

most optim istic perspective is that drastic limitations of GHG emissions are implemented to 

successfully limit global warming below 1.5°C. The global scientific community reckons that 

some significant climate impacts will remain even in this best -case scenario ( IPCC , 2018 ) 9.

The explanation above on time horizons introduces the broader topic of uncertainties about 

future climate impacts. For instance, the uncertain evolution of climate hazards depends not 

only on uncertain GHG emission trajectories, but also on the potential tipping points in the 

response of the climate system to GHG emissions, or on the unpredictable evolution of natural 

phenomena affecting the climate. In addition, climate models do not fully agree on the 

representation of climate evolutions. The r elative importance of these uncertainties varies 

across climate hazards and time horizons. 

2.3.2 Some uncertainties can be addressed with scenario analysis 

Available approaches can use specific tools to account for major uncertainties when analyzing 

potent ial climate impacts.       

> 7The impact of humans on the climate in the near term is already done, given GHG emissions accumulated in the
> atmosphere and that response of the climate system may be del ayed.
> 8Mora et al (2018) in Nature Climate Change concluded that a joint evolution of 10 selected types of climate hazards (e.g.
> drought; heatwaves) may result in overall increased exposure to intensified climate hazards worldwide by 2095 compared
> to 1955 .
> 9Global scientific community also believes that each half degree of global warming goes with large differences in terms of
> impacts. Chapter 35

564 

Many uncertainties over climate hazards and resulting impacts arise from unpredictable future 

societal choices. Therefore, physical climate risk analyses cannot rely exclusively on historical 

information. For long -term horizons, climat e scenario analyses can be useful for exploring 

plausible climate trajectories depending on the future GHG emissions from human activities. 

For short - and long -term horizons, climate impact and adaptation scenarios can also be used 

to explore how societal choices may affect ‘humans ’ exposure and vulnerability to changing 

climate conditions ( Colin et al., 2019 ). 

Other tools can be used to account for diverse types of uncertainties. For instance, in order to 

account for the divergence of results across climat e models, some scientists generate climate 

data from multiple climate models instead of a single model. This generates a consolidated 

result accounting for the divergence of the results across models. 

# 3 Main aspects of available approaches 

All available appr oaches seek to inform financial institutions on their exposures to physical 

climate risks. However, they target different audiences at financial institutions and provide 

them with different types of information outputs as shown in this section. 

A limited n umber of approaches with diverse targets 

There are only a limited number of approaches on physical climate risk analysis tailored for 

financial institutions. The specialized institutions that developed these approaches include 

Acclimatise ( Asian Developmen t Bank, 2016 ), WRI ( Gassert et al., 2014 ; Luck et al., 2015 ), Four 

Twenty Seven ( Four Twenty Seven & Deutsche Asset Management, 2017 ), Carbone 4 ( Carbone 

4, 2017 ), Carbon Delta ( Carbon Delta, 2019 ), Mercer ( Mercer, 2015 ; Mercer & CALStrs, 2016 ), 

and Trucos t ( Ecolab, 2017 ). Moody ’s ( MOODY, 2016 ) also developed research to study how its 

rating system correlates with climate risk exposures.  Figure 35 -2 below details the name of 

approaches under in -depth studies in the context of the ClimINVEST project during 2018. 

The UNEP FI also gathered financial institutions and service providers to pilot methodologies 

on scenario -based climate risk assessment, in respons e to the TCFD. In this context, 16 leading 

banks and Acclimatise piloted methodological guidelines on physical climate risk analysis that 

were released in July 2018 ( UNEP FI & Acclimatise, 2018 ). These are summarized in Box 1 

below and differ significantly from the Acclimatise ’s Aware for Project platform used in the 

ClimINVEST project and detailed in this chapter. In 2018 -2019, 20 institutional investors and 

Carbon Delta also tested available methodologies and built their work upon Carbon Delta ’s

Climate V alue at Risk methodology used in the ClimINVEST project and detailed further in this 

chapter ( UNEP FI & Carbon Delta, 2019 ). A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks 

565 

Box 1: The UNEP FI’s pilot exercise on physical climate risk analysis for banks 

In July 2018, 16 leading banks gathered by the UNEP FI and supported by the consultancy 

Acclimatise released methodological frameworks on physical climate risk analysis ( UNEP FI 

& Acclimatise, 2018 ). They sought to help banks make in -house estimates of the financial 

physical climate risks in their loan portfolios, expressed as key credit risk metrics: 

probability of default (PD) and loan -to -value ratio (LTV). The methodological framework 

was piloted specifically for agriculture 10 , energy 11 and real estate por tfolios 12 .

The methodology on agriculture and energy 

This methodology provides guidance for recalculating the default probability of borrowers 

under climate impacts. The output can be generated per time period (2020s and 2040s) and 

climate scenario (2°C and 4°C) on sectoral borrowers or portfolios. The output builds on: 

- Estimated impacts from incremental climate change (temperatures and precipitations) on 

production (agriculture and energy) and prices (agriculture) per sub -sector and 

region/country, sourc ed from peer -reviewed impact studies. These impacts are translated 

into equivalent percentages of annual revenue losses for all borrowers in a sub -sector and 

region/country. 

- Estimated impacts from extreme events (tropical cyclones, flood, wildfire, drou ght and 

extreme heat) in terms of production losses (proportion of crops lost in agriculture sector; 

electricity production downtime or reduction in energy production). They are estimated 

from empirical evidence on observed losses and projected into the fu ture with high -level 

assumptions of future changing frequency of each type of extreme event. These impacts 

are translated into equivalent percentages of annual revenue losses. Through Risk 

Management Solutions (RMS) models, the variations in annual revenue can also estimate 

changes in cost of goods sold. 

The methodology stresses directly the variables in PD modelling with revenue and cost 

components. The authors acknowledge that other PD modelling factors may be modified, 

but are left unchanged for practica l reasons. In order to assess PD variations in a bank’s 

specific portfolio, the methodology assesses a sample of borrowers in terms of PD, range 

of debt and geographic distribution. This requires data from the bank on the borrower: 

annual revenue, cost of goods sold, key operating assets and their location and output. The 

methodology extrapolates results of this representative sample to the sectoral portfolio. 

To improve the overall quality of the assessment, the UNEP FI partners flag the need for 

understan ding better the historic relationships between extreme climate -related events 

and PDs. 

The methodology on real estate 

This approach provides some guidance for revising LTV ratios per climate scenario (2°C or 

4°C) and time period (2020s and 2040s). The outp ut builds on high -level estimates of 

impacts of extreme climate -related events on property value, sourced from high -level 

observed losses and projected into the future (see the agriculture and energy methodology 

above). The UNEP FI partners recommend that the banks carry out historical analyses on 

their portfolios to specify how extreme events impact specific property markets. 

The estimated sectoral impact on property values is used as a basis for calculating impact 

on the LTV for the bank’s portfolio. The bank calculates the average remaining mortgage Chapter 35 

566 

term for its portfolio, multiplies it by the probability of hazards occur in this period. This is 

combined with the high -level estimated change in property value to provide a “risk to 

property value” factor. T hen the bank combines it with the original property value and 

locations in its portfolio as well as outstanding loan amounts to arrive at revised LTV ratios. 

Limitations of the methodologies as described in the UNEP FI and Acclimatise report 

The UNEP FI partners explain that macroeconomic impacts are not included in the pilot 

project methodologies. They highlight the need for research on the macroeconomic 

impacts of climate change, for instance in terms of interest rates or inflation. The partners 

also fl ag that most macroeconomic modeling approaches focus on GDP and provide a very 

wide range of estimates. In addition, the pilot project focuses on publicly available data 

which preclude the integration of value chain considerations. Insurance is excluded du e to 

uncertainties on present -day coverage and future changes in insurance availability and 

pricing. The methodologies do not account for adaptation actions that borrowers may 

undertake. 

Sour ce: UNEP FI and Acclimatise (2018) 

All these approaches try to answer the same question: how climate change affects the entities 

receiving funding from a financial institution. However, they have different targets as detailed 

in  Figure 35 -2 below. They seek to inform different users at financial institutions, at different 

stages of decision making, and can apply to different portfolios depending on the types of 

entities funded by this fina ncial institution. The WRI ’s Aqueduct - Water Risk Atlas is included 

in this review as a salient example of an online tool that financial institutions can use as a part 

of their physical climate risk analysis. More specifically, this tool maps some physica l climate -

related hazards. As such, the WRI ’s tool does not focus on one particular entity.     

> 10 With 3 sub -sectors: crop production, livestock farming, timber production
> 11 With 5 sub -sectors: thermal power production, hydropower production, power transmission, oil and gas upstream
> (exploration and production), oil and gas midstream and downstream (liquefied natural gas, gas -to -liquids, refining,
> petrochemicals
> 12 Applicable to retail mortgages, income -produci ng real estate

A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks 

567 

Figure 35 -2 Selected approaches and targets 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analysis in finance 

Approaches providing two main types of output information 

The selected approaches provide two broad types of information to the targeted audience in 

financial institutions. On the one hand, some service providers choose to generate risk 

indicators in terms of normalized scores. Except for WRI, the construction of such scores 

considers at some point how climate hazards may generate financial impacts on the entity in 

a portfolio. On the other hand, some approaches provide quantitative estimates of financial 

impacts. Trucost explains the financial impacts at the scal e of the financed entity with revenue 

at risk and total cost of water while Carbon Delta and Mercer explain impacts in terms of 

financial returns. 

In both cases, the output metrics can provide different levels of aggregation and details, as 

illustrated in  Figure 35 -3, and provide diverse insights to decision making. For instance, Mercer 

provides financial return impact depending on the type of impact at t he scale of the company 

(i.e., climate sensitive resources or physical damaged) while Four Twenty Seven provides 

scores on different aspects of a company ’s value chain (i.e., supply, operations and markets). 1 Moody’s approach is exploratory in the sense that it does not constitute a new                         

> product to investors and it is based on illustrative data.
> Service provider
> Acclimatise Moody’s Investors
> Service WRI Four Twenty
> Seven Carbone 4 Carbon Delta Mercer Ecolab ,Trucost and
> Microsoft
> Approach
> Aware for
> Projects
> Physical Effects of
> Climate Change on
> Sovereign
> Aqueduct –
> Water Risk
> Atlas
> 427 Climate
> Risk Scores CRIS Climate VaR TRIP framework Water Risk
> Monetizer

Target use            

> Pre -screening before financing
> Exploratory approach 1
> Analysis of a portfolio
> exposure to climate hazards
> Analysis of physical climate risk

Target user             

> Project officer and risk
> manager –development bank
> Risk managers –
> All financial institutions
> Not defined –
> All financial institutions

Entity in portfolio 

> Government
> Corporate
> Project

Service Paid Paid Paid Paid Paid Paid Fre eFre eChapter 35 

568 

Figure 35 -3 Selected approaches and output information 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analysis in finance 

# 4 Key aspects of the methodologies underpinning the available 

# approaches 

The approaches under re view apply the general analytical framework presented in section two 

on different perimeters, with specific data and tools as shown in this section. 

A common analytical framework 

To analyze the physical climate risks of a financial institution, the approaches usually focus first 

on the “risk exposure ”, i.e., scale at which climate hazards generate physical and financial 

impacts on the financed entity. Financial institutions can the n use the information to compute 

impacts on their portfolios. 

This requires setting the perimeter of analysis on several aspects: the set of hazards considered, 

the types of physical and financial impacts, the perimeter of the entity being studied (e.g., the 

entire company, one business unit doing a specific activity or in one particular country, key 

operation sites, the whole value chain and the evolution of its broader business environment), 

the time horizon of the analysis, and the range of uncertainti es about the future (e.g., one or 

several climate scenarios). Service provider                       

> Acclimatise Moody’s Investors
> Service WRI Four Twenty
> Seven Carbone 4 Carbon Delta Mercer Ecolab ,Trucost and
> Microsoft
> Approach
> Aware for
> Projects
> Physical Effects of
> Climate Change on
> Sovereign
> Aqueduct –
> Water Risk
> Atlas
> 427 Climate
> Risk Scores CRIS Climate VaR TRIP framework Water Risk
> Monetizer

Quantification   

> Qualitative scoring
> Financial estimate

On financed entities 

> Portfolio

On time horizon    

> Detail and aggregatio nper
> horizon
> Restricted to one horizon

On hazard 

> Financed entity (or sub level,
> e.g. business unit)
> Asset class
> Detail and aggregation per:
> Element of value chain
> Sector
> Geography
> Type of impact

On scenario   

> Specific hazard addressed
> All hazards combined
> Output for different scenarios

A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks 

569 

To implement the analysis of physical and financial impacts on the financed entity in the 

chosen perimeter, the approaches may combine information on four broad aspects: climate 

hazards, exposur e to these hazards; the sensitivity of the entity to this exposure, and its 

capacity to address these potential impacts (also called adaptive capacity). The term 

vulnerability is also frequently used to describe concepts such as sensitivity and adaptive 

ca pacity. 

As illustrated in  Figure 35 -4 with the case of a corporate entity, the assessment relies on 

“indicators, ” with each describing one or several as pects of the risk to the entity (i.e., hazard, 

exposure, sensitivity, adaptive capacity), which combine to produce an output describing a 

type of impact. These indicators are chosen according to the available data and tools 

calculating them. Thus, some ind icators provide a very precise picture of a specific variable 

while others are proxies of a more complex reality. 

Figure 35 -4 Implementing physical climate risk analysis on a corporate entity 13 

Source: ClimINVEST project , 2019 

The service providers implement this analytical framework with variations in terms of 

perimeter of hazards and impacts on the entity, time horizons and uncertainties, but also 

different data and modeling approaches. The subsection s below summarize these 

methodological aspects of the approaches. More complete information can be found about 

the methodology of each approach in I4CE ’s 2018 report “Getting started on physical climate 

risk analysis in finance ” written for the ClimINVEST project ( Hubert et al., 2018 ). 

Different perimeters of hazards, impacts and adaptive capacity 

4.2.1 Hazards 

“Climate hazards ” are defined either in absolute terms – as climate conditions at a point in 

time – or in relative terms – as the delta in climate c onditions between a future period and a 

reference period. 

The scope of climate -related phenomena differs across the methodologies. Most of the 

approaches cover disruptive and extreme events (e.g., hurricanes, heat waves, drought and 

floods) while the overa ge of gradual changes in the broader climate -related conditions is only 

emerging (e.g., the WRI and Trucost focus specifically on water availability). 

Some methodologies show differences in the indicators that describe a given hazard (e.g., 

water stress ca n be studied through mean yearly water supply or intra -year variability of water 

supply). However, the choice of indicators is not fully transparent in several approaches.                         

> 13 An e xemplar --financial impacts of physical climate risks on Company A. One material risk analyzed here is potential
> impacts from floods on the buildings that Company A uses for its operations. “Indicators” can be the output information
> or intermediary building blocks .Number of days when
> rainfall exceeds 50mm
> Financial value and
> location of the building
> Data
> Indicator
> Selected
> asset and
> impact
> chain
> EXPOSURE OF
> BUILDING ON
> OPERATION SITE
> SENSITIVITY OF
> BUILDING ON
> OPERATION SITE
> ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
> FINANCIAL IMPACT TO
> COMPANY FROM
> FLOODS ON OPERATION
> BUILDINGS
> Climate data Economical
> asset -level data
> Incline of lands
> Age of the building,
> etc.
> Technical and
> environmental data
> Asset specific data
> and contextual data
> Early warning system
> Insurance
> Technical measures
> Variation of OPEX
> over next 5years
> FLOOD
> (HAZARD)

Chapter 35 

570 

Figure 35 -5 Selected approaches and perimeter of climate hazards 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analysis in finance 

4.2.2 Impacts 

Available methodologies recognize that climate hazards may lead to an array of physical 

impacts on the ent ity, translating into financial impacts on this entity and ultimately impacts 

on financial institutions providing capital and services. However, the methodologies 

concentrate efforts on analyzing diverse subsets of impacts, as shown with the example below 

on corporate entities. 

The scope of physical impacts on the companies 

The available methodologies apply different scopes of analysis to characterize physical impacts 

to companies. Depending on the data and analytical tools, the scope of impacts can be expl icit 

or not. 

The methodologies can target different segments of the company ’s value chain (i.e., supply 

chain, logistics, operations, markets). The methodologies can also cover different types of 

vulnerabilities on each segment of the value chain (e.g., vu lnerability of labor in terms of 

productivity; vulnerability of infrastructure in terms of damage; vulnerability of natural 

resources in terms of availability or quality). Some approaches directly target the 

consequences of climate hazards on production (e .g., in terms of downtime or quantity) or 

sales. 

For instance, Carbon Delta focuses on damages and disruption of activities arising on 

operation sites and the downstream value chain. Four Twenty Seven and Carbone 4 focus 

qualitatively on operations and markets but also on the supply chain. Depending on the 

segment of value chain, they can cover for instance physical damage, labor productivity, 

availability of natural resources and climate -sensitivity o f market preferences. Mercer provides 

implicit coverage of the value chain through aggregate physical impacts on the built 

environment and on business interruptions on the one side and through the investment Service provider                        

> Acclimatise Moody’s Investors
> Service WRI Four Twenty
> Seven Carbone 4 Carbon Delta Mercer Ecolab ,Trucost and
> Microsoft
> Approach
> Aware for
> Projects
> Physical Effects of
> Climate Change on
> Sovereign
> Aqueduct –
> Water Risk
> Atlas
> 427 Climate
> Risk Scores CRIS Climate VaR TRIP framework Water Risk
> Monetizer
> Extremes
> Chronic changes
> Landslides
> Floods
> Fires
> Storms
> Temperature
> Drought
> Precipitation
> Temperature
> Precipitation
> Water scarcity
> Sea level rise
> Ice and snow A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks

571 

impact of climate change on natural and material resource distribution/availability on the 

other .14 

When analyzing climate impacts on corporates, the available approaches usually do not 

integrate the consequences of climate hazards on the broader business environment of the 

company. As an exception, Four Twenty Seven includes some indicators about the climate 

resilience of countries as a part of the general business environment, with the perspective that 

such context may influence the resilience of the company. 

It is worth noting that in some instances th e methodologies are not hazard -centric as in the 

case of Mercer. Such methodologies identify impacts from a set of climate hazards instead of 

individual hazards. 

The scope of financial impacts on the companies 

The methodologies that provide qualitative ind icators on climate impacts consider financial 

impacts to some extent even though it is not reflected transparently in the output information. 

Such considerations can guide the choice of indicators that help characterize the level of 

physical climate risks on an entity in a portfolio. 

Some methodologies quantify financial impacts on the entity, on a non -exhaustive set of 

financial parameters (e.g. impacts on production costs; on sales; on asset value). Carbon Delta 

provides cost estimates from asset damages and disruptions in the value chain. Mercer starts 

with estimates of GDP loss from various climate -related hazards and allocates it to different 

sectors, thus producing an indicator of the impact on the company ’s production. 

In all cases, the current method ologies are not integrating complex mechanisms including 

dynamics within the financial system and feedback loops between the real economy and the 

financial system. 

4.2.3 Adaptive capacity 

Adaptive capacity is defined here as the resources that an entity ca n use to deal with the 

consequences of climate hazards and keep working. Adaptive capacity can take the form of 

early warning systems; contingency plans; financial capacity of the company to absorb shocks; 

insurance policies; etc. The adaptive capacity is often addressed for sovereign entities but less 

covered for corporates. This is due largely to the lack of data for analysis. 

Modelling techniques for generating output indicators on impacts 

4.3.1 Quantitative modelling techniques to estimate financial im pacts 

Quantitative estimates of financial impacts at the scale of the entity usually rely on 

vulnerability functions. Carbon Delta provides cost estimates from disruptions in the value 

chain, arising from a sectoral cost function. Based on scientific publ ications in combination 

with information from media reports, Carbon Delta specifies further the vulnerability factors 

at the subsector level. They also provide cost estimates from asset damage with regionally 

calibrated damage functions as detailed by UNEP FI and Carbon Delta (2019) . Mercer uses 

essentially a top -down strategy. The methodology starts from GDP losses simulated with 

damage functions of the FUND IAM. This model calculates impacts in different domains that 

are not necessarily economic sectors. Thus, these impacts are spr ead across economic sectors 

based on expert judgment in order to generate sectoral sensitivities.    

> 14 Detail ed information on the s cope of impacts addressed by each methodology is available in section 2.6 of Hubert et
> el.2018.
> Getting started on Physical climate risk analysis in finance .Chapter 35

572 

It is worth noting that vulnerability functions in IAMs are specified from diverse academic 

studies ( Diaz & Moore, 2017 ). They do not necessarily include spec ific behavior of impacts in 

extreme future climate conditions and the data used to calibrate the damage functions are 

not necessarily forward -looking. 

Carbon Delta and Mercer also quantify financial market impacts on financial securities with 

discounted ca shflow valuation models. Climate impacts can factor in the model through 

correction of the cashflow sequence, or through the correction of the risk premium into the 

discounting factor (which integrates risk in terms of return volatility). 

4.3.2 Other techn iques 

Some methodologies use correlation matrices between hazards and types of impacts. These 

are based on different information sources, including potentially published sources or expert 

judgment. This work can help define the entity ’s sensitivity factors . This can also be used to 

prioritize material issues to be analyzed. For instance, Carbone 4 (2017) uses correlation 

between hazards, economic impacts along the value chain and sector of activity to help 

prioritize data search accordingly. 

Approaches with analyses at the appropriate granularity 

As discussed in section 2, the appropriate granularity and specificity of analyses depend on 

the type of financed entity. Sovereigns can be analyzed essentially with macro information. 

The analysis of companies or p rojects requires an additional level of granularity and specificity 

on many aspects, which results in intensive data needs. The case of corporate entities creates 

a greater data challenge since financial institutions have limited access to corporate level data. 

Concerning the case of corporate entities, each service provider makes its own efforts 

regarding the granularity of data and parameters. As summarized in  Figure 35 -6, big -data 

strategies contribute mostly to identifying exposures from operations to markets in the value 

chain. They provide company specific data, at the scale of latitude and longitude coordinates 

or on a wider scale (e.g., location of sales at country scale). The exposure of supply -chain 

networks is addressed only by Four Twenty Seven and at sectoral scales. Sensitivities are also 

calculated at sectoral scales on limited perimeters by the service providers. At this stage, no 

data is us ed on adaptive capacity. 

Figure 35 -6 Selected approaches and granularity of input data for corporate micro 

analysis 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analys is in finance Supply chain 

Operations 

and assets 

Logistics 

Markets 

Exposure Sensitivity Adaptive capacity 

Sectoral per country 

(if included )

Some efforts on big 

data:           

> ▪(x,y )coordinates of assets
> or sales
> ▪company specific data on
> wi der scale
> ▪Little link to revenue
> contribution

Sectoral data 

on fragmentary ,

implicit or 

opaque 

perimeter 

No data included A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks 

573 

While Mercer ’s approach to corporate analysis is essentially top -down, service providers 

generally provide hybrid scale analyses. For instance, Four Twenty Seven ’s corporate analysis 

integrates the macro climate resilience of the country where the company sells its products, 

in addition to the other micro and sectoral qualitative indicators (However no public 

information is available on how these indicators combine) .15 

Forward -looking analysis on climate hazards and the evolution of human 

systems 

Most approaches analyze physical climate risks over future horizons. This would require 

account ing for the uncertainties on how climate conditions and socio -economic behaviors will 

evolve. While this usually comes down to the evolution of climate conditions with appropriate 

use of scenario analysis, this is not the case for the evolution of socio -economic behaviors. 

Figure 35 -7 Sel ected approaches and forward -looking analysis 

Source: Authors, after Hubert et al. 2018. Getting started on Physical climate risk 

analysis in finance 

4.5.1 Exploring the evolution of climate hazards 

Except for Moody ’s Investors Service, the approaches a nalyze future hazards with climate 

scenario analysis on variable time horizons ranging from the next 15 years to 2100. 

Most approaches focusing on the longer term analyze several up -to -date IPCC climate 

scenarios. They take as input different trajectories of future GHG emissions broadly used in 

academic research. This is recommended since future GHG emissions can make a large 

difference on climate conditions in distant horizons. 

One approach produces climate scenarios as a part of a broader simulation from an Integrated 

Assessment Model (IAM). As opposed to the climate models used for IPCC ’s scenarios, the   

> 15 For more examples see the s ynthe sis in section 2.8.4 and detailed analysis in annex to Hubert et al. 2018.
> Getting started
> on Physical climate risk analysis in finance .Chapter 35

574 

IAM generates climate data through simplified equation that translates a GHG trajectory into 

a climate hazard. The GHG trajectory is also a hypothetical construct by the service provider. 

One approach focusing on the short term also makes use of “trend scenarios ” that extrapolate 

past weather events onto a 15 -year horizon. However, this methodology does not account for 

potentially unprecedented combination s of hazards possibly in concentrated timeline and on 

different key locations affecting a financed entity. It does not account either for fluctuations 

arising from natural variability in the climate system. 

4.5.2 Exploring the evolution of socio -economic b ehaviors 

Beside the influence of human -caused GHG emissions on climate hazards, socio -economic 

systems may be more or less affected by the resulting impacts depending on their future 

development choices that modify their own exposure, vulnerability and ada ptability. Societies 

may even undergo structural changes in the future, for instance in relation to climate impacts 

or the transition towards a low -carbon economy. Such evolutions may also deserve scenario -

based analyses, for instance using a range of impa ct scenarios or adaptation scenarios. 

However, the current methodologies adopt essentially a historical perspective on the behavior 

of socio -economic systems. 

Conclusion: limitations in current approaches 

The approaches analyzed in this chapter are pionee ring efforts to provide financial institutions 

with decision -useful information on their exposures to physical climate risks. However, these 

approaches also faced significant limitations as they stood in 2018 when the authors reviewed 

them for the ClimINVE ST project. 

1. Limited scope of analysis. The approaches are insufficiently addressing network effects of 

climate impacts in both the real economy and the financial sector as well as potential systemic 

risks. Most approaches analyzing climate impacts on co mpanies insufficiently address the 

macro -economic consequences of climate hazards. The scope of impacts on company ’s value 

chains is also patchy on certain approaches while the others cover a broader scope but this 

comes at the expense of the separability of information per specific types of impacts. 

2. Limited consideration of entities ’ specific characteristics due to heavy data requirements. 

Approaches analyzing impacts on companies require a large amount of company -specific data. 

The approaches still fac e difficulties obtaining the data on locations of production sites and 

partners that are key contributors to the benefits of the company. Adaptive capacity is not 

accounted for due to the lack of data. Sensitivities are still approached at sectoral level a nd 

there is a need for empirical evidence to make them more precise. Forward -looking approach 

could also be enhanced to anticipate how counterparties ’ behaviors will evolve and change 

their adaptation to climate hazards. 

3. Limited transparency. Most appro aches still lack transparency on core aspects of the 

methodology such as the characteristics of some databases and the sensitivity of entities that 

are exposed to climate hazards. This is partly because the approaches are provided by 

commercial vendors. He nce, the quality of information is not totally ensured. Financial actors 

consider that transparency is a key requirement for them to use this information for their 

decisions ( Bruin et al., 2019 ). 

4. Limited compatibility with decision -making at financial institutions. There are 

discrepancies between some characteristics of physical climate risk information and decision -

making processes at financial institutions. Some approaches provide information on long -term 

impacts that is not relevant for day -to -day op erations at financial institutions. They also A Review of Methodologies Analyzing Physical Climate Risks 

575 

explore the uncertainties on future climate conditions and socio -economic behaviors as well 

as secular changes that financial models do not properly integrate. In addition, data intensity 

combined with little d ata availability make these approaches difficult to replicate on an array 

of large portfolios. Further research is needed so that financial institutions can make a better 

use of physical climate risk information ( Dépoues et al., 2019 ). Chapter 35 

576 

# Bibliography 

Asian Development Bank. (2016). Project climate risk assessment and management -

Guangxi Regional Cooperation and Integration Promotion Investment Program .

Bruin, K. d., Romain, H., Evain, J., Clapp, C., Dahl, M. S., & Bolt, J. (2019). Physical climate risk: 

Inv estor needs and information gaps. CICERO Report .

Carbon Delta. (2019). Climate Value -at -Risk (VaR) .

Carbone 4. (2017). CRIS - Climate Risk Impact Screening .

Colin, A., Vailles, C., & Hubert, R. (2019). Understanding transition scenarios – Eight steps for 

reading and interpreting these scenarios .

Dépoues, V., Bouchet, V., Cardon, M., & Nicol, M. (2019). Pour une autre approche du risque 

climatique en finance – Tenir pleinement compte des incertitudes .

Diaz, D., & Moore, F. (2017). Quantifying the economic r isks of climate change. Nature 

Climate Change, 7 (11), 774 -782. 

Ecolab. (2017). Water Risk Monetizer - Smart water management for business growth: 

Integrating water risk into business decision making .

Four Twenty Seven, & Deutsche Asset Management. (2017). Measuring Physical Climate Risk 

in Equity Portfolio .

Gassert, F., Luck, M., Landis, M., Reig, P., & Shiao, T. (2014). Aqueduct global maps 2.1: 

Constructing decision -relevant global water risk indicators. World Resources 

Institute , 31. 

Hubert, R., & Cardo na, M. (2018). La finance n’a pas encore pris la mesure des impacts 

climatiques .

Hubert, R., Evain, J., & Nicol, M. (2018). Getting started on physical climate risk analysis in 

finance – Available approaches and the way forward .

IPCC. (2018). Global Warmin g of 1.5◦C - Summary for Policymakers. . Technical Report 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 

Luck, M., Landis, M., & Gassert, F. (2015). Aqueduct water stress projections: decadal 

projections of water supply and demand using CMIP5 GCMs. World Resources 

Institute .

Mercer. (2015). Investing in a time of climate change. London, UK: Mercer International 

Finance Corporation and the UK Department for International Development .

Mercer, & CALStrs. (2016). CALStrs Portfolio Climate Change Risk Assessm ent .

MOODY, S. (2016). Environmental Risks --Sovereigns: How Moody’s Assesses the Physical 

Effects of Climate Change on Sovereign Issuers.  Moody’s Investors Service .

Mora, C., Spirandelli, D., Franklin, E. C., Lynham, J., Kantar, M. B., Miles, W., . . .  Hu nter, C. L. 

(2018). Broad threat to humanity from cumulative climate hazards intensified by 

greenhouse gas emissions. Nature Climate Change, 8 (12), 1062 -1071. 

UNEP FI, & Acclimatise. (2018). Navigating a new climate .

UNEP FI, & Carbon Delta. (2019). Chang ing Course: A Comprehensive Investor Guide to 

Scenario -based Methods for Climate Risk Assessment, in Response to the TCFD .Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

577 

# Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

By

Carbon Trust 1

# Abstract 

Currently, multiple methodologies are available to asses transition risks for financial 

institutions. In this paper we discuss the key characteristics of existing approaches and develop 

a criteria framework to help financial institutions select the most su itable methodologies. The 

criteria are separated into three broad groups: i) General applicability, based on the types of 

transition risks covered, scenarios and outputs; ii) Coverage considerations, based on 

geographies, asset classes, sectors and levels of analysis; iii) Practicality and implementation, 

based on data requirements, integration challenges, costs and development stage of the 

methodologies. We also identify overarching methodological limitations to inform end -users, 

supervisors and methodolog y developers. 

Keywords: transition risk assessment methodology, climate risk for financial institutions, 

methodology selection , methodology review 

# 1 Introduction and purpose of the chapter 

The aim of transition risk assessment is to understand climate -rela ted transition risks in 

relation to other mainstream risks. It also serves to identify, disclose and manage the impact 

of these risks on the underlying business, strategy, and financial planning of a company (TCFD, 

2017a ). Climate -related transition risks, as well as their potential impacts, differ significantly 

across sectors, regions and time horizons. Various transition risk assessment methodologies 

have been developed in response to the challenge of pricing and address ing increasingly 

material transition risks that drive demand from end users and regulators. It is crucial for end 

users to identify their objectives for risk assessment, and prioritise their requirements, given 

the diversity of methodological approaches. 

This chapter presents a discussion of the characteristics of available transition risk assessment 

methodologies as applicable to a variety of financial institutions. Originally based on a 

comprehensive assessment of a sample of methodologies carried out by the Carbon Trust, the 

chapter outlines the key, high -level criteria for different financial institutions to consider when 

selecting an appropriate methodology. The chapter also helps supervisors to take account of 

the constraints and limitations of transi tion risk assessment tools material for financial 

institutions. This can then inform the expectations put in place in supervising financial                   

> 1This chapter is written by Nick Harris, Senior Manager, Green Finance, nick.harris@carbontrust.com; Ben Peel, Consult ant,
> email: ben.peel@carbontrust.com; Tianyue Wu, Analyst, email: tianyue.wu@carbontrust.com; Alp Katalan, Analyst, email:
> alp.katalan@carbontrust.com; Vitaliy Komar, Analyst, email: vitaliy.komar@carbontrust.com; Lijian Zhao, China Country
> Manager, email: lijian.zhao@carbontrust.com; Gina Hall, Global Head of Sustainable Finance, email:
> gina.hall@carbontrust.com. Chapter 36

578 

institutions, helping to build systemic resilience within the constraints of existing 

methodologies. A conceptual fr amework of the criteria is summarised in  Figure 36 -1 below: 

Figure 36 -1 Summary of the key criteria to c onsider when selecting a transition risk 

methodology 

Note: The order of criteria above does not reflect their relative importance or stages 

of analysis. Readers can refer to individual sections independent of order. 

The structure of this chapter reflect s the above high -level criteria groupings: 

• General considerations are the key factors that financial institutions should consider 

when determining their objectives for a risk assessment exercise. 

• Coverage considerations refer to the applicability of different methodologies based 

on a financial institution ’s needs and portfolios. 

• Practicality and implementation refer to the ease of implementation (cost, time and 

effort, systems requirements etc.) of a given methodology. 

This chapter also outlines several key limitations of the current methodological field, and 

suggests avenues for overcoming them. These include incomplete risk coverage, neglecting 

transition risks beyond of the direct operations of counterparties, and inad equate integration 

of risk assessment into internal processes. 

Our conceptual mapping of methodologies and selection criteria are simplified and can be 

further refined. Notably, UNEP FI has previously produced a detailed review of the field, 

categorising a range of existing methodology providers and presenting findings of their own 

pilot (UNEP FI & Carbon Delta, 2019 ). Our simplified approach has been informed by this and 

other similar publications, empirical methodology reviews, and sectoral expertise of the 

authors. 

# 2 General considerations and alignment with needs 

As outlined in the conceptual framework in  Figure 36 -1, the high level characteristics of any 

given methodology include three main criteria: a) types of transition risks covered ; b) types of Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

579 

scenarios used ; c) types of outputs produced. While these characteristics might not always be 

the primary considerations for all financial institutions when considering risk assessment 

implementation, they tackle some of the main aspects of the exercise. Specifically, these 

criteria help the reader to navigate the general landscape of transition risks, better understand 

available climate scenarios, and ty pes of assessment outcomes. 

Figure 36 -2 Criteria for general consideration 

Key takeaways of the section: 

• Transition risks , as defined by the TCFD, include technology, market, reputation, and 

policy and legal risks. The ease of risk assessment can vary according to type of risk, 

for example, policy and technology risks are easier to assess than market, legal and 

reputation ri sks. Not all methodologies cover all types of transition risks. 

• The type of scenario used will depend on whether the financial institution is trying 

to understand its vulnerability to gradual policy and market shifts caused by climate 

change (temperature -based), or whether it is trying to understand the impact from 

a single occurrence (event -based). The number of scenarios available in the risk 

assessment vary by methodology. 

• The outputs produced by existing tools can be quantitative, qualitative, or a 

combination of both. This will be largely dependent on the types of transition risks 

assessed, and can be adjusted to cater to specific needs of a financial institution. 

Types of transition risks 

The TCFD has identified four overarching categories for tra nsition risk that all companies, 

including financial institutions, should consider. However, not all methodologies cover all types 

of transition risks. The most common transition risks assessed are policy risk (often via an 

assumed carbon price) and techno logy risk (often via assumed technology cost trajectories). 

Impacts from legal risk and reputation risk are likely omitted from methodologies because they 

are harder to quantify (UNEP FI & Carbon Delta, 2019 ), however this is not to say they cannot 

and wil l not be integrated into future iterations of risk assessments.  Figure 36 -3 lists the types 

of transition risks, as defined by the TCFD, which methodolo gies may assess. Chapter 36 

580 

Figure 36 -3 Types of climate -related transition risks 

Source: adapted from TCFD (2017a) 

Financial institutions should select methodologies that best cover the risks that are most 

material to their counterparties and portfolios, as well as meet their objectives for undertaking 

the transition risk assessment in the first place (e.g. whether it is for reporting their transition 

risks to regulators, or simply understanding which of their counterparties are most exposed to 

transition risks). 

The TCFD also provides supplemental guidance for the financial sector in considering transition 

risks (TCF D, 2017a ). For example, the TCFD recommends banks to consider characterising their 

climate -related risks in the context of traditional banking industry risk categories such as credit 

risk, market risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk. Similarly, they recommend insurance 

companies to assess transition risks resulting from a reduction in insurable interest due to a 

decline in value, changing energy costs, implementation of carbon regulation, and liability risks 

from a possible increase in litigation. Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

581 

Types of scenarios used 

Box 2: Low -carbon transition scenarios 

A scenario describes a path of development leading to a particular outcome. They are 

intended to highlight core elements of a possible future and to draw attention to the key 

factors that will drive future developments (TCFD, 2017c ). Different scenarios allow financial 

institutions to conduct ‘what -if ’ analyses of how different transition pathways could affect 

their assets and/or portfolios, and to explore the resilience and vulnerabilities of a firm ’s

business model to a range of ou tcomes. 

Two types of scenarios that financial institutions could consider when selecting an 

appropriate methodology, as identified by Oliver Wyman (2019 ), are: 

• Temperature -based scenarios : these often describe a smooth and orderly 

transition to a low carb on economy, and have a long -term view. However, they 

can also describe a disorderly transition where stringent policies kick off at a 

later date to meet climate commitments. Temperature -based scenarios are 

comprehensive and holistic scenarios analysing how the world might develop, 

and the corresponding impacts that these pathways have on average global 

temperatures and climate change. 

• Event -based scenarios : these are often used to illustrate aspects of an abrupt 

or a disorderly transition to a low -carbon e conomy, and take a short -term 

outlook when compared to temperature -based scenarios. Event -based 

scenarios focus on the potential impacts of one triggering event, such as a 

sudden change in government policy or the introduction of a disruptive energy 

techno logy. 

Currently, industry at large is increasingly looking into longer -term, orderly, temperature -

based scenarios . This is in -line with the TCFD ’s recommendation that organisations use a 

2°C or lower scenario in addition to two or three other scenarios mos t relevant to their 

circumstances (TCFD, 2017b ). Though event -based scenarios are not common in transition 

risk assessment methodologies at the moment, they may be relevant to consider as 

supervisors are interested in abrupt and disorderly transition scena rios, which are likely to 

result in higher stress for financial entities as they do not provide the time horizon for a 

planned movement out of exposed sectors to lower carbon assets. 

Multiple methodologies look at a range of temperature -based scenarios – from a smooth 

and orderly transition keeping global temperature rise to 1.5°C, to overshooting 2 -3°C warming 

through the implementation of current national pledges and objectives , or even ‘no -additional 

policy ’ scenarios exceeding 4°C of warming. In add ition, some methodologies can also 

compute implied temperature alignment of portfolios according to the collated total emissions 

and/or future decarbonisation plans. 

Temperature -based scenarios are underpinned by models which translate underlying 

assumptio ns around the climate, the economy, and societies into scenario outputs. For 

transition risk assessments, the most relevant types of underlying models used in scenarios 

are: Chapter 36 

582 

• Sector -specific models : energy system models (e.g. looking at interlinked energy a nd 

transport systems) and land -use models (e.g. looking at agriculture and forestry) 

explore how different economic sectors evolve based on changing policy, technology 

and market conditions. Popular developers of scenarios using these models are the 

Intern ational Energy Agency (IEA) and the International Institute for Applied Systems 

Analysis (IIASA) respectively. 

• Macroeconomic models : these are often computable general equilibrium (CGE) 

models and cover various macroeconomic variables, including an econo my ’s

resources (e.g. capital and labour), sectoral composition, and international trade. 

They look at how changes in one part of the economy affect the whole system. 

Examples of developers of macroeconomic models for transition risk assessments 

are Vivid E conomics and E3ME. 

• Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs): consider the socioeconomic factors that 

affect the earth systems to determine how these then affect human welfare. These 

are based on the best available science and underpin policymaking and the 

Inte rgovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) ’s assessments, particularly, IAMs 

aligned to the use of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) will be used for the 

upcoming IPCC assessment. Scenarios using IAMs are developed by IIASA, the 

Potsdam Institute for Climate Research (PIK), and the Joint Global Change Research 

Institute (JGCRI), among others. 

Sector -specific models produce scenarios that can be used for transition risk assessments, 

whereas IAMs are often used when assessing both transition and physic al climate risk (UNEP 

FI & Carbon Delta, 2019 ). Other types of scenario models include climate models (to simulate 

the response of the climate to GHG emissions) and hazard models (to determine the risk of 

hazards like droughts, floods, and hurricanes based on different climatic conditions). These are 

relevant for assessing physical climate risk rather than transition risk. 

Some methodologies allow the user to run any chosen scenario, while others offer a pre -

determined set . Using multiple scenarios allows for an assessment of the portfolio against 

various possible temperature goals, technological trajectories and national contributions. 

Therefore, methodologies allowing for multiple scenarios can help financial institutions to 

develop a better understanding of their exposure to transition risks. However, using varying 

scenarios can also make the comparability of climate related disclosures across institutions 

challenging. Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

583 

Box 3. The difference between scenario alignment and risk assessment 

It is important to note that the assessment of climate -related transition risk is a separate 

task to aligning operational and financial activities to mitigation and climate resilience goals, 

such as the Paris Agreement goals, which have the obje ctive of “holding the increase in the 

global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre -industrial levels and pursuing 

efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre -industrial levels ” (UNFCCC, 

2015 ). A portfolio that is aligned to a 2° pathway is one in which the counterparties, 

collectively, are developing in a way that is consistent with a 2° transition. As such they are 

likely to avoid being caught out by policies, are bringing low carbon technologies to market, 

and responding to clim ate change driven market signals, which are the hallmarks of 

transition risk exposure. There is still some divergence though as a 2° alignment focuses only 

on one transition scenario and does not quantify the potential downside risk of the 

transition, inst ead only identifying whether counterparties are on the right path. 

There is strong correlation between those companies that are not aligned to the 2° 

transition and those who are most exposed to transition risks, due to their lack or readiness 

for a low carbon transition. An aligned portfolio is, on balance, investing in counterparties 

who are already in the process of low carbon transition, and therefore have a likely lower 

level of transition risk exposure – there is not perfect correlation though, as some sectors 

ultimately will carry greater financial risk on an absolute basis. Therefore, even financial 

institutions aligned with a 1.5°C scenario need to undertake further transition risk 

assessments. 

Output of assessments 

The types of outputs produ ced by existing transition risk assessment tools can vary 

considerably. In the broadest sense, risk assessment outputs can be separated into: 

• Quantitative outputs : these include metrics such as projected changes in EBITDA, 

VaR, as well as CapEx and OpEx impacts. 

• Qualitative outputs : these can be graphical, such as risk prioritisation heat -maps, as 

well as descriptive or numerical, such as discrete scale risk scores. 

• Combined outputs : some methodology providers can use a combination of the two 

formats, e.g. producing an initial qualitative screening with a subsequent 

quantitative deep dive. 

As highlighted previously, transition risk is not affecting portfolios and counterparties in a 

uniform way. A commercial bank, for instance, might be primarily interes ted in quantifying 

medium -term risks to its utility sector loans, and would therefore look for a methodology that 

produces a climate -related Probability of Default, or Expected Shortfall metric. On the other 

hand, a pension fund in the initial stages of ri sk assessment might favour a qualitative mapping 

of their total portfolio by asset class, in order to identify potential risk hotspots for subsequent 

quantitative analysis, or identify sectors for direct investee engagement. In line with these 

various user demands, risk assessment tools by design produce various outcomes: some can 

act as screening tools whereas others quantify the financial impacts of transition risks. Per 

TCFD guidance, effective disclosures on implications of transition risk can be both q uantitative 

and qualitative, depending on the institution and economic sector in question. Chapter 36 

584 

# 3 Coverage considerations 

Despite the existence of more than 40 methodologies on assessing climate -related transition 

risks, many of them are designed for specific ta rget portfolios and users. No one methodology 

covers all regions, all types of financial instruments, and all industry sectors exhaustively. These 

considerations are summarised in  Figure 36 -4 below: 

Figure 36 -4 Criteria for coverage considerations 

Key takeaways of the section: 

• Geographic location of counterparties 2 and their supply chains is a major source of 

transition risk, and users should conceptually determine its potential portfolio 

significance before choosing the appropriate methodology. 

• The breadth of asset class coverage has been a clear differentiator bet ween 

methodologies, and further asset classes are being added on an ongoing basis. 

• Sector -specific transition risks can be addressed by single -sector focused 

methodologies as well as cross -sectoral methodologies. A suitable methodology 

usually covers the majority of a financial institution ’s sector exposure. 

• Effects of transition risks manifest on different levels: from individual physical assets 

to whole economic sectors of counterparties. Thus, tools provide various level of 

analysis , using bottom -up or top -down or both approaches to capture various 

aspects of transition risk. Choosing the right level of output is essential for effective 

implementation of the results of the risk assessment. The choice of analysis level 

depends on objective of the assessm ent and requires different input data granularity, 

which will be further elaborated in the next section Practicality and Implementation .

Geographic coverage 

Location matters to transition risk analysis because each location has unique policy 

requirements , technology development level, market traits and trends, as well as specific 

consumer and investor behaviours. For example, certain technology that is still regarded as 

“clean ” in South -east Asia region might not be acceptable or bankable in the European Union 

region (“ EU ”). Therefore, for financial institutions with international asset exposure, choosing 

a tool developed for the right geography is fundamental.      

> 2This chapter used the definition of UNEP FI on t he term counterparty . It refer sto “entities that investors, through their
> portfolios, have exposure to and that are more directly affected by climate -related risk. These range from countries to
> companies and individual facilities/projects ”. Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies

585 

Different tools ’ geographic risk coverage provides various levels of granularity and generally 

varies in three ways: risks at global level, regional level (e.g. EU) or country -specific level. Often, 

a methodology will offer a mix of two levels, and some methodologies provide analysis on all 

three. When a financial institution selects a methodology, it is critical to answer the following 

four questions: 

• Where are your counterparties ’ activities predominantly located? 

• Where will their future activities be located? 

• Are key sectors driven by global trends or local trends? 

• Does it matter for your portf olio to differentiate risks at a country -specific level? 

The hypothetical example below showcases the differences in geographic coverage: 

Tool A provides regional -level data and limited country -level data. This framework covers 

broader regions like EU, an d some country -level analysis for Germany and India. Tool B can 

assess data over 58 different countries globally and greater country specification is offered in 

sectors which require further differentiation. 

If a financial institution is exposed to EU -bas ed equity assets and also has significant holdings 

in real assets in India, both methodologies above could be a good fit, as EU countries share a 

similar climate -related policy framework, and any more granular coverage at European 

country -level would be le ss necessary in this case. 

Asset class coverage 

Given the wide range of financial instruments across financial institutions ’ portfolios, asset 

class applicability is an important practical consideration for selecting an appropriate 

methodology. Some methodologies were designed specifically for certain e nd user portfolios, 

e.g. bank loan portfolios focusing on credit risk, or project finance, focusing on market risk. 

Others offer a broader range of instrument coverage. As such, financial institutions need to 

be mindful of each methodology ’s asset class c overage in relation to their specific needs. 

Figure 36 -5 Examples for asset class coverage Chapter 36 

586 

As shown in  Figure 36 -5, if Asset Management Firm B mostly invests in equity and fixed 

income, Tool I could be a suitable option. On the other hand, this tool may not be suitable for 

Commercial Bank A , which holds more assets in cash and real asset debt. 

Lastly, it is worth pointing out that instrument coverage is generally an evolving variable as 

many methodologies are increasingly adding to the number of instruments they cover. 

Sectoral coverage 

This assessment reflects the coverage provided by methodologies for a financial institution ’s

sectoral exposure. Climate -related transition risks vary across economic sectors. For example, 

high risk energy and resource intensive sectors, such as power, tra nsport and industry (cement, 

iron and steel in particular) have traditionally received the most attention from tool developers. 

Other sectors widely covered include, but are not limited to, real estate and other 

infrastructure. Some tools can be adapted to almost all sectors after bespoke collaboration 

with tool developers. 

It is also noteworthy that different methodologies cover sectors at different levels of 

granularity. For example, while two methodologies might both cover transport, one might 

analyse a t the whole transport sector level, while the other breaks the sector down into 

automotive, aviation and shipping sub -sectors. 

Some of the reasons for this variation are suggested below: 

• Underlying scenarios used 

• Expertise of a developer (e.g. developer s having existing intellectual property in 

infrastructure) 

• Intrinsic variable significance of transition risk across sectors (e.g. tool developers 

tend to prioritise analysis on those with higher perceived risks) 

• Reference materials (e.g. some tools define sectors according to various taxonomies 

but others take a practical approach in defining sectors according to the target 

audience ’s internal segmentation) Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

587 

Level of analysis 

Transition risk exposure can manifest at various 

levels, from total portfolio, through to the 

individual physical assets of a counterparty (as 

shown in  Figure 36 -6). The UNEP FI ’s Investor 

Guide in response to TCFD recommendations 

(UNEP FI & Carbon Delta, 2019 ), notes that risks 

tend to materialise at the physical asset level, 

subsequently translating to a counterparty and 

later portfolio impact. Nevertheless, aggregating 

risk exposure on a portfolio level can be a desired 

output for financial institutions, allowing 

informed strategic decision making a nd disclosure. 

Existing tool providers often offer a combined 

approach, for example informing portfolio level 

analysis with asset level data, or executing asset 

level quantitative analysis after portfolio level risk 

hotspot identification. The results of different 

scopes of analysis vary in their applicability among 

financial institutions. For instance, identifying 

drivers of transition risks at a physical asset level 

could help active asset owners inform their 

engagement strategies with investee companies ,

while portfolio level insights would enable 

shareholder disclosure. Assessment granularity also has practical implications, such as data 

requirements and costs, further addressed in section 1.3. 

While the level of analysis relates to the type of outputs produced, it should be noted that the 

underlying methodologies can take different analytical approaches: 

# 4 Practicality and implementation 

This section deals with the practicality and ease of implementation of risk assessment 

methodologies. These criteria are important primarily at the implementation stage of the risk 

Box 4. Top -down and bottom -up approac hes 

Tool providers currently can take either one of these approaches , or a combination of both: 

• A top -down assessment typically looks at portfolio impacts as a result of either 

country -specific or sector -specific variables. 

• A bottom -up approach will individually assess each counterparty or asset in a 

portfolio, before integrating the results to provide a portfolio -wide viewpoint. 

Some tools will, for example, only provide a top -down view on listed companies, while 

others will have a capability t o deliver a bottom -up view on physical assets of all listed 

portfolio companies. On the other hand, methodologies might factor in firms ’ adaptative 

capacity in bottom -up assessment, but then find it challenging to apply the conclusions at 

the sector or the portfolio level .

Figure 36 -6 Investor risk expo sure Chapter 36 

588 

assessment process and have direct implications for the exercise ’s feasibility.  Figure 36 -7

below summarises the criteria: 

Figure 36 -7 Practicality and implementation criteria 

Key takeaways of the s ection: 

• For certain asset classes, e.g. listed equity, it is possible to carry out insightful 

transition risk assessment with minimum data inputs . However, there is a trade -off 

between input data granularity and level of bespoke insights on risk. 

• Important trade -offs exist between simplicity and applicability of risk assessment, 

and the level of time and internal integration effort needed. 

• Other practical considerations include the cost structure (ranging from open -source 

to bespoke consulting pricing) of tool offerings, as well as their development stage ,

given the dynamic nature of the space. 

Input data requirements 

The level of input data required depends on the depth of analysis and would normally include 

financial asset level or portfolio level data. T here is a trade -off between the amount of input 

data and the level of insights gleaned from the analysis. The less data financial institutions 

input into the tool (either due to the lack of internal data system consolidation, or simply 

because of lack of r eporting from the counterparty), the more generic the output analysis will 

be. Therefore, financial institutions can opt to provide less data if they simply want a snapshot 

view of portfolio transition risks, or alternatively, provide granular data for bes poke in -depth 

analysis. 

Typically, general data requirements include portfolio breakdown, such as security names, 

International Securities Identification Number (ISIN), total asset value, and currency. However, 

the data required will vary by asset class. For example, in addition to the above inputs, equ ity 

portfolios may require portfolio weights. 

More granular data (such as asset geography, carbon emissions data, and technology data) 

may be required for a project finance portfolio, or in the case of a deep -dive analysis of 

transition risks. This could also include detailed balance sheet data, as well as profit and loss 

data at the individual counterparty or asset level. When granular data is not available, top -

down, rather than bottom -up, approaches can be applied (see  Box 4 for further reference). 

Some methodologies may use proprietary asset -level datasets, significantly reducing data 

requirements from the end user. However, these datasets are often applicable only to large 

listed entities, and therefore may not be appropriate for alternative asset classes. Also, in this Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

589 

case the quality of transition -risk assessment will be dependent on the accuracy of the third -

party dataset, rather than the interna lly collected data. 

Internal integration 

The ideal tool, besides meeting all relevant requirements, would be easily incorporated into 

end users ’ risk management practices and general decision -making procedures. This is a 

challenging task, given the dive rse levels of internal process complexity across financial 

institutions. Below this chapter outlines two common trade -offs to consider in terms of 

implementation complexity: 

Trade -off 1: time efficiency vs. depth of analysis 

The time frame of an assessmen t process will depend on portfolio composition, data 

availability and complexity of results expected. Some tools are available online, which makes 

it possible to assess portfolios relatively quickly. However, this type of general tool likely offers 

less fl exibility for users to include tailored variables. Some tools, on the other hand, might take 

up to six months to analyse an institution ’s portfolio in detail, but once the screening session 

is completed, the assessment is less time intensive and the result is more detailed. 

Trade -off 2: tool feasibility vs. applicability to internal stakeholders 

A specific tool may not produce easy to use outcomes for a range of internal divisions within 

an institution. For example, certain tools are explicitly targeted at commercial banking risk 

management, while others cater to the needs of equity portfolio managers. This may make 

results less helpful for another type of financial institution, or even different internal divisions, 

requiring additional work for refining da ta and output types. It is critical to ensure the outputs 

are ‘translatable ’ and can be used broadly across an organisation. In general, climate risk 

assessment data can be used for strategic asset allocation, stock selection, sector risk 

identification, due diligence, internal buy -in, external engagement, monitoring and 

compliance, disclosure and reporting, and more, depending on end users ’ needs. 

In the selection of tools, having a clear objective is at the essence of making the right trade -

off. The obje ctive might vary from targeting specific types of risks to particular level of analysis 

to be achieved. External factors such as pressure from investors and regulatory disclosure 

requirements, or internal incentives such as group ’s long -term strategy and r isk appetite will 

lead end users to make different trade -offs. 

In summary, it is in the interest of the end user to select a tool that aligns the best to their goal, 

while also requiring relatively less additional effort in implementation (e.g., a tool th at can 

produce the most flexible output, which can be used across a financial institution ’s various 

business units and with a range of stakeholders) .

Other considerations 

Cost structure 

Costs of transition risk assessment tools on the market can vary wide ly depending on types of 

outcome and general methodological approach. Tool developers may also provide tiered 

access to their product, e.g. ‘basic ’ or ‘premium ’ services at different prices. In general, their 

cost structure fall s into the following categor ies: 

• Free: some tools are free to use and may be hosted online or may be available as 

open -source spreadsheet models. However, it is important to note that these are 

often in a pilot phase, or when a provider is looking to attract initial customers. Chapter 36 

590 

Theref ore, the cost of the tool during this development stage may not be 

representative of its full cost when it is eventually rolled out to a wider client base. 

• Licensing fee: licensing a tool will scale in price depending on the assessment 

undertaken. The cost of licensing depends on a variety of factors such as: number 

and size of assets/portfolios, number of sectors, frequency of analysis, granularity of 

the financial risk, and number of metrics used. Moreover, there may be additional 

costs related to the lev el of customisation required, quality assurance, and data 

updates. 

• Consulting services : some bespoke tools cannot be licensed and the cost will be 

structured as a consulting fee for implementation, with a scaling cost similar to that 

of licensing models. 

Development stage 

The current market for transition risk assessment methodologies is still quite young, but 

nevertheless a rapidly growing one. Tools and methods will have various maturity levels, from 

research and pilot stage to established commercial o ffering. The development stage is 

therefore important for practical implementation of a given methodology in the context of 

immediate applicability for financial institutions ’ portfolios. End users are also advised to 

monitor the space and contribute to to ol and method development through pilot participation. 

Similarly, the use of climate scenarios by the private sector and financial institutions is a 

relatively new phenomenon. Scenarios are continuously adjusted and developed to adjust to 

the needs of the sector, given that their initial audience has historically been scientists and 

policymakers. 

# 5 General limitations 

In a relatively short period of time the market for transition risk assessment methodologies 

has grown rapidly, catering to the needs of a wide range of financial institutions. The space is 

very dynamic, and several tools and methodologies are still in ear ly stage development. 

Transition risk assessment is intrinsically a complex process, and some key limitations can be 

identified. These limitations do not relate to any one specific tool or its methodology, but 

rather highlight some of the systemic consider ations for effective implementation of transition 

risk assessment. 

Key limitations and suggested avenues for addressing them are given below: 

• Scenario analysis rarely addresses whether the counterparty can pass the cost of the 

transition to consumers. The adaptive ability of the counterparty is one the direct 

determinants of risk, and should therefore be explored. Counterparties ’ strategies 

developed to transform and adapt themselves to the transition pathways are 

examples of adaptive capacity indicators t hat should be addressed. Increased TCFD -

aligned disclosures by counterparties, as well as upskilling of financial institution 

analyst teams are examples of positive developments to tackle the issue. 

• Drivers of transition risk currently covered across metho dologies are often limited to 

policy, quantified through a carbon price variable. There is still low coverage of legal 

and reputational risk drivers, and policy risk coverage is yet to expand beyond just a 

carbon price to include wider climate policy lands cape factors such as minimum 

standards, energy regulations, emissions caps and technology phase outs. Transition Risk Assessment Methodologies 

591 

• Integration of risk assessment results into a financial institution ’s actual risk 

management process requires strategic commitment from end users, not onl y

output adjustment from the tool provider. 

• The risk assessment approach might focus on specific financial risk categories or 

sectors, preventing a systemic approach to the exercise. For instance, scope 2 and 3 

emissions are often excluded from counterparty analysis, making conclusions less 

coherent for several sectors, such for example, retail. Leveraging financial research 

capabilities and expanding beyond simple carbon metrics is imperative. 

• Standardised counterparty reporting at high levels of granularity is essential as an 

input for risk assess ment. Forward looking and TCFD compliant disclosures have only 

recently started to pick up, and consistent coverage across sectors will be an 

important facilitator of effective risk assessments. Multiple national and 

international level policy programmes t o support this are currently being rolled out, 

such as the Bank of England stress testing, Article 173 in France, and the EU Non -

financial Reporting Directive. 

• Quantitative methodologies may still face some fundamental challenges such as 

extending the conv entional modelling time horizon from short to medium and long 

term. Similarly, building forward looking climate change transition risk models based 

on historical data can be challenging. This time horizon misalignment is also one of 

the key barriers to wid er integration of transition risk to general financial risk 

management frameworks. Chapter 36 

592 

# Bibliography 

TCFD. (2017a). Implementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related 

Financial Disclosures .

TCFD. (2017b). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures .

TCFD. (2017c). Technical Supplement: The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -

Related Risks and Opportunities .

UNEP FI, & Carbon Delta. (2019). Changing Course: A Comprehensive Investor Guide to 

Scenario -based Methods for Climate Risk Assessment, in Response to the TCFD .

Paris Agreement, (2015). 

Wyman, O. (2019). Climate Change: Managing a New Financial Risk .Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical Risks 

593 

# Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical 

# Risks 

By 

CICERO 1

# Abstract 

Climate and energy scenarios are being used in new ways to assess financial risks. While 

current policies seem to point towards 3°C warming by the end of the century, higher and 

lower temperature scenarios need to be considered for their potential impact on physical and 

transition risk. However, improvements need to be made in the availability of near -term risk -

based scenario information for financial decision makers, and in the comparability of reported 

scenario information from companies. 

Keyword s: scenarios, climate risk, physical risk, transition risk, finance 

# 1 Introduction 

The Paris Agreement was a call to action for policy makers, businesses, and financial actors. 

The role of the financial sector is critical to accelerating a transition to a low carbon society. 

First, the financial sector must play an important role by redirecting capital towards low carbon 

and climate -resilient infrastructure in support of the Paris Agreement. Second, the financial 

sector must manage risk in a dynamic climate policy landscape and with the intensification of 

physical climate impacts. 

Climate change can affect firms ’ profitability and investment portfolio returns via regulati ons 

that imply carbon prices and climate -related damages from flooding or other physical impacts 

(Figure 37 -1). Investment funds, pension funds, and bank loans can all be exposed to climate 

risks. Clear messaging from financial authorities have shifted attention to the financial risk that 

can result f rom climate risks. The framing of climate change in terms of potential impact on 

financial bottom lines brought climate change onto the radar screen of many financial actors. 

Two different types of climate risk that can have financial impact have been deli neated by the 

Task Force on Climate -Related Financial Disclosures ( TCFD, 2017 ): 

Transition risks associated to the transition to a low carbon economy, which are dependent on 

scenario analysis and the speed of political, societal and technological changes a s well as the 

associated legal risks; and 

Physical risks associated with physical impacts of the changing climate, some of which are 

already occurring and resulting in significant costs, such as extreme precipitation. In the short -                  

> 1This chapter is written by Christa Clapp ,Research Director on climate finance at CICERO, email:
> christa .clapp@cicero.oslo.no ;Glen Peters Research Director on climate mitigation at CICERO ;and Alexander Berg, Senior
> Advisor on climate finance at CICERO .Chapter 37

594 

term, physical risks are largely independent of the climate scenario, and other ongoing 

projects address physical risk ( CICERO, 2019 ). 

Figure 37 -1 Scope of climate risk and financial impacts 

Source: ( CICERO, 2018 )

Climate scenari o stress -testing features strongly in recommendations from financial and 

regulatory authorities to financial institutions and companies. The TCFD recommends 

disclosure for all financial institutions and companies on “the resilience of an organization ’s

str ategy, taking into consideration different climate -related scenarios, including a 2° Celsius or 

lower scenario ” (TCFD, 2017 ). Regulatory developments in France and at the European Union 

(EU) level echo the focus on climate risk disclosure and climate scena rio stress -testing. France 

became the first country to mandate climate risk disclosure for financial institutions in 2015 

via Article 173. The current draft of the EU Sustainable Finance Action Plan proposes 

mandatory disclosure of a similar nature. 

This c hapter provides an overview of the landscape of scenarios for assessing transition and 

physical risks. We highlight that with today ’s policy ambitions, an average global warming of 

approximately 3°C is the most likely future scenario but note that a range of scenarios is 

necessary to stress -test against the transition to possible futures. To analyze physical risk in 

the next decade, other tools are required given that we have locked -in greenhouse gas (GHG) 

emissions in the atmosphere already that will have consequences for near term impacts. Going 

forward, financial decision -makers could benefit from more consistent near -term risk -based 

information from scenarios. 

# 2 Scenarios in transition risk assessment 

Scenarios are coherent futures, each with advantages a nd disadvantages. They are used to 

explore key uncertainties, not to predict the future. There is no one ‘correct ’ scenario. Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical Risks 

595 

There are many ways to get to an emissions or temperature target depending on 

socioeconomic and modelling assumptions. To reach the target in the Paris Agreement of 2°C 

or lower, there are many different pathways, however, all 2°C scenarios require rapid 

decarbonization in the short term, net -zero emissions between 2050 and 2100, and net -

negative emissions thereafter – such as with af forestation or by using bioenergy with carbon 

capture and storage (CCS). 

What are the different types of climate and energy scenarios used in stress -

testing? 

In practice, climate scenario stress -testing may involve using scenarios from very different 

type s of models. The choice of modelling platform and the underlying technological and socio -

economic assumptions can have significant impact on the scenario outcomes. Two commonly 

used model types are: 

Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) link various aspects of the economic, energy, land, and 

climate system to assess future emissions pathways under various types of climate policy. 

Some models may focus on specific aspects of the system (e.g., energy), while others may 

broadly cover all activities leading to emissions IAMs are useful to examine potential transition 

impacts, and it is possible to explore hundreds of alternate futures. 

Climate models have a detailed representation of the climate system, translating emissions or 

concent rations into climate variables such as temperature and precipitation. These models are 

useful for physical impacts, and it is possible to explore only a few representative scenarios 

due to the computational time. 

Transition impacts can be examined using sc enarios of socioeconomic and technical systems, 

with emission pathways changing with policy choices. It is possible to focus on specific aspects 

of society (e.g., the energy system) or to consider the interlinkages between systems (e.g., 

energy and land). The International Energy Agency (IEA) ’s World Energy Outlook (WEO) is 

perhaps the most known and publicized energy -system model with detailed annual releases. 

There are a range of other IAMs, often run by research groups, that generate scenarios across 

soc ioeconomic systems (energy, land, and agriculture). These research groups often cooperate 

to develop model inter -comparison projects, where many IAMs are used to address the same 

research question to assess uncertainties. These IAMs, either individually or in inter -

comparison projects, generate thousands of scenarios that are often compiled into databases 

that are assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. These scenarios are 

developed continuously, but major assessments are released every 5 -7 years. 

Physical impacts can be examined using the output of climate system models. Because of 

computational constraints, these climate models generally take a few selected scenarios from 

IAMs and translate the emissions or concentrations into climate va riables (e.g. temperature, 

precipitation and wind). The Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) are four well 

known pathways used by these climate models, but these are being replaced by a selection of 

the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs). These pathways allow the exploration of different 

temperature outcomes. The outputs of these climate models are generally quite coarse 

(greater than 100’ s of kilometers), but can be downscaled using either models or empirical 

approaches to give more detailed reg ional information. 

In combination, IAMs and climate system models enable us to link models of the energy and 

other societal systems to temperature increases in coherent scenarios. Scenarios from the IEA 

and assessed by the IPCC are independently produced and well -known ( Table 37 -1Chapter 37 

596 

Table 37 -1 Commonly used scenario families 

). In addition, business organizations (e.g. World Business Council for Sustainable Development) 

and companies (e.g. Equinor, BP) produce their own scenarios. Scenarios vary in how often 

they are updated and the end year that they model. 

Table 37 -1 Commonly used scenario families 

Scenario  Purpose  Update 

frequency 

Number 

scenarios 

End 

year  Key focus 

IPCC 

community: 

Marker 

Scenarios 

(RCPs) 

Physical 

and 

transition 

risk 

5-7 years  4-6 2100  Focus on the climate 

system and impacts 

IPCC 

community: 

Scenario 

databases 

Physical 

and 

transition 

risk 

5-7 years  ~1000  2100 

Comprehensive 

exploration of 

socioeconomic 

pathways using a range 

of models and model 

intercomparisons 

IEA WEO  Transition 

risk  Annual  3 2040  Focus on markets 

IEA Energy 

Technology 

Perspectives 

(ETP) 

Transition 

risk  Annual  3 2060  Focus on energy 

technology 

Source: CICERO (2018 )

Approximate alignment of commonly used scenarios with various temperature targets is 

mapped out in  Figure 37 -2. The IPCC ’s Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) RCP1.9 

and RCP2.6 roughly map to 1.5°C and well below 2°C warming at the end of the century, and 

the WEO Sustainable Development Scenario ( IEA, 2018 ) describes a pathway that stretches to 

2050 and with around 1.8°C at the end of the century, assuming net -zero emissions from the 

year 2070. Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical Risks 

597 

Figure 37 -2 Mapping a range of emission scenarios to temperature levels 

Source: Rogelj et al. (2018 ); Riahi et al. (2017 )

Which range of scenarios is useful for stress -testing? 

The global average temperature is likely to be approximately 1.5°C higher pre -industrial levels 

in the next 10 -20 years, regardless of the emissions scenario. Historical emissions accumulate 

in the atmosphere and there is a time lag before they result in temperature impacts. Towards 

the end of the century, temperatures could span f rom approximately 2°C to 4°C, across a range 

of average emission scenarios. 

Reaching approximately 3°C degrees in 2100 is more likely than 2°C, given today ’s policy 

ambition. Still, 2°C is considered to be somewhat more likely than 4 -5°C, given the possib ility 

of tightening ambition under the Paris Agreement design, and the rapid progress made with 

low -carbon technologies like solar, wind, and electric vehicles. Reaching approximately 4 -5°C 

would mean that current climate policies would be rescinded or rel axed. 

Political, social, or technological events can influence the temperature increase, pushing it up 

to 4 -5°C or pulling it lower towards 2°C. Examples of push factors towards a higher 

temperature outcome include key emitting countries ( i.e., China, EU, India, US – which are 

jointly responsible for 60% of global emissions) failing to implement their climate targets 

(Nationally Determined Contributions, NDCs), or CCS deployment is delayed due to cost and 

public opposition. Examples of pull factors towards a lower temperature outcome include 

rapid deployment of clean technologies, CCS being deployed more rapidly (CCS plants are built 

at the historical pace of coal plants in China or nuclear plants in Europe), or key emitting 

countries ambitiously tighten the ir climate targets every 5 years under the Paris agreement. 

Stress testing against a range of scenarios can help prepare for transition risk, across all periods. 

Given today ’s policy ambition, approximately 3°C global warming by 2100 is the most likely 

sce nario, but we don ’t know enough to quantify the probability of reaching that temperature 

outcome ( Figure 37 -3). We also do not know much about the distribution curve at higher 

emission levels, which could be a fat -tail risk with a lower probability of occurrence but with Chapter 37 

598 

higher potential financial impacts from systemic climate disruptions ( Wagner, 2015 ). Thus, a 

range of scenarios should be examined to understand the range of transition and physical risks, 

including 2°C, 3°C, and even 4°C scenarios. 

Figure 37 -3 Probability distribution of scenarios based on expert ju dgement 

Source: ( CICERO, 2018 )

# 3 Scenarios in physical risk assessments 

Physical impacts are observed in all regions today and can have abrupt consequences across 

all sectors ( CICERO, 2017 ). Physical impacts manifest themselves mainly by rare events 

becoming more variable, (sometimes much) more frequent and intense. Observed impacts 

today include: 

• Extreme weather such as stronger hurricanes and flooding, 

• Flooding in already wet areas is increasing, 

• Drought is observed in all regions, and 

• Sea level r ise is accelerating faster than expected. 

While physical impacts are highly location -specific, they can have wide -reaching financial 

impacts across all sectors. Physical climate change can be felt both directly (via infrastructure 

damage) and indirectly (v ia supply chain and transportation disruptions). Physical impacts can 

be chronic or abrupt, which may require different stress testing for companies. 

We do not need elaborate scenario testing to prepare for physical climate change for the next 

10 -20 years . We are already locked in for 1.5°C global warming, because of historical emissions. 

Changes such as extreme events and flooding are impacting all sectors and regions already. 

These impacts will become clearer over the next 10 -20 years. 

There is a trade -off between mitigation and adaptation, and policy decisions now can impact 

physical risk in the future. Using a higher temperature scenario e.g. 4°C can be useful for 

examining a possible worst -case scenario of potential physical impacts in the long run. Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical Risks 

599 

However, commonly used climate models for IPCC scenario analysis may be underestimating 

the recent non -linear increase in extreme weather trends related to climate change ( Sutton, 

2019 ). Furthermore, the accumulated impacts of compounded extreme weather eve nts have 

the possibility to lead to systemic disruption of the climate. The potential for financial 

instability from this fat -tail risk is not well explored. 

The risk of physical climate change is a factor of the probability of the event occurring, the 

vul nerability of the asset or infrastructure to the event, and the exposure of a portfolio or 

company to the event. Regional assessments of specific hazards, many of which are available 

from government sources e.g. on flooding, can provide information to help assess the 

probability of a hazard occurring. 

A global overview of the potential for physical hazards occurring across different scenarios can 

be distilled from the IPCC 5th Assessment Report, however some of the information is patchy 

depending on literat ure focused on particular hazards or regions. Using a color -coding 

indication of when a hazard was observed or projected to occur in a region across different 

time frames and scenarios, the Shades of Climate Risk study from CICERO shows high risk 

coding fo r some hazards in each region of the world ( Figure 37 -4)( CICERO, 2017 ). Regional 

studies and information from meteorological institutes can provide addi tional data at a much 

more granular level. 

Figure 37 -4 Physical climate hazard overview from IPCC AR5 

Source: ( CICERO, 2017 )

There are several service providers of physical risk assessment tools with diverse scope of 

coverage and methodologies that offer tailored risk assessment. Since most of these 

approaches use proprietary methods, it is difficult to assess the indicators, da ta, scenarios and Chapter 37 

600 

methodology they incorporate ( CICERO, 2019 ). Publicly available data is available for water 

scarcity only. 

# 4 Challenges in adapting climate scenarios to assess financial risk 

The regulatory push on climate risk stress -testing and disclosur e has created a whole new 

customer base for scenarios, with financial actors struggling to respond to assess risk across a 

range of future scenarios ( Clapp & Sillmann, 2019 ). Climate and energy scenarios were largely 

designed for policy makers to examine e mission pathways towards a global or national 

emissions targets decades in the future. Existing climate scenarios are ill -adapted to the short 

term and risk -based “stress -testing ” needs of financial actors. Challenges in using existing 

scenario information include: 

• Time scale. Many emission scenarios only present data in decade time steps, and are 

updated only every 5 -7 years, well outside the timescales for financial decision making 

(CICERO, 2018 ). 

• Risk framing. Available scenario outputs focus on emission s rather than forward -

looking investment considerations. Further, focusing on outcomes from a single model 

and for a limited number of economic sectors greatly limits the ability to assess climate 

risk. 

• Granularity. Scenarios that are updated annually, suc h as those from the IEA (IEA, 

2018), provide more detail and regularity, but only cover the energy sector. Further, 

some users may need regional or sectoral detail, which is not available in many 

scenarios. 

Several recent initiatives have focused on improv ing limited aspects of scenario information. 

CICERO has developed a manual to help build capacity within the financial sector on climate 

scenarios ( CICERO, 2018 ), and has used this as a platform to discuss user needs with similar 

findings to other initiati ves. The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) has 

a 1.5°C Scenario Explorer that presents comparable data from scenarios used in the recent 

IPCC 1.5°C ( Huppmann et al., 2018 ). The World Resources Institute has an Emissions Scenario 

Portal that compiles data from various scenarios. The 2 Degrees Investing Initiative and KPMG 

have developed independent tools to test if a portfolio is aligned with 2°C. Other approaches 

such as the Climate Risk Impact Screening (CRIS) by Carbone4 is focu sed only on physical risk. 

Another initiative to pull investment decision information from transition scenarios is 

convened by the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP FI) for a 

group of banks ( UNEP FI, 2018 ). 

However, the financia l sector generally needs metrics not commonly included in scenario 

databases and relevant on short timescales, greater granularity, and importantly, flexibility to 

meet their specific activities. Scenario information for the financial sector is not yet ref lected 

in the scientific literature ( Weber et al., 2018 ). While the academic scenario community is 

becoming more transparent, existing scenario data and tools do not yet meet the needs of the 

financial sector. Some tools are purely descriptive, which help build capacity but do not help 

users perform analysis. Other tools are proprietary, or not transparent, making it difficult to 

assess their robustness. None of the initiatives provide the data that users need to perform 

their own in -house analysis, nor do they provide guidance on how to report and respond to 

climate -related risks. Framing Scenarios for Transition and Physical Risks 

601 

# 5 How can we move towards more consistent scenario stress -

# testing? 

Portfolio managers and bankers face a challenge in comparing the application of climate risk 

stress -testing acros s companies. Implementing scenario stress testing requires information 

that is tailored to sector and company characteristics. However, a common understanding, and 

transparency on a consistent set of assumptions for climate scenarios can support investors in 

doing due diligence on companies or portfolios ( CICERO, 2018 ). To this end, the macro -

financial work stream of NGFS (Workstream 2) is, in joint effort with the climate science 

community, in the process of developing a consistent and comparable set of da ta -driven 

scenarios encompassing a range of different plausible future states of the world. 

Looking across the strategic risk planning needs of companies and financial decision makers, 

principles for the implementation of scenario stress testing that suppo rt investor due diligence 

could include: 

• Coherency of the storyline assumptions embedded within a scenario, 

• Consistency of key driver assumptions across scenarios, 

• Flexibility for companies to adapt scenarios to what they know about their 

sector/business, and 

• Compatibility with common reporting metrics on scenarios. 

While one -size -fits -all scenarios are not suited to capture the range of climate risk, 

benchmarking against commo nly used scenarios such as WEO and IPCC for 2°C could be used 

to illustrate scenario due diligence. Chapter 37 

602 

# Bibliography 

CICERO. (2017). Shades of Climate Risk: Categorizing Climate Risk for Investors .

CICERO. (2018). Climate scenarios demystified: A climate scenario guide for investors .

CICERO. (2019). Physical climate risk: Investor needs and information gaps .

Clapp, C., & Sillmann, J. (2019). Facilitating Climate -Smart Investments. One Earth, 1 (1), 57 -

61. 

Huppmann, D., Rogelj, J., Kriegler, E., Krey, V., & Riahi, K. (2018). A new scenario resource for 

integrated 1.5 °C research. Nature Climate Change, 8 (12), 1027 -1030. 

IEA. (2018). World Energy Outlook 2018 .

Riahi, K., van Vuuren, D. P., Kriegler, E., Edmonds, J., O'Neill, B. C., Fujimori, S., . . . Tavoni , M. 

(2017). The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and 

greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global environmental change, 

42 , 153 -168. 

Rogelj, J., Popp, A., Calvin, K. V., Luderer, G., Emmerling, J., Gernaat, D., . . . Tavoni, M. 

(2018). Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase below 1.5 °c. 

Nature Climate Change, 8 (4), 325 -332. 

Sutton, R. T. (2019). Climate science needs to take risk assessment much more seriously. 

Bulletin of the American Meteorol ogical Society, 100 (9), 1637 -1642. 

TCFD. (2017). The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate -Related Risks and 

Opportunities 

UNEP FI. (2018). EXTENDING OUR HORIZONS -- Assessing credit risk and opportunity in a 

changing climate: Outputs of a wo rking group of 16 banks -- piloting the TCFD 

Recommendations PART 1: Transition -related risks & opportunities .

Wagner, G. (2015). Climate shock the economic consequences of a hotter planet . Princeton ,

NJ : Princeton University Press. 

Weber, C., McCollum, D. , Edmonds, J., Faria, P., Pyanet, A., Rogelj, J., . . . Kriegler, E. (2018). 

Mitigation scenarios must cater to new users. Nature Climate Change, 8 (10), 845 -

848. Acknowledgments 

603 

# Acknowledgment s

This NGFS Occasional Paper, Case Studies of Environmental Risk Analysis Methodologies, is a 

collaborative effort of many financial institutions, third -party service providers, research 

institutions, NGOs and distinguished members of the NGFS. It was jointl y edited by Dr. Ma Jun, 

the Chair of NGFS supervision workstream and Special Advisor to the Governor of the People ’s

Bank of China (PBC), Dr. Ben Caldecott of University of Oxford, and Dr. Ulrich Volz of SOAS 

University of London. 

The editors of this Occa sional Paper would like to thank the authors of the 37 chapters and 

the research team led by Dr. Ma, including Dr. Sun Tianyin, Dr. Li Jing, Z hu Yun, Meng Tingyi 

and Cheng Lin at the PBC School of Finance of Tsinghua University, for the excellent content 

and organization, as well as the NGFS Secretariat (in particular Bertille Delaveau, Emilie Fialon 

and Léa Grisey) at the Banque de France for lending its enthusiastic support. 

The editors would like to express their gratitude to ClimateWorks Foundation for generously 

funding this critical project. 

The editors are also grateful for the valuable comments and suggestions provided by: Judson 

Berkey (UBS), Christa Clapp (CICERO), Emanuele Campiglio (Wien University of Economics and 

Business), Michel Cardona (I4CE ), Benjamin Guin (Bank of England), Sonja Gibbs (IIF), Soh 

Young In (Stanford University), Xianfu Lu (Acclimatise), Maxine Nelson (GARP), Jo Paisley 

(GARP), Bernhard Schießl (CICERO), Edo Schets (Bank of England), Julien Wallen (Blackrock) 

and many others. Our thanks also go to William Bi, the copy editor for most of this Occasional 

Paper.
