Title: Microsoft Word - Chp 24 Borum and Rowe Bystanders.docx

URL Source: https://mitsloan.mit.edu/shared/ods/documents?PublicationDocumentID=7906

Markdown Content:
# The Importance of Bystanders in Threat Assessment and Management 

in JR Meloy and J Hoffmann Eds. (2021).Int handbook of threat assessment 2nd edition. New York: Oxford Univ Press. 

Randy Borum School of Information University of South Florida Mary Rowe Sloan School of Management Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

ABSTRACT Bystanders—those who observe or come to know about potential wrongdoing—are often the best source of pre-attack intelligence, including indicators of intent and “warning” behaviors. They are the reason that some planned attacks are foiled before they occur. Numerous studies of targeted violence (e.g., mass shootings and school shootings), have demonstrated that peers and bystanders often have knowledge of an attacker’s intentions, concerning communication, and troubling behavior before the attack occurs. This chapter describes—with empirical support—why threat assessment professionals should consider bystanders; outlines a model for understanding bystander decision making; reviews common barriers to bystander reporting; and suggests ways to mitigate those barriers, to engage bystanders at an individual level, and to improve reporting.The principal aim of threat assessment is to prevent (primarily) intentional acts of harm. When tragic incidents of planned violence occur, however, it is almost always uncovered “that someone knew something” about the attack before it happened. This happens because, as attack plans unfold, people in several different roles may know, or come to know, something about what is happening before harm occurs. The perpetrators know, and so may others, including targets, family members, friends, co-workers, or even casual observers. 2

The principal aim of threat assessment is to primarily prevent intentional acts of harm. When tragic incidents of planned violence occur, however, it is almost always uncovered “that someone knew something” about the attack before it happened. This happens because, as attack plans unfold, people in several different roles may know, or come to know, something about what is happening before harm occurs. The perpetrators know, and so may others, including targets, family members, friends, co-workers, or even casual observers. We regard these people as potential “bystanders.” Their role in preventing acts of planned violence and intentional harm is critical. Responsible bystanders may possess and report concerning behavior that may portend an attack, but they may also help to re-channel, interrupt, mitigate, stop, or remediate the threatening behavior or intent. In late December, 2018 at a middle school in Middlebury, Vermont, a student overheard two other students planning to attack a specific individual on campus. He reported what he heard to the school’s principal, who notified the authorities. An investigation revealed that a 14-year old student had a specific target, plan, time, location and means (with a weapon provided by a co-conspiring student) to execute the attack. Days before the planned shooting was to occur, police were able to transport the teen to a local medical center for psychiatric evaluation and treatment (McLaughlin & Chavez, 2018). In May, 2019, a student wearing a black trench coat and brandishing a loaded shotgun entered a classroom in a Portland, Oregon high school. An unarmed football coach tackled the student and detained him until authorities arrived. In July 2019, just weeks before a mass shooting spree in El Paso, Texas, another attack in the same state was potentially thwarted by a concerned grandmother. According to a federal 3

affidavit, a 19-year- old Texas man called from a hotel room, telling his grandmother that he had purchased “an AK-47 style rifle and was wanting to ‘shoot up’ his hotel and then commit suicide by cop when the police arrived.” The grandmother could even hear him handling the rifle over the phone. She convinced the man to allow her to pick him up and take him to the hospital. When police searched his hotel room, they found an AK-47 rifle with multiple loaded magazines, several knives, and tactical clothing the man had laid out on the bed to be seized by authorities (Yancey-Bragg, 2019). Stories like these—whether or not reported in the news— may occur as often, or more often than successful shooting attacks. People can and do recognize “red flags” before a tragedy occurs, and some act directly or indirectly to prevent it. Many bystanders, however, still hesitate much of the time, in the face of concerning behavior. Except in sudden, dangerous emergencies, when some people may act instinctively, people often hesitate, before acting on the spot or reporting behavior that causes them to be concerned. There are many reasons why people hesitate. Many people dislike and distrust investigations or the authorities that conduct them. Some fear that acting or reporting will damage an important relationship. Others may doubt the significance of what they know, or even convince themselves that there must be some benign explanation for what they know or have seen. What is most important to understand is that hesitation occurs for a range of reasons—often for multiple reasons—and is not simply the result of a “diffusion of responsibility” cited in the media. The popular idea that bystanders are generally passive observers seemed to accelerate after the highly publicized 1964 murder of Kitty Genovese in Queens, New York. Ms. Genovese was publicly attacked by a knife-wielding assailant who stabbed her twice in the back. She was 4

just a few feet away from her apartment building entrance. She reportedly screamed for help. 

One neighbor is know n to have yelled at the attacker, which prompted him to flee the scene 

(though the attacker re -confronted Genovese and further assaulted her once she was out of 

view). 

Initial news stories reported that more than 30 of her neighbors watched the attack 

wit hout doing anything to help. That became the indelible image burned into the minds of the 

public. Those initial estimates were subsequently shown to have been inaccurate and markedly 

exaggerated, but the public perception of bystanders as apathetic onlook ers persisted. Sparked, 

in part, by this event, several decades of experimental research focused on the so -called 

“bystander effect.” The bystander effect postulates that having more observers present at a 

given incident decreases the likelihood that a by stander will intervene .

Although subsequent experimental research has often replicated the finding, numerous 

studies suggest that the “effect” is not a general truth. Research has illuminated situational 

conditions that substantially mitigate the effect , and other studies have found the presence of 

other bystanders can actually increase the likelihood of intervention under certain conditions, 

particularly when the situation is dangerous or potentially if the victim is seen as a member of 

one’s “in -group.” 

New research in non -experimental, real -world settings also challenges conventional 

wisdom about the “ bystander effect .” Philpot and colleagues (2019) examined CCTV footage in 

three countries (UK, the Netherlands, and South Africa), identifying 219 incid ents of public 

space aggression involving conflict between at least two people. In 90.9% of these conflict 

situations, at least one bystander intervened. On average , each situation mobilized nearly four 5

people to act. Results were fairly consistent across the three countries. In contrast to expectations based on the “bystander effect,” the number of bystanders present in the conflict situation actually increased the likelihood of intervention, with an incremental bump in that likelihood for each additional bystander on the scene (Philpot, Liebst, Levine, Bernasco, & Lindegaard, 2019). It is inaccurate to conclude from research that bystanders, in general, are cowardly do-nothings. Significant research demonstrates that sometimes bystanders intervene or otherwise take action when they witness troubling behavior. In some situations, it may be almost certain that someone will intervene. Numerous studies in social psychology, and real-life observations of public events, show that people are often quite willing to intervene, even at a personal cost, to stop another’s wrongdoing (e.g., assault, rape, theft, littering). The potential for helpful bystander action offers an incredible opportunity for threat assessment professionals, whose goal is to prevent hazardous or conflictual situations from escalating into violence. In this chapter, we will summarize some of the existing (though often limited) literature on bystander behavior and decision-making— including their motivations and barriers to reporting. We then offer some practical guidance to help threat assessment practitioners to develop more effective reporting systems/mechanisms, and to identify and engage those who may have information relevant to a potential threat. For the purposes of this chapter, we use the term “bystander” for people who observe or come to know about concerning behavior or wrongdoing by others, but who are not knowingly engaged in planning or executing that behavior. We are also interested in those who come to know of preparations by a perpetrator that may lead to, or have led to harm. These 6

observers may be “bystanders” for our purpose, regardless of whether they know, or knew of plans for doing harm. 

Why should TA professionals consider bystanders? 

Given the relative lack of attention to bystanders in traditional threat assessment, practitioners might wonder why they should consider bystanders in assessment inquiries and management plans. The noteworthy answer is twofold: (a) bystanders are often the best source of pre-attack intelligence, including indicators of intent and “warning” behaviors, and (b) bystanders are the reason that some planned attacks are foiled before they occur. In cases of targeted violence, peers and bystanders often have knowledge of an attacker’s intentions, concerning communication, and troubling behavior before the attack occurs. This finding has consistently been borne out in studies of mass shootings, school-based attacks, lone actor terrorism, assassination, active shooter attacks. and other forms of targeted violence. Gill, Horgan, & Deckert (2014) studied 119 individuals from the U.S. and Europe who engaged in or planned to engage in lone-actor terrorism. They found it very common for others to be aware of the attacker’s commitment to a specific extremist ideology (87.8%) and of the grievance that spurred the planed attack (83.7%). Strikingly, “For 63.3 percent of the sample, there was an identifiable bystander to the individual’s planning/ preparation behaviors. These 7

(bystanders) were typically individuals who witnessed concerning behaviors (e.g. seeing the offender looking at bomb-making manuals at work) but were not privy to the individual’s specific plans” (p.108). In about two thirds of all the cases examined, one or more friends or family members were aware of the attacker’s intent because the attacker verbally told them (p. 429). In another sample of 115 mass murderers, more than half (58.3%) communicated their intentions to harm a specific target to at least one third party, sometimes even disclosing their specific plans (Silver, Horgan, & Gill, 2018). Almost two decades earlier, Hempel, Meloy and Richards (1999) reported a similar finding in their sample of 30 mass murderers. While two thirds (67%) communicated some type of general or specific threat to a third party before the attack, half of those communicated specific threatening information “verbally or in writing, which described the location, victims, or time of the killings” (p.220). Moreover, in a study of 

ˆthwarted mass homicide attacks, Sarteschi (2016) found that the plots were identified or uncovered most commonly by information from the suspect’s family, friends or acquaintances, but also by information from members of the general public. Meloy, Hempel, Mohandie, Shiva & Gray (2001) studied cases involving adolescent mass murderers. They found that—prior to the attack--more than half the adolescent attackers made direct statements about the attack (usually to third parties). Likewise, in 81% of the school 8

shootings studie d by the U.S. Secret Service/Department of Educ ation (Vossekuil et al., 2002), 

at least one person before the attack, knew of the attacker’s intentions and plans, and , in over 

half , more than one person knew. In nearly all cases (93%), the school shooters were known in 

advance to engage more broadly in behavior that caused other people to be concerned. 

An FBI Study (Silver, Simons, & Craun, 2018), examining 160 “active shooter” incidents 

in the U.S. between 2000 and 2013, found more than half (56%) the shooters communicated 

beforehand their intent to harm someone to a third party ( a process the authors refer to as 

“leakage”). Each attacker, on average, engaged in 4.7 “concerning behaviors” before the attack 

occurred. In cases where the attacker was a student, those behaviors were typically noticed b y

a schoolmate (92%) or by a teacher/school staff (75%). For adults, the attacker’s 

spouse/partner (87%), family members (68%) and friends (68%) were the common observers of 

concerning behaviors. 

Bystanders’ knowledge of pre -attack plans, communications and behaviors may provide 

the initial signal of a pending attack, or their information may contribute to a broader threat 

assessment inquiry or investigation. Organizations may know that troubling behavior is 

occurring, but may require further investigatio n to identify the nature or source of that 

concerning activity. Threat assessment practitioners may be called upon to support those 9

protective intelligence investigations, or they may even be brought in by lawyers or others after an event has occurred to locate and interview potential witnesses. The second major reason why threat assessment professionals should consider peers and bystanders is less well documented in the professional literature, but at least as important. Peers and bystanders often act, formally and (more commonly) informally , to divert potential perpetrators of unacceptable behavior from their plans to engage in wrongdoing (Hodges, Low, Vinas-Racionero, Hollister, & Scalora, 2016). Although peers and bystanders with foreknowledge may not routinely go directly to law enforcement authorities, they do quite often act on their concern, either with the potential attacker directly or by sharing the information more unofficially with a supervisor or manager. Regarding targeted violence, specifically, it is not a general truth that bystanders “do nothing” to prevent it. In fact, in the FBI’s study of active shooter incidents, 13% of the attacks ended after unarmed citizens safely and successfully restrained the shooter (Silver, Simons, & Craun, 2018). The same was true for active shooters in 2014-15 (15%) (Schweit, 2016), and 2016-17 (16%) (FBI Office of Partner Engagement, 2018). In 2018, 18.5% of active shooter attacks were ended by unarmed or lawfully armed citizens (FBI Office of Partner Engagement, 2019). 10 

Some bystanders are willing to act, especially in emergency situations. And numerous anecdotal reports have recounted how a planned, targeted attack was foiled by a peer, family member or bystander bringing their concerns to the attention of authorities. This is especially and increasingly true for thwarted school shootings. Millspaugh and colleagues (2015) surveyed more than 39,000 7 th and 8 th grade students. Eighty six percent (86%) of the students agreed that if another student brought a gun to school, she/he would tell one of the teachers or staff at school. Eighty two percent (82%) agreed that if another student talked about killing someone, she/he would tell one of the teachers or staff at school. Stallings and Hall (2019) reported in their study of averted school shootings that 60.7% of the incidents they studied were averted due to a student reporting the threat. Another 18% were averted because the suspect was stopped immediately prior to the targeted school killing—for example, when students were detained by law enforcement for a minor infraction, but the planned attack was detected. Daniels and colleagues (2007) also found that other students were the primary source of information for averted school attacks. In half of the cases they studied, the source was a friend of the suspect. In another 25%, the information was overheard by other students who came forward (Daniels, Buck, Croxall, Gruber, Kime, & Grovert, 2007). 11 

Th reat assessment professionals should be working with communities, law 

enforcement, and organizations to encourage more people with relevant, concerning 

information to come forward —and , a vital point, to teach those who receive information how 

to be perceiv ed as receptive and effective . Professionals need to help in designing systems and 

facilitating climates in which peers and bystanders are more confident and comfortable coming 

forward (Banyard, Weber, Grych, & Hamby, 2016; Bennett & Banyard, 2014; Edwards, Banyard, 

Sessarego, Waterman, Mitchell, & Chang, 2019 ; Cowie & Hutson, 2005; McMahon, 2015; Rowe 

201 8).

Effective prevention will require more than purveying a “See something, Say something” 

message. Working at the system level —fostering positive climates and conditions for 

reporting —may save more lives by preventing a planned attack from ever coming to fruition 

(Lankford, 2018; Stallings & Hall, 2019). 

What do T hreat Assessment Professionals need to know about bystanders ?

Sometimes thre at assessment practitioner s need to identify an unknown perpetrator —

or to assess a possible perpetrator. In this situation they might seek bystanders —and look 

especially for those who may have already taken some kind of relevant action in a given 

context —as potentially important sources of information (see Table 2) . Threat assessors also 12 

need to know how to interview bystander s to assess the information they have or have 

provided . In sum , threat assessment professionals must recognize (a) that bystanders m ay have 

critical information and be able to help, directly or indirectly (as detailed above) and (b) that 

success in locating and working with bystanders is more likely if assessors know how and why 

bystanders decide whether or not to help .

How and w hy do bystanders decide whether to help or take action? 

Threat assessment professionals seeking to identify and engage bystanders need a basic 

understanding of how/when/why/where certain people act directly or surface their concerns 

about the possibility of int entional harm , while others do not . We propose a four -stage model 

for understanding responses to others’ concerning behavior. 

• In Stage 1, the bystander perceives or receives information about the target behavior 

(or intended behavior) .

• In Stage 2, the by stander decides (in a deliberate way) or registers (automatically) that 

the behavior is dangerous, or otherwise unacceptable. If not, then the behavior may be 

ignored, or covered up or dismissed. 13 

• In Stage 3, if the bystander decides that some dangerous or unacceptable behavior has 

occurred, then she or he must decide whether some type of response or action is 

necessary. 

• Stage 4, if action is deemed necessary, then the bystander must determine what his or 

her personal response will be —whether, when and how to pursue a response. 

These four stages are not necessarily independent of each other , and they are not always 

seque ntial . A person may move back and forth from one stage to another. 

The fourth stage focuses on the ultimate question: “Will I act or report the wrongdoing?” 

Bystanders weigh at least four sets of considerations in their decisions about whether to act :

(1) The bystander’s motivations and goals, especially if significant others are involved. 

(2) How others are likely to judge the bystander’s action —the list of important others 

may be long. 

(3) The perpetrator’s status and relationship with the bystander if the bystan der knows 

the perpetrator’s identity .

(4) The bystander’s self -perceived skill or capacity to act, the perceived effectiveness of 

taking action, and the perceived consequences. 14 

These four factors affect how the bystander “frames” the decision for him or herse lf —that 

is, whether an intervention and/or report is an act of heroism, duty, betrayal, revenge, a “last 

resort,” or something else. 

Motives : The bystander’s motives and goals will influence the decision about whether to 

act or report /disclose concerning information . Those motives and goals can be multiple, well or 

poorly understood, complex , and quite diverse (Rowe, Wilc ox and Gadlin, 2009, see Table 1 ). 

People can do good things for bad reasons (motives) —or end up doing bad things for good 

rea sons. 

Table 1

Why Do Some People Stop or Report Unacceptable Behavior? 

(Adapted from Rowe, Wilcox, & Gadlin, 2009, p. 19) 

• This is my job 

• There is a moral imperative to act 

• Tangible and intangible rewards for speaking up 

• Tangible and intangible sanctions for people who do not speak up 

• I am forced to speak up 

• There is strong evidence (conclusive proof) that will support speaking up 

• I know the rules and can find out how to come forward 

• I can do it without being identified 

• I can talk with (the offender) directly 

• Important people will help me 

• It is reassuring "not to have to act alone” 

• If it all goes bad I have a good fall back position 

• I have nothing left to lose 

• I will never give up; I am committed; n othing else matters 

• This is my chance to "pay back or "get even" 15 

Revenge/payback/competition is not an uncommon set of motives for reporting others’ 

behavior. If the bystander has felt disrespected, bullied or otherwise mistreated, he may regard 

his own reporting as “payback,” or as a way for the one exposed to “get what they deserve.” A 

bystander also may be willing to publicly expose or cause pain to another person, not because 

they have wronged her personally, but because the perpetrator may remind the bystander of a

different person who caused harm. Or the perpetrator may be seen to impede the bystander’s 

own goals. 

Finally, a bystander might be willing to report the apparently unacceptable behavior, 

and risk, accept, or even seek the personal consequences, becaus e she feels that she has 

nothing left to lose. This dynamic is sometimes seen in people who feel desperate, hopeless, or 

suicidal. 

In the prosocial realm of motivations, a bystander’s sense of duty, justice sensitivity, or 

altruism can also nudge her tow ard surfacing her concerns. A sense of duty may arise from 

moral or role -based obligations, or from fear of being found later not to have shared what she 

knew . Acting from moral duty —in the ethical sense —is to fulfill obligations without regard to 

conseque nces or personal interests. The ethical doctrine of altruism, however, is explicitly 

rooted in consequentialism. The central idea is that acting for the good/benefit of others, even 16 

over self, should be each person’s moral obligation. An act is, therefore, deemed right or good 

to the extent that it benefits others. 

The Appraisals of Significant Others: Most people attend to how they are perceived or 

judged by others whose opinions are important to them, and those perceptions frequently 

influence their behavior. The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) posits that a key factor in 

determin ing a person’s inte ntion to act is the reaction he/she expects from others. People tend 

to shape their own identi ties, at least in part, by the groups to which they belong. These group 

identifications create “social identities” (Tajfel & Turner, 1979; Vadera, Aguilera, & Caz a, 2009). 

A person may identify with a few or several groups. The culture or ethos of that group may 

favor the reporting of concerns , or it may cast those who report others as disloyal or 

troublemakers. Perceptions of w hat others are likely to think will be important element s in the 

bystander’s decision about whether, and potentially how to act (Berry, 2004; Kaptein, 2011). 

Observed Actor’s Status: The status of the person whose behavior was observed and 

the bystander’s relationship with him/her may also affect the bystander’s decision about 

whether to act. Consideration of “status” may include social status and reputation, as well as 

the observed person’s position within a hierarchy (e.g., supervisor, subordinate, etc). It might 

also include the person’s history of past behavior, especially whether the perpetrator was seen 17 

to be a rule -breaker or respectful of rules, threatening or supportive, a go od or poor citizen, or 

a good or poor performer. 

The relationship between the bystander and the observed may be considered in light of 

how long they have known each other, their past conflicts, cooperation, and emotional and 

material exchanges. The decisi ons of college students, for example, to take only informal action 

in response to potentially threat en ing behavior were influenced by their prior relationships 

with the potential ly dangerous individual (Hodges et al., 2016). Decisions might also be 

affect ed by whether the person observed was regarded as part of the bystander’s “in -group” or 

“out -group,” classifications often formed on the basis of social identities (Tajfel, 1982). 

In Rowe, Wilcox and Gadlin’s (2009) study, relationships were found to be t he most 

important factor in determining whether bystanders would act or report. The closeness of the 

bystander’s relationship with the apparent wrongdoer may affect the likelihood of reporting 

(Miller & Thomas, 2005). Friendship, loyalty, and in -group cohe sion between bystander and 

wrongdoer are all factors that may diminish the likelihood of reporting. In King’s (1997) study of 

registered nurses, for example, he found participants much less willing to report wrongdoing by 

a friend than by a colleague who w as not considered a friend. 

Little is known about decision -making where the bystander d oes not know the identity 

of a potential perpetrator. This question , however, is likely to be important in a specific case. 18 

Efficacy of Reporting: Perceived efficacy, b oth of the reporter herself and the entity to 

whi ch she is reporting, will weigh into a bystander’s decision. An affirmative belief in one’s 

competence to execute a task, also known as “self -efficacy,” buffers fear a nd enables action 

(Kish -Gephart et al., 2009). Once a self -confident bystander determines that action is necessary, 

he might consider acting on the spot or reporting to an authority, depending on the nature of 

the unacceptable behavior, the context in which it occurs, the options the by stander thinks he 

has, how the bystander believes he might most safely and effectively respond , and his 

perception as to whether any action taken will be appropriate and effective. 

In sum, capacity to act or report the target behavior is a combined functi on of the 

bystander’s own sense of competence to respond, the safety, credibility and accessibility of 

reporting mechanisms, assessment of risk and propensity to avoid risk, and the bystander’s 

knowledge of, and perceptions about the competence and intenti ons of the authority who will 

be expected to respond. Any of those touch points may affect the bystander’s intention to act. 

What barriers exist to reporting/disclosing concerns? 

Threat assessment professionals need to know about barriers to reporting in order to 

manage resistance or difficulty with disclosure. We present a brief description of barriers that 

might occur at each stage of bystander decision -making . As described above, those four stages 19 

involve perceiving a wrong action, deciding the acti on is wrong, deciding whether a response is 

necessary, and deciding how personally to respond. 

Stage 1 

Barriers to seeing or otherwise learning of problematic behavior 

• Insufficient Knowledge: The bystander does not actually know enough to notice or 

“regi ster” the behavior as problematic. 

• Inattention: The bystander is too absorbed or distracted to notice. 

• Motivated Blindness: “Motivated blindness” blocks the bystander from noticing ; it is 

not safe to “see” this behavior; therefore it is not observed or re membered .

• Avoids Seeing: The bystander chooses, either consciously —or un consciously —not 

to be in a position to see unacceptable behavior. 

Stage 2 

Barriers to perceiving behavior as unacceptable 

• Insufficient Knowledge: The bystander does not know relevant rules or laws, or how 

to judge the problematic behavior, especially if the behavior is simply a small part of 

a preparation by a wrongdoer who intends harm. 

• Insufficient Threshold: The bystander thinks there “probably is not much of a 

problem here .” Beca use the behavior is brief or sporadic, with few or no 20 

“footprints ,” the bystander has no clear definition in mind about what has 

happened. For example, when college students who had observed threatening 

behavior on campus were asked whether they had reported their concerns , those 

who had not were more likely to believe that the behavior did not portend a likely or 

imminent dangerous incident (Hodges et al., 2016) .

• Authority Barrier: The apparent wrongdoer is highly place d, an expert, a person 

who has the right to act unconventionally ; the bystander thinks, “My judgment must 

be wrong.” 

• Affinity Barrier: The apparent perpetrator is a friend or family or in -group member; 

the bystander thinks, “this must be OK; anyway it has to be OK.” 

• Social Appraisal Barrier: The bystander may be asked or expected to help or go 

along with the behavior, as if, of course, it is acceptable ; the bystander may then be 

talked out of his or her reservations. 

• Benefit Barrier: There may be immediate gains from the problematic behavior for 

the bystander; these gains may seem to cancel out the problematic aspects. 

Stage 3 

Barriers to deciding that “someone” should take action 21 

• Insufficient Knowledge/Understanding : The bystander does not have the experience 

to know if action should be taken —and does not know any relevant reporting 

procedures. 

• Insufficient Evidence Barrier: The bystander thinks nothing will done by authorities 

if there is “no conclusive proof and no (other) witness. ”

• Competence/Trust Barrier: The bystander thinks “there is no one who is 

competent —or trustworthy —to understand and fix this. It is no use for me to take 

action.” 

• Ineffective Response Barrier: The bystander thinks any action would res ult in too 

much being done —or nothing being done —and that even “just an investigation ”

would have bad consequences .

Stage 4 

Barriers to personal action 

• Unsure How to Respond Barrier : The bystander cannot imagine how to formulate a 

plan even if he or she thinks the behavior should be stopped. 

• Prior Damaging Response Barrier: The bystander knows someone who tried to stop 

unacceptable behavior, with very bad consequences .22 

• Lack of Knowledge/Trust Barrier: “ I know n o one who understands or trusts the 

system.” (See Hollister, Scalora, Hoff & Marquez , 2014 , finding that college students 

who did not trust campus police were also less willing to report concerning 

behaviors that might signal an on -campus attack). 

• Insufficient Evidence Barrier: The bystander think s, “for sure my evidence is not 

enough,” assumes any action is “his word against mine,” and fears that his or her 

own competence may be questioned .

• Role Barrier: The particular bystander think s taking action is not part of her or his 

status, role, or job .

• Reporting Procedure Barrier: The bystander wishes for a specific reporting option ,

e.g. complete anonymity , that is not available .

• Some Specific Negative Consequences Barriers: 

o Spe cific Fear of Retaliation: The bystander worries that specific people will find 

out or guess who reported. 

o Fear of Social Disapproval: The specific bystander knows that loyalty is 

everything .23 

o Fear of Being Misunderstood: The bystander is wary of offense in a particular 

workplace: “I cannot risk raising a concern about someone from another 

culture.” 

o Fear of Acting Alone: This bystander cannot imagine taking action alone .

How can Threat Assessment Professionals engage bystanders at a systems level? 

In addition to directly preventing, interrupting, re -channeling, mitigating, stopping, or 

remediating concerning behaviors, b ystanders may also report such behavior to various 

authorities with formal power. Sometimes this is done through a designated “incident 

reporting” mechanis m or office. That action in turn may also lead to preventing, interrupting, 

re -channeling, mitigating, stopping and remediating concerning behavior —in this case by the 

authorities themselves. 

When presented with evidence, such as that reviewed in the firs t part of this chapter 

which shows that other people usually know about an attacker’s intention or plan before an 

attack occurs, a common response is to declare a need “to educate the public” about common 

warning signs, so that they will be more likely to report them. While educating peer s and 

bystanders may be helpful, reflexively calling for this type of public education as a primary 

solution misses an important point. Often those with foreknowledge of an attackers plan 24 

already know enough to be concerned. They may hesitate to share th at information with 

authorities, however, either because the best way to report is not clear (or accessible) to them 

or because they believe the authorities may not respond appropriately. Ultimately, we may 

need to educate bystanders, but first we should c onsider educating those who will receive 

information (access points) of concern, as well as those who will act on the information , such as 

investigators and decision -makers .

Bystanders regularly speak and act as if they find formal reporting channels 

unapp ealing , and “investigations ” to be useless . Many bystanders perceive reporting 

authorities to be unreceptive and ineffective. Cultural issues are another set of factors 

important to understanding bystander reporting. Numerous empirical studies have shown h ow 

perceptions of wrongful or unacceptable behavior may differ as a function of variants in 

cultural norms or values. 

If preventing harmful behavior is the goal, creating climates in which bystanders are 

likely to report their concerns may be the most impo rtant intervention that we have not yet 

tried. A common challenge to coming forward is that bystanders in all cultures experience 

barriers when their actions risk their relationships. For preventing targeted violence, it is not 

accurate to view bystanders as the major problem. Bystanders are willing to act in all kinds of 

emergency situations, even those that may put themselves at risk of harm. The real challenge is 25 

asking bystanders to risk their relationships to prevent an outcome that may or may not eve n

happen. 

That suggests that a focal point of prevention efforts should be creating a “zero barrier” 

system for reporting concerns. In general, t hose who seek advice and make reports typically 

want their “access points” and reporting channels to be safe, accessible and credible . Most 

effective incident reporting systems share these characteristics. Many authors also have 

focused on the importance of building a "safety culture" to enhance the likelihood that errors 

and mistakes will get caught in a timely way. One prominent and consistent finding from 

research on incident reporting is that supervisors /authorities have a powerful role in whether 

and how concerns and misconduct are reported. 

The presence and nature of multiple reporting options or access ch annels appears to 

make a major difference in whether people are willing to seek advice, and to “speak up.” 

Multiple modes and points of access allow a range of user preferences to fit with different user 

motivations and different circumstances —especially i f one is a “zero barrier ” option , such as 

completely anonymous reporting or a confidential office like an organizational ombudsman .

How can Threat Assessment Professionals engage bystanders at an individual level? 26 

Bystanders typically emerge from one of four groupings: Family, Peers (to include 

friends and acquaintances) , Authority Figures (such as a principal, supervisor, law enforcement 

or mental health professional) , and Strangers (such as members of the general public) .

Intended victims are another potential source of pre -incident information, but might not be 

regarded as “bystanders” per se . Each group may have access to different kinds of information ;

each may have different motivations and decision patterns in different kinds of situations. Each 

may have different levels of resistance to sharing that information with a professional trying to 

assess and manage a potentially threat eni ng situation. Confrontations and interrogation -like 

approaches are rarely effective in eliciting cooperation from by standers ; the interviewer must 

be prepared for resistance and be able to elicit accurately the kinds of details that will support 

the assessment. 

The general approach to effective engagement is to develop a collaborative, rapport -based 

exchange that facilitates trust and inspires the interviewee’s confidence . Most threat 

assessment professionals will have sufficient investigative experience to know how to develop 

rapport and to know when it has been established. With bystander -related interview s, the 

interviewer will want to assume a more collaborative, and less directive posture , allowing the 

interviewee space and latitude to express ideas and convey information. In most cases, the 

basic tenets of active listening work well, represented here by the acronym: OARS 27 

• Open -ended questions : Queries might funnel from the general to the more specific, 

starting with questions that do not have a yes/no answer. Asking for more descriptive 

responses (Tell me about…. or Tell me how …) facilitates a deeper e xchange and allows 

the interviewee to elaborate without interference from the interviewer. 

• Affirmations : Because the interviewer will probably have to work with an interviewee’s 

ambivalence, it is important to identify, acknowledge and validate the emoti ons and 

concerns that may affect disclosure or reporting of information (such as those discussed 

above) .

• Reflections : Reflections are a basic group of active listening techniques that allow the 

interviewer to provide “feedback” demonstrating that she has heard and understands 

what the interviewee has said, and has accurately perceived the underlying emotions or 

sentiment (reflection of feeling). Reflection tactics include repeating, re -stating, or 

paraphrasing what the interviewee has said. 

• Summaries : Summaries are a type of reflection in which the interviewer sums up a 

central message, and often checks with the interviewee on the accuracy of what was 

summarized. They can also be used to highlight areas of interviewee ambivalence. 

Managing resistanc e often is challenging. It is generally true that closer bonds or 

relationships between the bystander and the subject of the assessment will be associated with 28 

higher levels of resistance —even if the bystander, in principle, is committed to preventing 

vio lence or avoiding harm. Some investigators are accustomed to overcoming a subject’s 

resistance by argumentation or forceful persuasion. That approach is unlikely to yield a positive 

outcome in bystander interviews. Instead, the interviewer is generally a dvised to “roll with 

resistance,” and to use that resistance to explore the interviewee’s concerns. 

Mobilizing Bystanders: In addition to “reporting” threat -related information, it is clear that 

bystanders can also be primed, empowered, and sometimes mobilized to prevent or mitigate a 

potentially dangerous situation. In organizations, a “primary prevention” approach might 

incl ude (1) action -oriented member training, (2) shaping the organizational culture by training 

senior leadership and peer levels how to “listen” to bystanders with 

assurance/demonstration /regular communication of effective organizational response, and (3) 

dev eloping systems (for reporting and sharing concerns ) that ensure confidentiality/anonymity, 

have multiple modes of access, and minimize barriers. 

At the individual level, key bystanders may be engaged to monitor and sometimes even act 

to address a subject ’s concerning behavior —even if they initially seem resistant or unwilling to 

report the behavior or to put the subject in jeopardy. Bystanders may take determined, 

unobtrusive, informal actions to prevent or stop criminal behavior by a family member or cl ose 

friend , while keeping the authorities from finding out about it. These examples highlight the 29 

importance of private bystander actions —beyond just reporting —that may re -channel behavior 

or resources. 

Table 2 presents a non -exhaustive list of responses drawn from many hundreds of self -

reports from real bystanders who have taken action with respect to concerning behavior. In 

considering a specific case, of course, the professional might ask, “What might encourage 

particular bystanders to help in this sit uation?” 

Table 2 . Some Naturally Occurring Helpful Bystander Actions 3

Peers and bystanders can: 

• Ask civil, effective questions, of an apparent perpetrator, or of people around the 

perpetrator 

• Become active mentors, modeling accessible, trustworthy behavior, in a way that 

interferes with the unacceptable behavior 

• Consult with personal or professional resources, in a direct or indirect fashion, with or 

without information identifying a (potentia l) perpetrator 

• Discuss, discourage and disparage behavior that is unacceptable, on the spot, as in 

“speaking up” in public, or physically defending a target 

• Deflect or derail the behavior unobtrusively as with humor, cartoons, or posters 

• Engage friends, family or associates to help deal with the behavior; engage other 

bystanders and “bystanders of bystanders” 

• Instigate or trigger a “generic approach” such as asking for a relevant community or 

organizational program on the subject, without identifying any individual 

• Interrupt the behavior unobtrusively or overtly 

Mitigate the effects of unacceptable behavior by personal action 

• “Name” or talk widely about associated unacceptable behaviors in the community, so 

they cannot happen unnoticed 30 

• Observe the behavior, gathering more information before choosing an option, collecting 

evidence, keeping a diary 

• Offer to ac company, call for help —or otherwise support —targets of unacceptable 

behavior, so that vulnerable persons are not left alone to deal with the behavior or 

possible retaliation 

• “Pivot” the situation, by encouraging or instigating positive alternatives for po tential 

perpetrators 

• Prevent the behavior from recurring (e.g. by making certain behavior punishable, or 

eliminating resources) 

• Punish the behavior (at the time or later) or act to see it punished 

• Re -channel plans or persons or resources engaged in unac ceptable behavior, (e.g. 

engaging the relevant person elsewhere, removing their access) 

• Remediate the behavior, (e.g. noticeably or behind the scenes – overtly or “casually”) 

• Report the behavior in one of many different ways, (alone or with others, once or 

repeatedly, in writing or orally, identifiably or anonymously, formally or informally, 

immediat ely or later, directly or indirectly, with few salient details or with exhaustive 

information) 

• Repudiate the specific unacceptable behavior, after the fact, in an explicit public fashion 

• Stop the behavior in the moment, alone or with others 

• Stop the beh avior and follow up, directly or indirectly, to assure no recurrence 

• Take covert action in such a way that the behavior of the perpetrator can come to the 

attention of some inside or outside authority 

• Teach others how to identify unacceptable behavior an d to assess: “who, what, when, 

where, why, how, and with whom?” in thinking about options 

• Teach others how to lead and exemplify positive alternatives with systematically 

affirming behavior 

Conclusion 

As Hodges and colleagues note: “The first step of violence prevention, including threat 

assessment, is to identify threatening individuals through becoming aware of pre -incident 

behaviors.” After a horrific, violent incident occurs, it is common to find that “that someone 

knew something” about the attack before it happened. Attackers are known to communicate 31 

with family members, friends, co -workers, or even casual observers —who we might regard as 

“bystanders” —about their grievances, and sometimes their attack plans. Those same 

individuals may directly o bserve the potential attacker’s behavior and be concerned. Threat 

assessment professionals need to know not only that those individuals may be important 

sources of pre -attack information, but also how they might best access that information, either 

throug h official reporting systems and channels or through collateral interviews in a threat 

assessment inquiry. 

Despite the fact that researchers have pursued a longstanding focus on the “bystander 

effect,” which suggests that it is less likely a bystander will intervene if other people are present 

at the scene, that “effect” is far from a general truth. Systematic observations of actual public 

and private conflicts show that many tim es bystanders will step in to help, even (and perhaps, 

especially) when other observers are present. Moreover, studies of “thwarted attacks,” from 

school shootings to mass homicides consistently reveal that the plots were discovered because 

of informatio n brought forward by bystanders. Bystanders often report and act on their 

concerns about unacceptable or threatening behavior , but surfacing those concerns is much 

more likely when reporting systems (and responders) are safe, accessible, and credible . Thr eat 

assessment practitioners should work to support systems and climates that will encourage 

bystanders to come forward. They should also understand the dynamics of bystander decision -

making and the common barriers to reporting, so they can better enlist bystanders’ 

cooperation with their inquiries. 

It is time for the threat assessment practice community to focus more on bystanders’ 

critical role in violence prevention. Available research and decades of experience suggest that 32 

bystanders are often the be st source of pre -attack intelligence, including indicators of intent 

and “warning” behaviors, and that some planned attacks are, and have been, averted because 

bystanders have surfaced their concerns. Though bystander intervention is a complicated issue, 

there are good reasons to be optimistic. Organizations can create a climate in which bystanders 

are very likely to act , and save lives. 

Key Points 

• Bystanders may help to identify, assess and even manage those who plan or undertake 

violence .

• Bystanders are often the best source of pre -attack intelligence, including indicators of 

intent and “warning” behavior. 

• Studies of “thwarted attacks,” from school shootings to mass homicides consistently 

reveal that the plots were discovered because of i nformation brought forward by 

bystanders. 

• Bystanders may divert, prevent, stop, interrupt, mitigate or remediate wrongdoing 

directly or by alerting authorities. 

• Bystanders may help to identify an unknown perpetrator —or provide information after 

an event. 

• Bystanders typically face major barriers to reporting; understanding these ba rriers will 

help in locating bystanders, in conducting threat assessment interviews, and in assessing 

bystander information. 

• Understanding barriers faced by bystanders will help authorities: in providing safe, 

accessible and credible ways for bystanders to provide information, in training those 

who receive bystander information, and in training bystanders. 33 

References 

Banyard, V., Weber, M. C., Grych, J., & Hamby, S. (2016). Where are the helpful bystanders? 

Ecological niche and victims’ perceptions of bystander intervention. Journal of Community 

Psychology , 44 (2), 214 -231. 

Bennett, S., Banyard, V. L., & Garnhart, L. (2014). To act or not to act, that is the question ?

Barriers and facilitators of bystander intervention. Journal of Interpersonal Violence , 29 (3), 476 -

496. 

Berry, B. (2004). Organizational Culture: A Framework and Strategies for Facilitating Employee 

Whistleblowing. Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal , 16 (1), 1 -11. 

doi:10.1023/B:ERRJ.0000017516.40437.b1 

Cowie, H., & Hutson, N. (2005). Peer support: A strategy to help bystanders challenge school 

bullying. Pastoral Care in Education , 23 (2), 40 -44. 

Daniels, J. A., Buck, I., Croxall , S., Gruber, J., Kime, P., & Govert, H. (2007). A content analysis of 

news reports of averted school rampages. Journal of School Violence , 6(1), 83 -99. 

Edwards, K. M., Banyard, V. L., Sessarego, S. N., Waterman, E. A., Mitchell, K. J., & Chang, H. 

(2019) . Evaluation of a bystander -focused interpersonal violence prevention program with high 

school students. Prevention Science, 20(4) , 488 -498. 

FBI Office of Partner Engagement (2018). Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2016 

and 2017. Washingto n, DC: US Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

FBI Office of Partner Engagement (2019). Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2018. 

Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

Gill, P. (2015). Lone -Actor Terrorists: A Behavioural Analysis. London: Routledge. 

Gill, P., Horgan, J., and Deckert, P. (2014). Bombing Alone: Tracing the Motivations and 

Antecedent Behaviors of Lone -Actor Terrorists. Journal of Forensic Sciences 59(2):425 -435. 

Gill, P. , Silver, J., Horgan, J., and Corner, E. (2017). Shooting Alone: The Pre -Attack Experiences 

and Behaviors of U.S. Solo Mass Murderers with Implications for Threat Assessments. Journal of 

Forensic Sciences, 62(3), 710 -714. 

Hempel, A., Meloy, J. R., & Richa rds, T. (1999). Offender and offense characteristics of a 

nonrandom sample of mass murderers. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the 

Law, 27, 213 –225. 34 

Hollister, B., Scalora, M., Hoff, S., & Marquez, A. (2014). Exposure to preincident beha vior and 

reporting in college students. Journal of Threat Assessment and Management , 1(2), 129 -143. 

Kaptein, M. (2011). From inaction to external whistleblowing: the influence of the ethical 

culture of organizations on employee responses to observed wrong doing. Journal of Business 

Ethics, 98, 513 -530. 

King, G., (1997). The effects of interpersonal closeness and issue seriousness on blowing the 

whistle. The Journal of Business Communication, 34, 419 –436. doi:10.1007/s10672 -007 -9036 -0

Kish -Gephart , J. J., Harrison, D. A., & Treviño, L. K. (2010). Bad apples, bad cases, and bad 

barrels: meta -analytic evidence about sources of unethical decisions at work. Journal of Applied 

Psychology , 95 (1), 1 -31. 

Lankford, A. (2018). Identifying potential mass sho oters and suicide terrorists with warning 

signs of suicide, perceived victimization, and desires for attention or fame. Journal of 

Personality Assessment, 100(5), 471 -482. 

McLaughlin, E. & Chavez, N. (December 20, 2018). A student helped thwart a possible school 

shooting in Vermont . CNN. Retrieved August 18, 2019 from: 

https://www.cnn.com/2018/12/20/us/vermont -middlebury -school -shooting -

thwarted/index.html 

McMahon, S. (2015). Call for research on bystander intervention to prevent sexual violence: 

The role of campus environments. American journal of community psychology , 55 (3 -4), 472 -

489. 

Meloy, J. R., Hempel, A. G., Mohandie, K., Shiva, A. A., & Gray, B. T. (2001). Offender and 

offense characteristics of a nonrandom sample of adolescent mass murderers. Jo urnal of the 

American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(6), 719 -728. 

Miller, D. & Thomas, S. (2005). The impact of relative position and relational closeness on the 

reporting of unethical acts. Journal of Business Ethics, 61, 315 -328. 

Millsp augh, S. B., Cornell, D. G., Huang, F. L., & Datta, P. (2015). Prevalence of aggressive 

attitudes and willingness to report threats in middle school. Journal of Threat Assessment and 

Management , 2(1), 11 -22. 

Philpot, R., Liebst, L. S., Levine, M., Bernasco, W., & Lindegaard, M. R. (2019). Would I be 

helped? Cross -national CCTV footage shows that intervention is the norm in public conflicts. 

American Psychologist . DOI: 10.1037/amp0000469. 

Rowe, M. (2018). Fostering Constructive Action by Peers and B ystanders in Organizations and 

Communities. Negotiation Journal , 34 (2), 137 -163. 35 

Rowe, M., Wilcox, B. & Gadlin, H. (2009). Dealing with —or reporting —“unacceptable” behavior. 

Journal of the International Ombudsman Association, 2(1) , 1 -24. 

Sarteschi, C. M . (2016). An examination of thwarted mass homicide plots and threateners. 

Aggression and Violent Behavior , 30 , 88 -93. 

Schweit, K. W. (2016). Active shooter incidents in the United States in 2014 and 2015 

Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Federal B ureau of Investigation. 

Silver, J., Horgan, J., & Gill, P. (2018). Foreshadowing targeted violence: Assessing leakage of 

intent by public mass murderers. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 38, 94 -100. 

Silver, J., Simons, A., & Craun, S. (2018). A Study of the Pre -attack Behaviors of Active Shooters 

in the United States Between 2000 and 2013. Washington, DC: Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

Stallings, R., & Hall, J. C. (2019). Averted targeted school killings from 1900 -2016. Criminal 

Justice Studies , 1 -17. 

Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 1-

39. 

Tajfel, H., Turner, J. C., Austin, W. G., & Worchel, S. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup 

conflict. In M.J. Hatch & M. Schultz (Eds.) Organizat ional identity: A Reader , pp. 56 -65. Oxford: 

Oxford University Press. 

Vadera, A., Aguilera, R., & Caza, B. (2009). Making sense of whistleblowing’s antecedents: 

learning from research on identity and ethics programs , Business Ethics Quarterly, 19, 553 -586. 

Vossekuil, B., Fein, R., Reddy, M., Borum, R., & Modzeleski, W. (2002). The final report and 

findings of the Safe School Initiative: Implications for the prevention of school attacks in the 

United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Secret Service and U.S. Department of Education. 

Yancey -Bragg, N. (2019). A Texas man planned a mass shooting. His grandmother stopped him 

and 'saved lives,' officials say. USA Today. Retrieved August 16, 2019 from: 

https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2019/08/05/texas -mass -shooting -plot -foiled -

mans -grandmother/1924646001/ 36
