Title: Glossary of Election Terms

URL Source: https://www.eac.gov/sites/default/files/glossary_files/Glossary_of_Election_Terms_EAC.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 21 Jul 2021 17:35:02 GMT

Markdown Content:
12

Contents 

Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 3

Glossary of Election Terminology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 4

A ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 4

B................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 10 

C ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 16 

D ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 29 

E ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 34 

F ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 42 

G ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 46 

H ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 47 

I ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 49 

J ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 50 

K................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 50 

L ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 50 

M ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 52 

N ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 56 

O ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 60 

P ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 64 

Q ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 75 

R................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 77 

S ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 84 

T ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 93 

U ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 97 

V ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 99 

W ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 110 

X................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 112 

Y ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 112 

Z ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 112 3

# Purpose 

This glossary contains nearly 1,300 terms and phrases used in the administration of elections in the 

United States. The main purpose of the glossary is to provide election officials with a comprehensive 

resource of common words and phrases used in the administration of elections. T he establi shment of 

uniform election terminology is beneficial for ensuring consistency when communicating with the public 

about elections and voting . However, because election procedures and terminology var y by jurisdiction, 

it is best to always refer to state and local election officials when a term differs with the definitions in 

this glossary. 4

# Glossary of Election Terminology 

# A

Abandoned Ballot 

Ballot that the voter did not place in the ballot box or record as cast on a direct electronic recording 

device (DRE) before leaving the polling place .

Absentee Application 

An application to receive an absentee ballot. 

Absentee Ballot 

A ballot cast by a voter other than in -person on election day . Some jurisdictions use the term 

synonymous with mailed ballot s while other jurisdictions use the term synonymous with early voting. 

Absentee Ballot Request Form 

A form used by a voter to request an absentee ballot. 

Absentee Mail Process 

A series of actions or steps taken when voting using an absentee ballot. 

Absentee Procedures 

The established series of actions taken by an election official to process absentee ballots .

Absentee Vote 

A vote cast using an absentee ballot .

Absentee Vot er 

A voter who uses an absentee ballot to vote .

Absentee Voter Status 

A term used by election officials when determining whether a voter is eligible for, applied for or voted 

using an absentee ballot .

Absolute Majority 

More than 50% .

Acceptance Testing 

Examination of a voting system by the purchasing election jurisdiction to validate the performance of 

delivered devices to ensure they meet procurement requirements, and that the delivered system is, in 

fact, the certified system purchased. This usually ha ppens in a simulated -use environment. 5

Access Control 

The process of granting or denying specific requests to obtain and use information, and related 

information processing services, and enter specific physical facilities. 

Access Board 

Independent federal agency whose primary mission is accessibility for pe ople with disabilities and a 

leading source of information on accessible design. 

Accessibility 

Measurable characteristics that indicate the degree to which a system is available to, and usable by, 

individuals with disabilities. The most common disabilitie s include those associated with vision, hearing 

and mobility, as well as cognitive disabilities. 

Accessibility Requirements 

The set of laws, statutes and procedures that govern the voting process to ensure that voting is 

accessible to individuals with dis abilities. 

Accessible Facility 

A location that meets all of the laws and statues to ensure that it is available and usable by individuals 

with disabilities. 

Accessible Voting Station 

Voting station equipped for individuals with disabilities. 

Accreditation 

Formal recognition that a laboratory is competent to car ry out specific tests or calibrations. 

Accreditation Body 

(1) Authoritative body that performs accreditation. (2) An independent organization responsible for 

assessing the performance of other organizations against a recognized standard, and for formally 

confirming the status of those that meet the standard. 

Accuracy 

(1) Extent to which a given measurement agrees with an accepted standard for that measurement. (2) 

Closeness of the agreement between the result of a measurement and a true value of the particular 

quantity subject to measurement. Accuracy is a qualitative concept and is not interchangeable with 

precision. 

Accuracy For Voting Systems 

Ability of the system to capture, record, store, consolidate and report the specific selections and 

ab sence of selections, made by the voter for each ballot position without error. Required accuracy is 

defined in terms of an error rate that for testing purposes represents the maximum number of errors 

allowed while processing a specified volume of data. 

Activation Device 

Programmed device that creates credentials necessary to begin a voting session using a specific ballot 

style. Examples include electronic poll books and card activators that contain credential information 

necessary to determine the approp riate ballot style for the voter. 6

Active Registered Voter 

A voter whose record is current with the appropriate election authority and is eligible to vote. 

Active Status 

A term used by election officials when a voter's record shows that the voter is eli gible to vote. Active 

status may not be accurate if the facts have changed since a voter last updated their record. 

Adjudication 

Process of resolving cast ballots to reflect voter intent. Common reasons that ballots require 

adjudication include: write -in s, overvotes, marginal machine -readable mark, having no contest 

selections marked on the entire ballot, or the ballot being unreadable by a scanner. 

Adjudicated Ballot 

A voted ballot that contains contest selections that require d adjudication. 

Advance(d) Ballot 

A ballot cast prior to election day. 

Advisory Board Member 

A member of an advisory board or panel. 

Advisory Panel 

A group of individuals and organizations that provides non -binding strategic advice to the management 

of a corporation, organization, or foundation. 

Affidavit 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation. 

Affidavit For Absentee Ballot 

A form use d by a voter to request an absentee ballot that is confirmed by oath or affirmation. 

Affidavit of Circulator 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation by a person who gathered voters' signatures on a 

petition. 

Affidavit of Identity 

A document containing personally identifiable information used to verify your identity or signature. 

Affidavit of Registration 

A document containing personally identifiable information used to verify your identity or signature. 

Affiliation 

Officially assoc iated with an organization. In terms of voting, this usually refers to voters registering to 

vote and formally associating themselves with a recognized political party. 7

Air gap 

A physical separation between systems that requires data to be moved by some external, manual 

process. Denotes no connection to the internet or other digital networks. 

Alert time 

The amount of time that a voting device will wait for a detectible voter activity after issuing an alert, 

before going into an inactive state requir ing election official intervention. 

Alternative Format 

Providing a different way of accessing informatio n, such as an accessible ballot. 

Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) 

The ADA is a civil rights law that prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in all areas 

of public life and all public and private places that are open to the general public. 

Anonymous Contributions 

Financial contributions made to a n organized campaign, that do not require disclosure of the person or 

organization that made the contribution. 

Appeal 

(1) When parties to an action request that a higher authority review a formal decision. (2) A formal 

process by which the EAC is petitio ned to reconsider an Agency Decision. 

Appeal Authority 

The individual or individuals appointed to serve as the determination authority on appeal. 

Appeals Process 

The process in which decisions are reviewed after an appeal to a decision has been requested. 

Application for Ballot By Mail (ABBM) 

A document used to request a ballot be mailed to a voter. 

Appointed At Large 

A member of a governing body who is appointed to represent a whole membership or population 

(notably a city, county, state, prov ince, nation, club or association), rather than a subset. 

Appointed Incumbent 

A candidate who is currently serving in an office they were appointed to, and they are a candidate for 

election to the same office. 

Appointed Member 

A member of Congress who h olds an office they were appointed to, and they are a currently a candidate 

for election to the same office. 

Appointed To Serve Until Next General Election 

A person who has been appointed by a governing authority to fill a vacancy in a public office, that will be 

on the ballot in the next General election. 8

Appointee 

A person who has been appointed to a position in government by an appointing authority. 

Appointing Authority 

An officer or agency having power to make appointments to positions of public service. 

Apportionment 

Process of dividing membership or voters .

Appropriation 

A sum of money or total of assets devoted to a special purpose. 

Approval Voting 

An electoral system where each voter may select any number of candidates, and the winner is the 

candidate approved by the largest number of voters. It is distinct from plurality voting, in which a voter 

may choose only one option among several, whereby the o ption with the most votes is chosen. 

Assembly 

The name given to various legislatures, especially lower houses or full legislatures in states in federal 

systems of government. 

Assembly District 

One of a fixed number of districts into which a state is divided, each district electing one member to the 

lower house of the state legislature. 

Assembly Member 

A person elected or appointed to the lower house of a state legislature. 

Assistance to Vote 

Voters with disabilities are allowed assistance from a per son of their choice with limited exceptions. 

Assistant of Voters 

A poll work er or individual chosen by a voter to assist in the voting process .

Assistive Technology 

An item used to increase, maintain, or improve the functional capabilities of persons wi th disabilities. 

Asymmetric Cryptography 

Encryption system that uses a public and private key pair for cryptographic operation. The private key is 

generally stored in a user's digital certificate and used typically to decrypt or digitally sign data. The 

public key is used typically to encrypt the data or verify its digital signatures. The keys could be used 

interchangeably as needed, that is, a public key can be used to decrypt data and the private key can be 

used to encrypt the data. 

At Large 

The whole membership or population (notably a city, county, state, province, nation, club or 

association), rather than a subset. 9

Attest 

Be a witness to or formally certify .

Audio Ballot 

A ballot in which a set of offices is presented to the voter in spoken form. 

Audio Format 

A ballot display format in wh ich contest options and other information are communicated through 

sounds and speech. 

Audio Function with Headset And Earphones 

A ballot display format in which contest options and other information are communicated through 

sounds and speech. 

Audio -Tac tile Interface (ATI) 

Voter interface designed to not require visual reading of a ballot. Audio is used to convey information to 

the voter and sensitive tactile controls allow the voter to communicate ballot selections to the voting 

system. 

Audit 

(1) Systematic, independent, documented process for determining the extent to which specified 

requirements are fulfilled. (2) A review of a system and its controls to determine its operational status 

and the accuracy of its outputs. 

Audit Device 

Device dedic ated exclusively to independently verifying or assessing a voting systems' performance. 

Audit Trail 

Information recorded during election activities to reconstruct steps followed or to later verify actions 

taken with respect to election procedures and voting systems. 

Audit Trail for Direct -Recording Equipment 

Paper printout of votes cast, produced by di rect -recording electronic (DRE) voting machines, which 

election officials may use to cross -check electronically tabulated totals. 

Auditor 

A person who is performing an audit of any part of the election process. 

Authentication 

Verifying the identify of a user, process, device, or component of a system, often as a prerequisite to 

allowing access to resources in an information system but can also refer to verifying the authenticity of 

voter or ballot. 

Authorized Poll Agent 

In certain states, a chairperson of an organized party committee, candidate or precinct committee who 

is appointed to observe an election. 10 

Automated Voter Registration 

Voter registration system whereby eligible voters are given the option to register to vote electronically 

whenever they interact with government agencies. 

Automatic Voter Registration (AVR) 

Under an automatic voter registration system, eligible voters are automatically registered to vote 

whenever they interact with government agencies (e. g., departments of motor vehicles). 

Availability 

The percentage of time during which a system is operating properly and available for use. 

# B

Ballot 

The official presentation of all of the contests to be decided in a particular election. Either in paper or 

electronic format, the mechanism for voters to show their voter preferences. 

Ballot Access 

The ability to mark, cast, and verify a ballot privately and independently. 

Ballot Board 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities and charged with control of elections and 

voting procedure. 

Ballot Box 

A sealed container that holds ballots cast by voters. 

Ballot Card 

A card or a number of cards upon which are pri nted, or identified by reference to the ballot, the names 

of candidates for nomination or election to one or more offices or the ballot titles of one or more 

measures. 

Ballot Cast 

The final action a voter takes in selecting contest options and irrevocably confirming their intent to vote 

as selected. Examples include when a ballot has been deposited by the voter in the ballot box, mailbox, 

drop box or electronically submitted for tabulation. 

Ballot Configuration 

Particular set of contests to appear on the ballot for a particular election district, their order, the list of 

ballot positions for each contest, and the binding of candidate names to ballot positions. 

Ballot Counter 

Feature in a voting device that counts the votes cast in an election. This can also refer to a person who 

counts vote by hand. 11 

Ballot Counting Logic 

The software logic that defines the combinations of voter choices that are valid and invalid on a given 

ballot and that determines how the vote choices are totaled in a given election. 

Ballot Data 

A list of contests and associated options that may appear on a ballot for a particular election. 

Ballot Designation 

A description, name or formal title printed under a candidate's name on a ballot. May also include a 

candidate's political party or incumbent status. 

Ballot Drop Box 

A locked container, either indoor or outdoor, where voters can return a n absentee ballot for collection 

directly by an election offic ial. 

Ballot Envelope 

The official inner and outer envelopes used to transport absentee and mailed ballots. 

Ballot Exhaustion 

Refers to processing a ranked choice voting contest on a cast ballot, when that ballot becomes inactive 

and cannot be advanced in the tabulation for a contest because there are no further valid rankings on 

the ballot for continuing contest options .

Ballot Fatigue 

Phenomenon where voters opt not to vote on races or issues appear ing further down the ballot .

Ballot Format 

The concrete presentation of the contents of a ballot appropriate to the particular voting technology 

being used. The contents may be rendered using various methods of presentation (visual or audio), 

language or graphics. 

Ballot Harvesting 

The act of collecting ballots, typically by a political party or nonprofit organization, for multiple vot ers 

and returning those ballots to an elections office on behalf of those voters. The legality of this practice 

varies by state, with some states allowing the practice , limiting who can return ballots on behalf of 

others or banning t he practice completely. 

Ballot Image 

Electronically produced record of all votes cast by a single voter. Also, can mean a digital image of a 

voted ballot captured by a voting system or ballot tabulation device. 

Ballot Instructions 

Information provided to a voter that describe s the procedures for marking the ballot. This information 

may appear directly on the paper or electronic ballot or may be provided separately. 

Ballot Label 

The portion of voting materials that contains information about voters, candidates, ballots, contests or 

other election data .12 

Ballot Layout 

The concrete presentation of the contents of a ballot appropriate to the particular voting technology 

being used. The contents may be r endered using various methods of presentation (visual or audio), 

language or graphics. 

Ballot Manifest 

A catalog prepared by election officials listing all the physical paper ballots and their locations in 

sequence. This is a requirement for a Risk Limiti ng Audit but can be used to track ballot inventory and 

create an audit record for other types of audits. 

Ballot Marking Device 

A device that permits contest options to be reviewed on an electronic interface, produces a human -

readable paper ballot, and do es not make any other lasting record of the voter's selections. 

Ballot Measure 

(1) A question that appears on the ballot for approval or rejection. (2) A contest on a ballot where the 

voter may vote yes or no. 

Ballot on Demand 

A process that produces a paper ballot of the required ballot style with the contests and candidates 

specific to a voter. This process requires a system with a printer that can create paper ballots that can be 

tabulated on a voting system and device with a ll of the data needed to print a ballot style associated 

with a specific voter. Note: "ballot on demand" is a registered trademark of ES&S, but it is a term that is 

commonly used for similar systems. 

Ballot Order 

(1) The order in which contests and candi dates appear on a ballot. The order candidates and issues 

appear on the ballot vary by state. (2) The term used when an election official requests a ballot printer 

to print a specific number of ballots. 

Ballot Pamphlet 

Official information about your bal lot issued from an elections office, often referred to as a voter 

information guide. 

Ballot Pickup 

Refers to the act of collecting an absentee or mailed ballot, instead of returning it via drop box, through 

the mail, or delivery. 

Ballot Position 

A spec ific place in a ballot where a voter's selection for a particular contest may be indicated. Positions 

may be connected to row and column numbers on the face of a voting machine or ballot, particular bit 

positions in a binary record of a ballot (for example , an electronic ballot image), or the equivalent in 

some other form. Ballot positions are bound to specific contests and candidate names by the ballot 

configuration. 13 

Ballot Preparation 

Selecting the specific contests and questions to be contained in a ballot format and related instructions; 

preparing and testing election -specific software containing these selections; producing all possible ballot 

formats; and validating the correctness of ballot materials and software containing these selections for 

an upcoming election. 

Ballot Production 

Process of generating ballots for presentation to voters, for example, printing paper ballots, or 

configuring the ballot presentation for an electronic display. 

Ballot Question 

Proposals to enact new laws or constitutional amendments that are placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters .

Ballot Remake 

A ballot substituted for a damaged or partially invalid ballot -- usually remade by a regulated process 

where the votes from the damaged or partially invalid ballot are duplicated ont o another ballot that can 

tabulated by a scanner. 

Ballot Rotation 

Process of varying the order of the candidate names within a given contest. This practice varies by state. 

Ballot Scanner 

Device used to read the voter selection data from a paper ballot or ballot card. 

Ballot Secrecy 

A set of rules and procedures to establish the fundamental right of voters in the United States to cast a 

secret ballot. These procedures ensure that no ballot can be associated with a voter, thereby allowing 

voters to mark their ballots freely and without fear of repercussion or reprisal. 

Ballot Stub 

A small strip , usually located at the top of a ballot , that is perforated with information about the ballot 

such as a serial number, the date of the election, and jurisdiction where the election is being held. 

Ballot Stuffing 

The act of casting illegal votes or submitting more than one ballot per voter when only one ballot per 

voter is permitted. 

Ballot Style 

A ballot with a specific set of contests and candidates for a particular precinct. Ballot styles vary based 

on which combination of contests and which party affiliation (in primary elections), that vot ers are 

eligible to participate in. Ballot style varies based on the contests voters are eligible to vote on and, 

during primary elections, their party affiliation. 

Ballot Title 

(1) The official short summary of a ballot measure that appears on a ballot. (2) The ballot title typically 

includes the election date and type (Special, Primary, or General) of election. 14 

Ballot Types 

A ballot with a specific set of contests and candidates fo r a particular precinct. Ballot styles vary based 

on which combination of contests and which party affiliation (in a primary election), that voters are 

eligible to participate in. 

Barcode 

An optical and machine -readable representation of data as a sequen ce of bars and spaces that conform 

to accepted standards. A QR code is an example of a barcode. 

Barcode Reader 

Device used to scan barcodes and convert the encoded information into a usable format. Barcode 

readers are used to scan codes on a variety of election materials including ballots, driver's licenses, voter 

ID cards, voter information packets, envelopes, and other election documents. 

Baseline Voting 

A vote variation in which the candidate with the most votes wins. In single -seat contests, the voter may 

only select one contest option. In multi -seat contests, the voter may select up to the number of contests 

specified on the ballot. 

Batch 

A collection of paper ballots gathered as a group for tabulation and auditing. 

Batch -fed scanner 

• An electronic voting device that: 

• accepts stacks of hand -marked or BMD -produced paper ballots and automatically processes 

the m until the stack is empty; 

• is usually used at an election jurisdiction’s central location; 

• is mostly commonly used to process absentee ballots; 

• usually has input and output hoppers for ballots; 

• scans a ballot and rejects it if either unreadable or un -proc essable; 

• detects, interprets, and validates contest selections; 

• detects and sorts (either digitally or physically) ballots that are unreadable or unprocessable, or 

• that contain undeterminable selections, marking exceptions, or write -ins; and 

• tabulates and reports contest results as required. 

Benchmark 

Quantitative point of reference to which the measured performance of a system or device may be 

compared. 

Bicameral 

A legislative body having two branches or chambers. 

Biennial 

Taking place every other year. Federal elections take place biennially in even -numbered years. 

Biennium 

A specified period of two years. 15 

Bilingual Requirements 

The list of laws and regulations that determine which election materials need to be available in 

languages other than English. 

Blank Ballot 

An issued ballot without any selections made. 

Blank Space 

An area on the ballot typically used by voters to write in a name that is not already pre -printed with the 

other candidate's name on the ballot for that contest. 

Blanket Primary 

Primary election wherein a voter may vote for candidates from any party, regardless of the political 

party affiliation of the voter or candidates. 

Blind 

Very limited or lack of vision. 

Block Voting 

A system in which a voter can select as many candidates as there are open seats. 

Board (Election) 

A group of individuals working together to complete an elections task. Examples include Precinct 

Boards, Canvassing Boards, Auditing Boards, among others. 

Board of Canvassers 

A group of individuals working together, following specific rules and procedures, to compile, review, and 

validate election materials. 

Board of Commissioners 

The governing body of a county in many U.S. states, especially in the Midwest and the East, con sisting of 

members elected by the voters. 

Board of Directors 

A board that manages the affairs of an institution or local government. 

Board of Elections 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities, and charged with control of elections and 

voting procedures. 

Board of Registrars 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities and charged with control of elections and 

voting. 

Board of Supervisors 

The governing body of a county in many U.S. states, especially in the West, consisting of members 

elected by the voters. 16 

Bond 

A debt in which the authorized issuer owes the holders a debt and is obliged to repay the principal and 

interest at a later date. Bonds questions may be placed on local ballots to approve or deny a bond and, if 

approved by voters, the bond may be re paid through the collection of property taxes within a 

determined jurisdiction, school district, or special district. Ballot questions may be placed on Statewide 

ballots and, if approved by voters, the bond is repaid with taxes or fees collected by the Sta te. 

Bond Election 

An election where a proposal to allow a state or local government to approve additional spending in 

which a debt and obligation are repaid with interest appears on the ballot for voters to decide on. 

Bond Issue 

A proposal to allow a s tate or local government to approve additional spending in which a debt and 

obligation are repaid with interest. 

Bond Proposition 

When a state or local government places a question before the voters as a ballot measure, asking them 

to approve additional proposed spending using a bond. 

Bond Referendum 

A proposal to repeal a law authorizing a bond that was previously enacted by a gov erning body, and that 

is placed on the ballot to be approved or rejected by voters .

Borough 

A town, village, or part of a large city that has its own government. 

Boundary Line 

The line that divides a precinct, city, or other political unit from another. 

Braille Voting Instructions 

Voting instructions written in characters that are represented by patterns of raised dots which are read 

through touch. 

Butterfly Ballot 

A ballot t hat has the names of candidates down both sides of a ballot, with a single column to mark 

choices down the middle. 

# C

Call an Election 

When an authorized government authority proclaims that an election will take place at a particular time. 

Campaign 

A series of democratic activities to influence a political vote for or against candidates or ballot questions. 17 

Campaign Contributions 

Any thing of value given, loaned or advanced to influence a political vote for or against candidates or 

ballot questions. 

Campaign Disclosure 

The act of reporting campaign contributions. 

Campaign Expense Report 

Report that details political expenses requir ed to be filed by a governing authority. 

Campaign Finance 

The act of raising and spending funds for political purposes. 

Campaign Finance Disclosure Statements 

Reports that detail political contributions and expenses required to be filed by a governing authority. 

Campaign Finance Laws 

A set of laws that detail the rules and regulations for raising and spending funds and contributions for 

political purposes .

Campaign Finance Report 

Reports that detail political contributions and expenses required to be filed by a governing authority .

Campaign Finance Reporting Requirements 

A set of requirements that detail the rules and regulations for raising and spending funds and 

contributions for political purposes. 

Campaign Materials 

The do cuments, resources and other materials used to influence a political vote for or against 

candidates or ballot questions. Campaign materials may include t -shirts, buttons, bumper stickers, yard 

signs, and other printed materials. 

Campaign Signs 

A sign adve rtising a particular vote. 

Cancellation Notices 

Written messages to voters informing them they have been removed from voter registration lists .

Cancellation of Registration 

The act of removing a voter from a voter registration list .

Cancelled Voter Status 

A term used by election officials when a voter's record shows that the voter has been removed from the 

voting rolls. 

Candidacy 

The state of being a candidate .18 

Candidate 

A person who is seeking nomination or election to a specified office an d who either has met the legal 

requirements to have his/her name printed on the ballot or is eligible to have his/her name written in 

on the ballot and counted as the voter's choice for the contest. Note - federal campaign finance and 

some states do not re quire a person to have filed petitions to be considered a candidate. Raising money 

alone can make you a candidate. 

Candidate Committee 

A group of individuals organized for political purposes to support or oppose candidates for public office .

Candidate No mination Procedures 

The official procedures to propose an individual to be considered for public office. 

Candidate Petitions 

A formal written document signed by registered voters to request the names of candidates be placed on 

election ballots .

Candidate Registration 

The act of completing the required paperwork to become a certified candidate for public office. 

Candidate Rost er 

A formal list of candidates .

Candidate Statement 

A written summary of information about a candidate for public office for the purposes of influencing 

voters .

Candidate Withdrawal 

When a person announces a candidacy or files for an election but later decides —by their own choice —

not to appear on the final ballot. 

Candidate Withdrawal Periods 

The time frame when an individual may remove their name from the list of candidates for public office. 

Candidates List 

Official listing of all qualified candidates for a public office up for election .

Canvass 

(1) Aggregating or confirming every valid ballot cast and counted, which includes absentee, early voting, 

Election Day, provisional, challenged, and uniformed and overseas citizen. (2) Soli cit votes. 

Canvass Report 

A detailed report of activities and information about the canvass of an election .

Canvassing Board 

A group of individuals working together, following specific rules and procedures, to compile, review and 

validate election materi als. 19 

Carry an Election 

To win an election .

Cast 

The final action a voter takes in selecting contest options and irrevocably confirming their intent to vote 

as selected .

Cast Ballot 

A ballot has been deposited by the voter in the ballot box, mailbox, drop box or electronically submitted 

for tabulation. 

Cast Vote Record 

Permanent record of all votes produced by a single voter whether in electronic, paper or other form. 

Also referred to as ballot image when used to refer to electronic ballots. 

Cast Your Ballot (Cast Your Vote) 

The act of a voter to place their completed paper ballot in a ballot box, to confirm and record their 

choices on a touch screen voting device at a voting location , to place a completed ballot in the mail or a 

drop box or to send a completed ballot through electronic transmission to an elections office. Once a 

ballot is cast, it usually cannot be changed. 

Catastrophic System Failure 

Total loss of function or funct ions, such as the loss or unrecoverable corruption of voting data or the 

failure of an on -board battery of volatile memory. 

Caucus 

(1) A closed meeting of a group of persons belonging to the same political party or faction usually to 

select candidates or to decide on policy . (2) A group of people united to promote an agreed -upon cause. 

Caucus Election 

A meeting at which local members of a political party register their preference among candidates 

running for office or select delegates to attend a convention .

Caucus System 

Rules and regulations that determine the process for a meeting at which local members of a political 

party register their preference among candidates running for office or select delegates to attend a 

convention .

Central Absente e Precinct 

A central absentee precinct (CAP) is a precinct established in the courthouse or other public building in a 

county or city for the receiving, counting, and recording of absentee ballots cast in the county or city. 

Central Committee 

The organization of the central or executive committees of the political parties in a county, state, or 

other political subdivision. 

Central Count 

An act of tabulating ballots from multiple precincts at a central location. 20 

Central Count Process 

The rules and regulations followed when tabulating ballots from multiple precincts at a central location. 

Central Count Voting System 

A voting system that tabulates ballots from multiple precincts at a central location. Voted ballots are 

placed into secure storage at the polling place. Stored ballots are transported or transmitted to a central 

counting place which produces the vote count report. 

Central Counting Station 

A site used to check in, process or tabulate ballots from multiple precincts as a centra l location .

Central Reporting Device 

Electronic voting device that consolidates and reports vote totals from multiple precincts at a central 

location. 

Central Voter Register List 

A list of voters maintained in a single, uniform, official, computerized st atewide database of registered 

voters. 

Centralized Voter Registration Database (CVR) 

A single, uniform, official, computerized statewide database of registered voters. 

Certificate 

An official document attesting a certain fact. 

Certificate of Circulator 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation by a person who gathered voter's signatures on a 

petition. 

Certificate of Election 

A written statement confirming that a candidate was elected to public office. 

Certificate of Error 

A written statement detailing an election error. 

Certificate of Nomination 

A written statement confirming that a candidate received one of the highest numbers of votes for public 

office, usually indicating they will be moving on to a general or run -off elec tion. 

Certificate of Permanent Disability 

A form completed by a licensed or certified health professional, or designated agency attesting to an 

individual’s disability .

Certificate of Registration 

An official, sworn statement by an elections office to at test that a citizen is a registered voter. 

Certificate of Restoration 

A certificate issued by a judicial system to restore voting rights. 21 

Certification 

Procedure by which a third party gives written assurance that a product, process , or service conforms to 

specified requirements. 

Certification of Election 

A written statement attesting that the tabulation and canvassing of the election is complete and 

accurate. 

Certification of Official Election Results 

A written statement attesting that the election results are a true and accurate accounting of all votes 

cast in a particular election. 

Certification of Signatures 

A written statement attesting that the number of signatures on a petition counted as valid or rejected is 

a true and accurate accounting of the facts. 

Certification Requirements 

The laws and regulations that govern the conditions that are essential elements to certify an elections or 

voting process. 

Certification Testing 

Testing performed under either national or state certification processes to verify voting system 

conformance to requirements. 

Certified Election Results 

Final vote tallies that have been attested as true and accurate by the official responsible for confirming 

their accuracy .

Certify 

The act of a third party giving written assurance that a product, process or service conforms to specified 

requirements. 

Chad 

A small piece of wastepaper produced by punching a hole in punched card or tape. 

Chain of Custody 

A process used to track the mov ement and control of an asset through its lifecycle by documenting each 

person and organization who handles an asset, the date/time it was collected or transferred, and the 

purpose of the transfer. 

Challenge 

Questioning the eligibility of a voter to cast a ballot, or to accept a ballot for counting. 

Challenged Ballot 

Ballot voted by an individual whose eligibility to vote has been questioned by another (typically an 

election official). The ballot is held until the reason for the challenge is resolved. 22 

Challenged Voter 

A voter whose eligibility to cast a ballot has been questioned. 

Challenger 

An individual or official who questions the eligibility of a voter to cast a ballot, or to accept a ballot for 

counting. 

Change in Political Affiliati on 

The act of a voter re -registering to vote with a different political preference or association. 

Change of Address 

The act of a voter re -registering to vote to update their residence or mailing address. Voters can also 

update their address at approved g overnment agencies such as the Department of Mot or Vehicles and 

the United States Postal Service. 

Change of Party 

The act of a voter re -registering to vote with a different political preference or association. 

Charter 

A written document by a legislative authority, such as a City or County, that defines the laws and 

regulations of that body. 

Charter Amendment 

An amendment to a written document that has been adopted by a legislative authority, such as a City of 

County, that modifies its organizing charter. 

Check the Box 

The act of marking a vote on a ballot. 

Chief Election Officer 

The official responsible fo r overseeing elections in a jurisdiction. 

Chief Inspector 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Chief State Election Officer 

The official responsible for overseeing elections in a state. 

Circulate 

The act of attempting to gather signatures from voters for initiatives, referendums , or candidates. 

Circulation 

The process of gathering signatures for initiatives, referendums or candidates. 

Circulator 

A person who presents petitions to voters to gather signatures for initiatives, referendums, or 

candidates. 23 

Circulator Statement 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation by a person who gathered voter's signatures on a 

petition. 

Citizen 

A person who, by place of birth, nationality of one or both parents, or naturalization is granted full rights 

and responsibilities as a member of a nation or political community, including the right to vote if not 

otherwise ineligible. 

Citizen Initiatives 

The procedure by which citizens can propose a law directly to a governing body. 

City 

An incorporated local government body within a state. 

City Charter 

A written document by a City that defines the laws and regulations of that body. 

City Clerk 

A city official who is responsible for election administration for a city .

City General Municipal Election 

A regular election of candidates and measures within a city. 

City Ordinance 

A law passed by a city. 

City Special Municipal Election 

An election held other than a regularly scheduled primary or general election within a city. 

Claim of Conformance 

Statement by a vendor declaring that a specific product conforms to a particular standard or set of 

standard profiles; for voting systems, NASED qualification or EAC certification provides independent 

verification of a claim. 

Clerk 

An official responsible for administering an election or an election process. 

Clerk of Absentee Voting 

An official responsible for overseeing absentee voting or a portion of the absentee voting process. 

Close of Registration 

The last day that a citizen can register to vote or update their voter registration before an election. 

Closed Primary 

Primary election in which voters receive a ballot listing only those candidates running for office in the 

political party with which the voters are affiliated. In some states, non -partisan contests and ballot 

issues may be included. 24 

Code of Conduct 

A set of rules outlining the norms, rules, and responsibilities or proper practices of an individual or 

organization. 

Code of Conduct of Elected Officials 

A set of rules outlining the norms, rules, and respo nsibilities or proper practices of election officials. 

Combined Precinct 

Two or more precincts treated as a single precinct for a specific election. 

Commercial Off -The -Shelf (COTS) 

Software, firmware, device , or component that is used in the United State s by many different people or 

organizations for many different applications other than certified voting systems and that is 

incorporated into the voting system with no manufacturer - or application -specific modification. 

Common Data Format 

Standard and practice of storing and creating data in a common, described format that can be read by 

other systems. 

Common Industry Format (CIF) 

Refers to the format described in ANSI/INCITS 354 -2001 "Common Industry Format (CIF) for Usability 

Test Reports." 

Component 

Element within a larger system; a component can be hardware or software. For hardware, it is a physical 

part of a subsystem that can be used to compose larger systems (e.g., circuit boards, internal modems, 

processors, computer memory) . For software, it is a module of executable code that performs a well -

defined function and interacts with other components. 

Computer Judge 

Vote center election worker who checks the voter’s ID and signature, and processes the voter in the 

electronic poll book. 

Conditional Voter Registration 

Some states use this term to define t he action of an individual registering and casting a provisional ballot 

after the statutory deadline, but whose eligibility or registration status could not be confirmed when 

they present themselves to vote. 

Conduct an Election 

The act of managing, running, and overseeing an election. 

Configuration Management 

Discipline applying technical and administrative direction and surveillance to identify and document 

functional and physica l characteristics of a configuration item, control changes to these characteristics, 

record and report change processing and implementation status, and verify compliance with specified 

requirements. 25 

Configuration Management Plan 

Document detailing the pr ocess for identifying, controlling and managing various released items (such as 

code, hardware and documentation). 

Configuration Status Accounting 

An element of configuration management, consisting of the recording and reporting of information 

needed to manage a configuration effectively. This includes a listing of the approved configuration 

identification, the status of proposed changes to the configuration, and the implementation status of 

approved changes. 

Confirmation Mailing 

A notice maile d to a voter to confirm changes made to their information on a voter list. The notice may 

request that the voter take an action to confirm that the information contained in the notice is accurate. 

Confirmation Notice 

A notice mailed to a voter to confirm changes made to their information on a voter list. The notice may 

request that the voter take an action to confirm that the information contained in the notice is accurate. 

Conformance 

Fulfilling specified requirements by a product, process, or service. 

Conformance Testing 

Process of testing an implementation against the requirements specified in one or more standards. The 

outcomes of a conformance test are generally a pass or fail result, possibly including reports of problems 

encountered during the ex ecution. Also known as certification testing. 

Congressional District 

The area within the boundaries of a state which a member of the U.S. House of Representatives is 

elected. 

Congressional Election 

An election when voters participate to election their U. S. House of Representative. 

Connect the Arrow 

On certain ballots, voters are instructed to draw a single line to connect the head and tail of the arrow 

that points to the choice to vote for a candidate or measure, instead of filling in a bubble or marking an 

X. 

Consolidated Election 

An election where more than one jurisdiction is holding an election on the same day, and participating 

jurisdictions take an official action to combine elections on the same ballot. 

Consolidated Precinct 

Two or more precincts treated as a single precinct for a specific election. 26 

Consolidated Primaries 

An election where more than one jurisdiction is holding a n election on the same day, one of which is a 

scheduled primary election, and participating jurisdicti ons take an official action to combine elections on 

the same ballot. 

Constituent 

A person who is represented politically by a designated government official or officeholder, especially 

when the official is one that the person represented has the opportun ity to participate in selecting 

through voting. 

Constitution 

The basic principles and laws of a nation, state, or social group that determine the powers and duties of 

the government and guarantee certain rights to the people in it. 

Contest 

(1) A single d ecision or set of associated decisions being put before the voters (for example, the option 

of candidates to fill a particular public office or the approval or disapproval of a constitutional 

amendment). This term encompasses other terms such as “race,” “q uestion,” and “issue” that are 

sometimes used to refer to specific kinds of contests. (2) A legal challenge of an election outcome. 

Contested Races 

An election contest with more candidates that there are vacancies for that election .

Continue Voting 

Terminology used in some electronic voting systems or ballot marking devices to indicate that the voter 

either has more selections or has not cast their ballot. 

Contribution 

Anything of value given, loaned or advanced to influence a political vote for or against candidates or 

ballot questions. 

Contribution Limit 

The maximum amount that an individual or organization may give, loan or advance to influence a 

political vote for or against candidates or ballot questions. 

Contributions and Expenses Reports 

Reports that detail political contributions and expenses required to be filed by a governing authority .

Contributions and Spendin g Limits 

The regulations that govern the maximum amount that a candidate or committee can spend to 

influence a political vote and that an individual or organization may give, loan or advance to influence a 

political vote for or against candidates or ballot questions. 

Controls 

A device, procedure, or subsystem, which when properly designed and implemented, ensures 

correctness of operation in a system. Common controls include completeness of processing checks, 

authentication of users, and accuracy in processing. Controls can be preventative (prevent anomalies 

from occurring) or paired, detective and corrective controls. 27 

Corrective Action 

Action taken to eliminate the causes of an existing deficiency or other undesirable situation in order to 

prevent re currence. 

Council District 

The area within the boundaries of a state which a member of a City or Town Council is elected. 

Count 

Process of totaling votes. 

Counted Ballot 

Ballot that has been processed and whose votes are included in the candidates and m easures vote 

totals. 

County 

A political and administrative division of a state, providing certain local government services .

County Auditor 

A county official, in some states, who is responsible for election administration for a county. 

County Board of Election 

A group of individuals charged with control of elections and voting procedures for a county. 

County Board of Supervisors 

The governing body of a county in many U.S. states, especially in the West, consisting of members 

elected by the voters. 

County Clerk 

A county official who is responsible for election administration for a county. 

County Commission 

The governing body of a county in many U.S. states, especially in the Midwest and the East, consisting of 

members elected by the vo ters. 

County Election Commission 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities and charged with control of elections and 

voting procedure. 

County Election Officer 

An official who is responsible for election administration for a county. 

County Election Precinct 

Election administrative division corresponding to a geographic area that is the basis for determining 

which contests the voters legally residing in that area are eligible to vote on. 

County Elections Officials 

Officials who are responsible for election administration for a county. 28 

County Measure 

A law, issue, or question that appears on a ballot for voters of a county to decide on. 

County Recorder 

A county official, in some states, who is responsible for election administration for a county. 

County of Residence 

The county in a state or territory in which, at the time a person or receives services, the person is living 

and has established on ongoing presence for a permanent or indefinite period of time. 

County Special District 

A political subdivision o f a county established to provide a single public service (such as water supply or 

sanitation) within a specific geographic area. 

Competency Order 

An order issued by a court determining whether a person has the mentally capacity to vote. 

Critical Infrastructure 

The physical and cyber systems and assets that are so vital to the United States that their incapacity or 

destruction would have a debilitating impact on our physical or economic security or public health or 

safety. 

Cross -Filing 

Endorsement of a single candidate or slate of candidates by more than one political party. The candidate 

or slate appears on the ballot representing each endorsing political party. Also referred to as cross -party 

endorsement. 

Cross -party endorsement 

Endorsement of a single candidate or slate of candidates by more than one political party. The candidate 

or slate appears on the ballot representing each endorsing political party. 

Crossover Voting 

The act of a voter participating in a partisan primary election of a party that they are not officially 

registered or affiliated with. 

Cryptographic Key 

Value used to control cryptographic operations, such as decryption, encryption, signature generation or 

signature verification. 

Cryptography 

Discipline that embodies the principles, means, and methods for the transformation of data in order to 

hide their semantic content, prevent their unauthorized use, prevent their undetected modification and 

establish their authenticity. 

Cumulative Voting 

A vote variation used in a mul tiple seat contest where a voter is permitted to distribute a specified 

number of votes to one or more contest options. Two major variations are used in US elections, one of 

which may result in fractional votes. 29 

Curbside Voting 

When a voter cannot enter a polling place, in some jurisdictions election officers are authorized to assist 

a voter with voting and casting a ballot outside of the polling place. 

Cure 

The process of fixing an error or providing information to an elections office when your ballot ha s

originally been rejected for counting. 

Cured Ballot 

A ballot that was originally rejected for an error or because it was missing required information but was 

ultimately counted because the voter corrected the error or supplied the required information. 

Cure Period 

The time period authorized by law or regu lations that a voter has to provide required information to 

allow a ballot to be counted that was originally rejected. This process is often authorized when 

signatures on ballot envelopes do not compare to signatures on voter registration cards, or if a vo ter 

forgets to sign their ballot envelope. 

Current Resident Address 

The address where you are current living. 

Custodian 

Person with the responsibility for protecting information assets. 

Cybersecurity 

Measures taken to protect computer systems and data from attach and unauthorized access or use. 

# D

Damaged Ballot 

A ballot that has been torn, bent, or otherwise mutilated or rendered unreadable such that it cannot be 

processed by the ballot tabulating equipment designed for use with the ballot. 

Data Accuracy 

(1) Data accuracy is defined in terms of ballot position error rate. This rate applies to the voting 

functions and supporting equipment that capture, record, store, consolidate and report the specific 

selections, and absence of selections, ma de by the voter for each ballot position. (2) The system's ability 

to process voting data absent internal errors generated by the system. It is distinguished from data 

integrity, which encompasses errors introduced by an outside source. 

Data Integrity 

Inv ulnerability of the system to accidental intervention or deliberate, fraudulent manipulation that 

would result in errors in the processing of data. It is distinguished from data accuracy which 

encompasses internal, system -generated errors. 30 

Data Security 

The practice of protecting digital information from unauthorized access, corruption, or theft throughout 

its entire lifecycle. 

Deadline for Voting 

The latest time and date that a citizen can vote. 

Deaf 

Hearing loss so severe that there is very little or no functional hearing. 

Decertification 

Revocation of national or state certification of voting system hardware and software. 

Declaration of Assistance to Vote 

A form completed by a disabled voter to ei ther request or deny assistance during the voting process. 

Declaration of Candidacy 

The act of completing the required paperwork to become a candidate for public office. 

Declaration of Intent 

The act of completing the required paperwork to declare a person's intent to become a candidate for 

public office. 

Declaration of Intent to Solicit and Receive Contributions 

A document filed with a governing authority to declare a person's intent to raise and spend political 

contributions. 

Declaration of Write -in Candidate 

A document filed with a governing authority to declare a person's intent to seek election to an office 

where their name will not be pre -printed on a ballot but need a voter to write in the candidate's name 

on a blank space for that contest. 

Decryption 

Process of changing encrypted text into plain text. 

Defective Ballot 

A ballot that has been torn, defaced, or marked in a way that it cannot be tabulated by a scanner. 

Defense -In -Depth 

Multiple levels of logical and physical security measures that deny a single point of security failure in a 

system. Also called the “Castle” approach. 

Delegate 

An authorized person sent to represent others, in particular an elective representative. 

Democracy 

A government in which the supreme power is v ested in the people and exercised by them directly or 

indirectly through a system of representation usually involving periodically held free elections. 31 

Deputy 

A person who is empowered or authorized to act on behalf of a person in authority. Election offic ials can 

administer an oath to citizens to carry out official election duties as their deputies in some States .

Designation 

A description, name, or formal title. In some jurisdictions, a candidate may submit a descriptive 

designation to be printed under their name on the ballot. 

Device 

Functional unit that performs its assigned tasks as an integrated whole. 

Digital Certificate 

A technology by which systems and their users can employ the security applications of Public Key 

Infrastructure (PKI). PKI is a set of roles, policies, and procedures needed to create, manage, distribute, 

use, store, and revoke digital certificates and manage public -key encryption. 

Digital Signature 

An asymmetric key operation where the private key is used to digitally sign an electronic document and 

the public key is used to verify the signature. Digital signatures provide data authentication and integrity 

protection. 

Digitize 

To convert analog data to digital format for storage and use on a computer. The digital form of the 

character “A” is the byte: 01000001 (ASCII value 65). Any data stored in a computer must be digitized. 

Direct Democracy 

A form of democracy in which citizens decide on policy initiatives directly, such as when voters decide 

on initiative, propositions , and referendums. 

Direct Primary 

A primary election in which members of a party nominate its candidates by direct vote. 

Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) 

A vote capture device that allows electronic presentation of a ballot, electronic selection of va lid contest 

options, and electronic storage of contest selections as individuals vote. It also provides a summary of 

these contest selections. 

Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) Voting System 

An electronic voting system that utilizes electronic components for the functions of ballot presentation, 

vote capture, vote recording, and tabulation which are logically and physically integrated into a single 

unit. A DRE produces a tabulation of the voting data stored in a removable memory component and in 

printed h ardcopy. 

Directly Verifiable 

Voting system feature that allows the voter to verify at least one representation of their ballot with their 

own senses, not using any software or hardware intermediary. Examples include a Marksense paper 

ballot and a DRE wit h a voter verifiable paper record feature. 32 

Directory 

A file storage architecture in which individual files are stored in separate, hierarchical directories. The 

directory is the map to where the file is stored. Most systems will store files in a default directory unless 

otherwise specified. 

Disability 

With respect to an individual: (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more 

of the major life activities of such individual; (2) a record of such an impairment; (3) bein g regarded as 

having such an impairment (definition from the Americans with Disabilities Act). 

Disabled 

An individual with a disability is defined by the ADA as a person who has a physical or mental 

impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a person who has a history or 

record of such an impairment, or a person who is perceived by others as having such an impairment. 

Disabled Voters 

Voters that may require assistance during the election process to interact with systems not designed 

using universal design. 

Discrimination 

Unequal treatment. 

Disenfranchise 

To deprive someone of the right to vote. 

Displaced Voters 

Voters who have had to leave their homes, typically because of a natural disaster. 

Disqualification 

The act ion of disqualifying a candidate or voter from participating in an electoral process. 

Disqualify 

Pronounce someone ineligible for an office or unable to participate in an electoral process. 

Disqualifying 

An action or offense that makes a candidate or voter unable to participate in an electoral process. 

Distribution of Contributions 

The detailed expenses of political candidate or campaign. 

District 

A political subdivision established within a specific geographic area. 

District Lines 

The lines that divide Districts from one another. 

District Number 

The number assigned to a political district. 33 

District Office 

An office of the federal or state government that is not voted on statewide. 

Double Voting 

When a voter votes more than one ba llot. 

Download 

An act or instance of transferring something (such as data or files) from a usually large computer to the 

memory of another device (such as a smaller computer) to transfer (data, files, etc.) from one location 

(such as a large computer or t he cloud) to another (such as a smaller computer, smartphone, or storage 

device). 

Dox 

Publishing damaging or defamatory information about an individual or organization on the Internet. 

Drop Box 

A locked container, either indoor or outdoor, where voters can return a mailed ballot for collection 

directly by an election official. 

Duplicate Ballot 

A ballot substituted for a damaged or partially invalid ballot. Duplicate ballots are usually remade by a 

regulated process where the votes from the damage d or partially invalid ballot are duplicated onto 

another ballot that can tabulated by a scanner. 

Duplicate Records 

Identical rows of information or documents. 

Duplicate Registrations 

An application to register to vote from a person already registered to vote at the same address, under 

the same name and personal information. 

Duty Station 

An assigned work location. 

Dynamic Password 

A password that changes at a defined interval or even t. 

Dynamic Voting System Software 

Software that changes over time once it is installed on the voting equipment. 34 

# E

E-pollbook 

Device that partially automates the process of checking in voters, assigning them the correct ballot style, 

and marking voters who have been issued a ballot. May be used in place of a traditional paper poll book. 

E-pollbooks can be stand alone at the precinct with a separate copy of the registration list or can be 

networked into a central voter registration system w here they can check and update voter records in 

real time. 

Early Voting 

Voting before election day where the voter completes the ballot in person at an elections office or other 

designated polling site prior to election day. Early voting can also include voting with a mailed or 

absentee ballot prior to election day. 

Early Vo ting Ballot Board 

A group of individuals, authorized by local authorities, who are charged with participating in or 

observing elections and voting procedures prior to election day. 

Early Voting Clerk 

An official responsible for overseeing early voting. 

Elect 

The act of choosing a person to hold public office through a public election. 

Elected 

Candidates who received the highest or requisite number of votes in an election for public office. 

Elected Office 

An office that is filled primarily or exclusivel y via election. 

Elected Officials 

Individuals who have been elected to hold public office or candidates appointed in lieu of being elected 

to a public office. 

Elected to Fill Unexpired Term 

Elected positions have set terms of usually two, four, or six years. If there is a vacancy in the middle of a 

term, a candidate will be elected and only hold office until the end of the original term. For example, if 

an elected official retired one year in to a four -year term, the next candidate would be elected to fill the 

remaining three years. 

Election 

A formal process of selecting a person for public office or of accepting or rejecting a political proposition 

by voting. 

Election Administration Process 

The act of managing, running, and overseeing an election .35 

Election Assessment 

An evaluation and analysis of any election or voting process. 

Election Assistance Commission 

Election Assistance Commission was created by the Help Americ a Vote Act (HAVA) to assist the states 

regarding HAVA compliance and to distribute HAVA funds to the states. The EAC is also charged with 

creating voting system guidelines and operating the federal government’s first voting system 

certification program. Th e EAC is also responsible for maintaining the National Voter Registration form, 

conducting research, and administering a national clearinghouse on elections that includes shared 

practices, information for voters, and other resources to improve elections. 

Election Authority 

The official responsible for overseeing elections in a jurisdiction. 

Election Ballot 

The official presentation of all of the contests to be decided in a particular election. Either in paper or 

electronic format, the mechanism for voters to show their voter preferences. 

Election Board 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities, and charged with control o f elections and 

voting procedure. 

Election Calendar 

The official list of key dates and voting deadlines for an election. 

Election Campaign 

A series of democratic activities to influence a political vote for or against candidates or ballot questions. 

Election Certification 

The act of confirming the final official results of a jurisdiction’s election. This event occurs after results 

from valid ballots are tallied from all sources (election day, absentee voting, early voting, provisional 

ballots, etc.) a nd results are validated and approved by those legally responsible. 

Election Clerk 

Any person who is involved with administering or conducting an election, including government 

personnel and temporary election workers. This may include any county clerk and recorder, election 

judge, member of a canvassing board, central election official , election day worker, member of a board 

of county commissioners, member or secretary of a board of directors authorized to conduct public 

elections, representative of a governing body, or other person engaged in the performance of election 

duties as requi red by the election code. 

Election Code 

The official laws that govern the electoral process. 

Election Commission 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities, and charged with overseeing elections and 

voting procedure. 36 

Election Contes t

A single decision or set of associated decisions being put before the voters (for example, the option of 

candidates to fill a particular public office or the approval or disapproval of a constitutional 

amendment). This term encompasses other terms such a s “race,” “question,” and “issue” that are 

sometimes used to refer to specific kinds of contests. A single ballot may contain one or more contests. 

Election Contribution 

Anything of value given, loaned, or advanced to influence a political vote for or against candidates or 

ballot questions. 

Election Databases 

Data file or set of files that contain geographic information about political subdivisions and boundaries, 

all co ntests and questions to be included in an election, and the candidates for each contest. 

Election Day 

The last day on which voters may cast a ballot. Absentee ballots and early voting ballots may be cast in 

advance of Election Day. 

Election Definition 

Definition of the contests and questions that will appear on the ballot for a specific election. 

Election District 

Contiguous geographic area represented by a public official who is elected by voters residing within the 

district boundaries. The district may cover an entire state or political subdivision, may be a portion of 

the state or political subdivision, or may include portions of more than one political subdivision. 

Election Division 

The department of government charged with administering elections. 

Election Equipment 

All of the necessary items to conduct elections and voting. This can include technology such as electronic 

poll books, voting machines, and other non -technical equipment including voting booths and voting 

signs. 

Election Fr aud 

The misrepresentation or alteration of the true results of an election. 

Election Inspector 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Election Integrity 

An election that is professional, impartial, and transparent in its preparation and administration 

throughout the electoral cycle. 

Election Judge 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 37 

Election Jurisdiction 

A geographical area to which a practical authority has been granted to administer elections for political 

or administrative offices. Areas of jurisdiction apply to local, state, and federal levels. States, counties, 

cities, towns, and townships are all exa mples of jurisdictions. 

Election Kit 

A set of items that election officials need to assist voters at a voting location. 

Election Law 

The official laws that govern the electoral process. 

Election Management System 

Set of processing functions and databases within a voting system that defines, develops and maintains 

election databases, performs election definitions and setup functions, format ballots, count votes, 

consolidates and report results, and maintains audit t rails. 

Election Materials 

Items needed to assist voters and conduct an election. 

Election Night Tabulation 

The act of tabulating votes on the night of the election, after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Election Officer 

An official responsible for administering an election or an election process. 

Election Officials 

The people associated with administering and conducting elections, including government personnel 

and poll workers. 

Election Order 

A legal term used when an authorized g overnment authority proclaims that an election will take place at 

a particular time. 

Election Precinct 

Election administration division corresponding to a contiguous geographic area that is the basis for 

determining which contests and issues the voters l egally residing in that area are eligible to vote on. 

Election Precinct Officer 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Election Programming 

Process by which election officials or their designees use voting system software to logically define the 

ballot for a specific election. 

Election Registrar 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 38 

Election Results 

Tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Election Returns 

Tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Election Seals 

A security mechanism using strategically placed serialized or tamperproof evident materials that alert 

officials if a device used in the elections process has potentially been altered or accessed without 

authorization. 

Election Supervisor 

An official res ponsible for administering an election or an election process. 

Election System 

A technology -based system that is used to collect, process, and store data related to elections and 

election administration. In addition to voter registration systems and publi c election websites, election 

systems include voting systems, vote tabulation systems, electronic poll books, election results reporting 

systems, and auditing devices. Can also be used to refer to the entire array of procedures, people, 

resources, equipmen t and locations associated with conducting elections. 

Electioneer 

The activity of trying to persuade people to vote for or against a particular candidate, measure or 

political party. 

Elections Administrator 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Elective Office 

An office that is filled primarily or exclusively via election. 

Elector 

(1) A person qualified to vote in an election. (2) A person appointed by a state in the U.S. to vote for 

president and vice president in the electoral college. 

Elector Candidates 

A candidate to be appointed by a state in the U.S. to vote for president and vice president in the 

electoral college. 

Electoral Board 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities, and charged with control of elections and 

voting procedure. 

Electoral College 

A body of people representing the states of the U.S., who formally cast votes for the election of the 

president and vice president. 39 

Electoral Cycle 

The time period from the first official act in an election to the last official act. The electoral cycle is 

divided in three main periods: the pre -electoral period, the electoral period, and the post -electoral 

period. 

Electoral Votes 

Votes cast by members of the elector al college. 

Electorate 

All the people in a political jurisdiction who are entitled to vote in an election. 

Electronic Ballot Delivery 

The delivery of ballot and voter information packets electronically. The MOVE Act requires each state to 

provide for the electronic delivery (via fax, email, or an Internet supported application) of ballots and 

related information from the local election office to the registered U niformed and Overseas Civilian 

voter s. Some jurisdictions allow voters with a disability, vo ters who have been displaced or other 

circumstances where a voter who resides in the election jurisdiction to also receive a ballot 

electronically. 

Electronic Ballot Return 

The return of a voted ballot or voter information packet using electronic means. This can be by fax, 

email, or through the use of an Internet supported application. Sometimes referred to as “Internet 

Voting.” 

Electronic Cast Vote Record 

Permanent record of all votes produced by a single voter in electronic form. 

Electronic Poll Book 

Device that partially automates the process of checking in voters, assigning them the correct ballot style, 

and marking voters who have been issued a ballot . May be used in place of a traditional paper poll book. 

E-poll books can be stand alone at the precinct with a separate copy of the registration list or can be 

networked into a central voter registration system where they can check and update voter record s in 

real time. 

Electronic Record 

Information recorded by a computer that is produced or received in the initiation, conduct, or 

completion of an agency or individual activity. Examples of electronic records include: e -mail messages, 

word -processed docume nts, electronic spreadsheets, digital images, and databases. 

Electronic Reporting And Tracking System (ERTS) 

An ERT system is used to electronically create stationary source sampling test plans and reports. The ERT 

calculates the test results from data im ported or hand -entered and includes supporting documentation 

to create a complete electronic report for submittal to the regulatory agency. 40 

Electronic Storage 

Any storage of electronic user data on a computer, computer network, or computer system regardless 

of whether the data is subject to recall, further manipulation, deletion, or transmission. Electronic 

storage includes any storage or electronic communication by an electronic communication service or a 

remote computing service. 

Electron ic Voter Interface 

Subsystem within a voting system which communicates ballot information to a voter in video, audio, or 

other alternative format which allows the voter to select candidates and issues by means of vocalization 

or physical actions. 

Electron ic Voting 

Voting that uses electronic means to either aid or facilitate casting and counting votes. 

Electronic Voting Accessibility 

Electronic voting system with accessible features, including touchscreen and audio, that gives voters 

with disabilities th e ability to cast a secret ballot without assistance. 

Electronic Voting Machine 

Any system that utilizes an electronic component. Term is generally used to refer to DREs. 

Electronic Voting System 

An electronic voting system is one or more integrated devices that utilize an electronic component for 

one or more of the following functions: ballot presentation, vote capture, vote recording, and 

tabulation. A DRE is a functionally and physically integrated electronic voting system which provides all 

four functions electronically in a single device. An optical scan (also known as Marksense) system where 

the voter marks a paper ballot with a marking instrument and then deposits the ballot in a tabulation 

device is partially electronic in that the p aper ballot provides the presentation, vote capture and vote 

recording functions. An optical scan system employing a ballot marking device adds a second electronic 

component for ballot presentation and vote capture functions. 

Electronically Tabulated Tota ls 

Election results tabulated on an electronic device. 

Eligibility for Office 

All of the legal requirements to hold a public office. 

Eligible Candidates 

Candidates who have completed all of the things necessary and meet all of the legal requirements to 

participate in an election process. 

Eligible Citizens 

The universe of all voters who, if they cast a ballot, would have the legal right to have eligible contests 

on that ballot tabulated. This would include those who do not appear in the list of eligible voters 

because they live in a same -day registration or no registration state and did not or could not register 

ahead of time. 41 

Eligible to Vote 

A person who meets the requirements set forth in a political subdivision for being able to vote. 

Eli gible Voters 

The universe of all voters who, if they cast a ballot, would have the legal right to have eligible contests 

on that ballot tabulated. This would include those who do not appear in the list of eligible voters 

because they live in a same -day registration or no registration state and did not or could not register 

ahead of time. 

Emergency Ballot 

A ballot issued to a voter under special circumstances, such as being out of state during an election or 

being displaced because of a natural disaster. 

Enclose 

To put something inside of something else, such as enclosing an absentee ballot in a secrecy sleeve. 

Encryption 

Process of obscuring information by changing plain text into ciphertext for the purpose of security or 

privacy. 

Endorseme nt 

An act of giving one's public approval or support to someone or something, such as a candidate for 

public office or a ballot measure question. 

Error Correcting Code 

Coding system that allows data being read or transmitted to be checked for errors and, when detected, 

corrects those errors. 

Error Rate 

Ratio of the number of errors that occur to the volume of data processed. 

Error Rate Standards 

The maximum allowable number of errors that can occur to the volume of data processed, as 

established by an official authority. 

Exhausted Ballot 

Refers to processing a ranked choice voting contest on a cast ballot, when that ballot becomes inactive 

and cannot be advanced in the tabulation for a contest because there are no further valid rankin gs on 

the ballot for continuing contest options. 

Exit Poll 

A poll taken of a small percentage of voters as they leave the polls, used to forecast the outcome of an 

election or determine the reasons for voting decisions. 

Expected Mark 

Mark that falls wholly or partially inside a contest option target area .42 

Expen se Report 

Report that details political expenses required to be filed by a governing authority. 

Extended Hours 

When a person of authority extends by formal action the required number of hours that voters are able 

to vote, usually in response to a situatio n that delayed or restricted voting. 

Extensible Markup Language 

A text -based language used to organize and present information on the World Wide Web (XML). 

Extension 

Such as "extension of period" or "extension of polling hours." 

Extraneous Mark 

A mark on a paper ballot that appears to be unrelated to the act of indicating a voter’s selection. 

Examples include: a mark made unintentionally by a voter that is obviously not related to making a 

selection; a hesitation mark, a dot within or outside of the contest option position made by resting a pen 

or pencil on the ballot; written notes or identifying information not related to indication of the voter’s 

selection; or printing defects. 

# F

Fail -Safe Ballot 

A ballot cast by a voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was incomplete or 

not accurate, or who had already received a ballot in the mail and was allowed to vote. Fail -safe ballots 

are usually kept separate from the other ball ots until an election official can determine if the voter is 

eligible to vote. These ballots are sometimes called provisional ballots. 

Fail -Safe Voter 

A voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was incomplete or not accurate, o r

who had already received a ballot in the mail but was allowed to vote. Fail -safe ballots are usually kept 

separate from the other ballots until an election official can determine if the voter is eligible to vote. 

These ballots are sometimes called provis ional ballots. 

Fault 

Flaw in design or implementation that may result in the qualities or behavior of the voting system 

deviating from the qualities or behavior that are anticipated, including those specified in the VVSG or in 

manufacturer -provided docume ntation. 

Fault -tolerant 

A system that continues to operate after the failure of a computer or network component. 

Federal Election 

Any primary, general, runoff, or special election in which a candidate for Federal office (President, 

Senator, or Representa tive) appears on the ballot. 43 

Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA) 

Strict limits on the amount of money a particular corporation, union, or private individual could give to a 

candidate in a federal election. It also required candidates and political action committees (PACs) to 

disclose their receipts and identify their contributors. A 1974 amendment specified additional 

contribution limits and imposed spending limits for candidates in primary and general elections; 

however, the Supreme Court struck down the latter provision as unconstitutional in Buckley v. Valeo, 

424 U.S. 1 (1976). The 1974 amendment also set up the Federal Election Commission and established 

public funding of presidential elections. Two additional amendments (1976, 1979) were aimed at 

regul ating PACs and boosting the level of party participation. 

Federal Election Commission (FEC) 

Independent agency responsible for administering and enforcing laws that cover federal election 

campaigns. The FEC oversees the public financing of presidential elections, ensures public disclosure of 

campaign finance activities, monitors campaign contributions and expenditures, regulates the campaign 

activities of political action committees (PACs), and investigates reports of violations. It is compo sed of 

six commissioners appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate. 

Federal Election Inspector 

A U.S. federal inspector general (IG) is the head of an independent, non -partisan organization 

established within each executive bran ch agency assigned to audit the agency’s operation in order to 

discover and investigate cases of misconduct, waste, fraud, and other abuse of government procedures 

occurring within the agency. 

Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 

Standards for federal computer systems developed by NIST. These standards are developed when there 

are no existing industry standards to address federal requirements for system interoperability, 

portability of data and software, and computer security. 

Fed eral Observer 

The Voting Rights Act permits federal observers to monitor procedures in polling places and at sites 

where ballots are counted in eligible political subdivisions. 

Federal Office 

United States President, member of the U.S. Senate, or member o f the House of Representatives. 

Federal Postcard Application (FPCA) 

Among the challenges military and overseas voters face are the wide variability in rules and procedures 

governing registration and voting across states. The FPCA serves as a uniform regi stration and ballot 

request application accepted in all U.S. states and territories. 

Federal Service Voters 

Active -duty military and family members and individuals, who vote while living abroad. 

Federal Services Ballot 

Ballot of a ctive -duty military and family members and individuals, who vote while living abroad. 44 

Federal Voting Assistance 

Assistance available from the Federal Voting Assistance Program to voters serving in the military and 

overseas civilians. 

Federal Voting Assistance Officers 

Voting Assistance Officers (VAOs) work to ensure that military and overseas voters understand their 

voting rights, how to register to vote absentee, and have access to accurate nonpartisan voting 

information and assistance. VAOs may be members of the Uniformed Services, civilians, or members of 

overseas U.S. citizen organizations. 

Feder al Voting Assistance Program 

Voter assistance and education program to ensure that members of the U. S. armed forces, their eligible 

family members, and U.S. citizens overseas are aware of their right to vote and have the tools to do so. 

Federal Voting Ri ghts Act 

The Voting Rights Act of 1965 is a landmark piece of federal legislation in the United States that 

prohibits racial discrimination in voting. 

Federal Voting Systems Standards (FVSS) 

The Federal minimum standards that each voting system used in an election for Federal office must 

meet. 

Federal Write -In Absentee Ballot (FWAB) 

A blank ballot provided by the Federal Voting Assistance Program by which military and overseas voters 

can vote by writing in their choices and returning the ballot to their elections office. 

Federally Recognized Tribes 

Indigenous tribal entities that are recognized as having a government -to -government relationship with 

the United States, with the responsibilities, powers, limitations, and obligations attached to that 

design ation, and are eligible for funding and services from the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Furthermore, 

federally recognized tribes are recognized as possessing certain inherent rights of self -government (i.e., 

tribal sovereignty) and are entitled to receive cert ain federal benefits, services, and protections because 

of their special relationship with the United States. 

Felony Disenfranchisement 

A crime regarded as more serious than a misdemeanor and usually punishable by loss of voting rights for 

a period of time. 

File for Office 

The act of completing the required paperwork to declare a person's intent to become a candidate for 

public office. 

Filing Deadline 

The last day to file election or voting documents for a specific election and process. Examples include 

paperwork to circulate a petition, to file paperwork to become a candidate, or to file campaign financial 

disclosures. 45 

Filing Electronically 

The process of submitting election paperwork via the internet. 

Filing Fees 

The amount of money due when filing election paperwork, such as when filing to become a candidate 

for public office. 

Filing Petitions 

Formally submitting a petition to the governing authority. 

Fill in The Oval 

On certain ballots, voters are instructed to fill in an oval to vote for a candidate or measure, instead of 

marking an X or connecting an arrow .

Finalize Your Vote 

The final action a voter takes in selecting contest options and irrevocably confirming their intent to vote 

as selected. 

Financial Disclosure Reports 

Reports that detail information about the source, type, amount, or value of the incomes of public 

officials and candidates for public office, require d to be filed by a governing authority. 

Firmware 

Computer programming stored in programmable read -only memory thus becoming a permanent part of 

the computing device. It is created and tested like software. 

First -Time Federal Voter 

A voter who registers to vote or votes for the first time in a federal election. Pursuant to the Help 

America Vote Act, these voters must provide identification before they can vote. 

First -Time Registrant 

The first time that a citizen registers to vote. 

First -Time Voter 

The first time that a citizen votes. 

Fiscal Statement 

A report that details political contributions and expenses required to be filed by a governing authority. 

Fixed Resident 

When a person lawfully and habitually uses a living quarters a majority of the week, it is considered a 

fixed residence for voting purposes , and the voter is referred to as a fixed resident. 

For Election Day Use Only 

An election procedure that can only be used on the day of an election. 46 

Forms of Identification 

Means of proving a person's identity, especially in the form of official papers. Common examples include 

Driver's Licenses, Passports and other Government issued documents. 

Fraud 

The misrepresentation or alteration of the true results of an election. 

Fraud Hotline 

A direct phone line set up to report voting issues. 

Fraudulently Registering to Vote 

A form of voter fraud in which someone registers to vote or registers someone else to vote using 

fictional information, or when they are ineligible to register to vote. 

Free from Coercion Or Intimidation 

The right to cast a ballot without threat of violence, manipulation, harassment, or fear. 

Functional Configuration Audit (FCA) 

Exhaustive verification of every system function and combina tion of functions cited in the vendor’s 

documentation. The FCA verifies the accuracy and completeness of the system’s voter manual, 

operations procedures, maintenance procedures, and diagnostic testing procedures. 

Functional Test 

Test performed to verify or validate the accomplishment of a function or a series of functions. 

Fundraising 

To seek financial support for a political candidate, campaign, or organization for the purpose of 

influencing an electoral outcome. 

# G

Grounds for Recall 

The reasons that citizens would begin the process to remove an elected official from office. 

Group Affidavit 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation by a group of individuals. 

Gubernatorial 

Relating to a state governor or the office of state governor. 

Gubernatorial Election 

Election where the office of the state governor is also on the ballot. Typically includes the other 

statewide office contests and is held in a year other than when the Presidential contest is on the ballot. 47 

Guberna torial General Election 

Election in which all eligible voters, regardless of party affiliation, are able to vote for candidates to fill 

public office and/or vote on ballot measures, and the office of the state governor is also on the ballot. 

Gubernatorial Primary Election 

Election held to determine which candidate will represent a political party for a given office in the 

general election and the office of the state governor is also on the ballot. Some states have an open 

primary, while others have a closed or modified -closed primary. Sometimes elections for nonpartisan 

offices and ballot issues are consolidated with primary elections. 

# H

Hand Count 

Counting ballot sheets and/or selections on ballot sheets by human examination. 

Hand -marked Paper Ball ot 

Paper ballot marked by a voter using a writing utensil. The paper ballot is the independent voter 

verifiable record. 

Hanging Chads 

Chad refers to fragments sometimes created when holes are made in a paper, card or similar synthetic 

materials, such as punched cards. A "hanging chad" is a chad that is incompletely removed. 

Hard Money 

Political contributions made directly to a specific candidate. 

Hard of Hearing 

Refers to a hearing loss where there may be enough residual hearing that an auditory device may aid. 

Hardware 

The physical, tangible, mechanical, or electromechanical components of a system. 

Hash 

Algorithm that maps a bit string of arbitrary length to a fixed -length bit string. 

Hash Function 

A function that maps a bit string of arbitrary length to a fixed -length bit string. Approved hash functions 

satisfy the following properties: 1. (one -way) It is computationally infeasi ble to find any input that maps 

to any pre -specified output, and 2. (collision -resistant) It is computationally infeasible to find any two 

distinct inputs that map to the same output. 

Hearing 

An opportunity to state one's case through a formal administrat ive process. 48 

Hearing Officer 

An individual who is authorized to apply a legal process, conduct hearings, resolve administrative 

disputes, facilitate negotiations between opposing parties, and issue legal decisions. 

Hearing Procedures 

The rules and serie s of actions that govern how hearings are administered. 

Help America Vote Act Of 2002 (HAVA) 

Act passed by the U.S. Congress in 2002 to make reforms to the nation’s voting process. HAVA addresses 

improvements to voting systems and voter access that were identified following the 2000 election. 

Help America Vote College Program 

A program authorized under the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) to encourage student participation as 

poll workers or assistants, to foster student interest in the elections process, and to encourage state and 

local governments to use students as poll workers. 

High School District 

A geographical unit for the local administration of secondary schools. It is a special -purpose government 

entity with elected board membe rs. 

Hold an Election 

The term used when a government authority administers an election. 

Hold Elections 

The term used when government authorities administer elections. 

Hold Hearings 

To indicate that an agency is organizing a process for an individual or organization to state one's case, 

resolve administrative disputes, facilitate negotiations between opposing parties, and issue legal 

decisions. 

Hold Office 

A term used to describe an individual who has been sworn into public office and is currently ser ving in 

the position. 

Home Rule 

The right of the people cities, village, townships or other local districts to set up and change their own 

governmental structure. 

Home Rule Charter 

In some states, known as home rule states, the state's constitution grants municipalities and/or counties 

the ability to pass laws to govern themselves as they see fit (so long as they obey the state and federal 

constitutions). The Charter is the written d ocument that defines the laws and regulations of that body. 

Home Rule City 

A city that has adopted a Charter outlining the form of government and local laws. 49 

House of Representatives 

The lower house of the United States Congress, with the Senate being the upper house. Together they 

compose the national bicameral legislature of the United States. The House's composition is established 

by Article One of the United States Constitution. 

House Seat 

One of 435 regions from which voting representatives are elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. 

# I

Internal Audit Log 

A human readable record, resident on the voting machine, used to track all activities of that machine. 

This log records every activity performed on or by the machine indicating the event and when it 

happened. 

Internet Voting 

The return of a voted ballot or voter information packet by email or through the use of an Internet 

supported application. 

Interoperability 

The ext ent to which systems from different manufacturers and devices with different system 

configurations can communicate with each other. 

Interpreter 

One who translates for people communicating in different languages. 

Interruption of The Voting Process 

Voting equipment failures, inadequate supplies, disasters, or anything that prevents voting. 

Intrusion Detection System (IDS) 

A hardware or software application that detects and reports a suspected security breach, policy 

violation, or other compromise th at may adversely affect the network. 

Invalidate Your Vote 

An error, mistake, or omission that results in your vote not counting towards the final election result. 

Irregularities 

Something that is not correct or acceptable, such as when the rules, laws, o r usual ways of doing things 

have not been followed. 

Issue 

To give something to someone in an official manner. 

Issue (To Issue A Vote) 

When an official authority, election clerk or poll worker gives a voter a ballot to vote. 50 

# J

Judge 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process, also 

known as an Elections Judge. 

Judicial Candidate 

A candidate for Judicial office. 

Judicial District 

One of a fixed number of districts into which a state is divided, each district electing Judicial candidates. 

Judicial Offices 

A public Judicial position, for an officer who administers the law. 

Judicial Retention Election 

An election where voters are asked whether an incumbent (usually a judge) should remain in office for 

another term. The office holder, who does not face an opponent, is removed from the position if a 

percentage of voters indicate that they should not remain in office. 

# K

Key Management 

Activities involving the handling of cryptographic keys and other related security parameters (e.g., 

passwords) during the entire life cycle of the keys, including their generation, storage, establishment, 

entry and output, and zeroization. 

# L

Language Assistance 

The Voting Rights Act outlaws literacy - and language -based voting qualifications or prerequisites. 

Section 203 recognizes widespread voting discrimination against Alaskan Native, American Indian, Asian, 

and Hispanic language minority citizens and seeks to eliminate it by requiring the provision of minority 

language materials and assistance related to the electoral process —oral and/or written —to language 

minority groups. Other VRA sections, including 4(e) and 208, are also 

relevant to language access. The most recent reauthorization of t he Voting Rights Act in 2006 extended 

Section 203 through 2032, and determinations were adjusted to occur every 5 years instead of 10. 51 

Language Minority Citizens 

The language minority provisions of the Voting Rights Act require that when a covered state or political 

subdivision provides registration or voting notices, forms, instructions, assistance, or other materials or 

information relating to the electoral process, including ballots, it shall provide them in the language of 

the applicable minority group as well as in the English language. Covered language minorities are limited 

to American Indians, Asian Americans, Alaskan Natives, and Spanish -heritage citizens - the groups that 

Congress found to have faced barriers in the political proces s. 

Lawful Permanent Resident 

Non -citizens who are lawfully authorized to live permanently within the United States. 

Legal Holiday 

A holiday established by law and is usually a non -working day during the year. 

Legislative Initiative Amendment 

A ballot m easure that proposes to amend a law. 

Legislative Ratification 

The act or process of formal confirmation of a law. 

Lever Voting Machine 

Machine that directly records a voter’s choices via mechanical lever -actuated controls into a counting 

mechanism that tallies the votes without using a physical ballot. 

Lieutenant Governor 

The top election official in the states of Alaska and Utah. 

Life Cycle 

Systems engineering concept that identifies the phases that a system passes through, from concept to 

retirement. There are different concerns and activities associated with each phase of the life cycle. 

Limited Ballot 

A ballot with some, but not all of the contests that other voters are entitled to vote on in an election. 

List of Registered Voters 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Local (Local Government) 

Governmental jurisdictions below the level of the state including - coun ties, cities, districts, boroughs ,

and parishes. 

Local Measures 

A proposal to enact, amend, or repeal a new law, ordinance, or charter at the local government level 

that is placed on the ballot for approval or rejection by voters. 52 

Logic and Accuracy (L&A) Testing 

Equipment and system readiness tests whose purpose is to detect malfunctioning devices and improper 

election -specific setup before the equipment or systems are used in an election. Jurisdictions are 

required to test the correctness o f every ballot style and to determine that every possible valid and 

invalid voter choice can be captured or handled by the voting system, both technologically and legally. 

Election officials conduct L&A tests prior to the start of an election as part of th e process of setting up 

the system and the devices for an election according to jurisdiction practices and conforming to any 

state laws. 

Logical Correctness 

Condition signifying that, for a given input, a computer program will satisfy the program specific ation 

and produce the required output. 

Look at Both Side o f Your Ballot 

Voting instructions reminding voters that election contests can appear on both the front and back of a 

ballot. 

Low/No Dexterity Mode 

An interaction mode with accessibility features f or voters with no use of one or both hands or have low 

dexterity. 

# M

Machine -Readable Mark 

Mark in a contest selection position of a paper ballot that meets requirements for detection by a 

scanner. 

Machine -Unreadable Mark 

Mark in a contest selection position of a paper ballot that cannot be detected as readable or marginal by 

a scanner and requires human adjudication. 

Magisterial District 

One of a fixed number of districts into which a state is divided, each district elect ing Magisterial 

candidates. 

Magisterial District Judge 

A civil officer or lay judge who administers the law, especially one who conducts a court that deals with 

minor offenses and holds preliminary hearings for more serious ones. 

Mail Ballots (Noun) 

A ba llot cast by a voter other than in -person at a voting location. Mailed ballots are typically mailed to 

voters but can be issued over the counter from an election's office. Depending on the jurisdiction, 

mailed ballots can be returned by mail, in a drop box , or in -person. Mailed ballots are synonymous with 

vote -by -mail and absentee ballots. 53 

Mail Ballots (Verb) 

The process of mailing ballots to voters using the U .S. Postal Service. 

Mail -In Voter Registration Form 

A form used by a voter to request that a ballot be mailed to them .

Mailed Ballot Election 

An election that is conducted entirely with the use of mailed ballots and either does not offer in -person 

voting options or has limited in -person voting options. 

Mailed Ballot Precinct 

A voting precinct that does not offer in -person voting options. 

Mailing Address 

The address where a person can receive mail, which may be different than the address where a person 

lives. 

Majority 

More than half. 

Majority of The Votes 

More than half of the votes cast. 

Majority of Voters 

More than half of the voters. 

Majority Party 

A political party that receives a minimum percentage of the total vote in a jurisdiction or has sufficient 

strength to win control of a government or constitute the principal opposition to the winning party. 

Majority Voting 

A vote variation which requires the winning candidate to receive more than half of the votes cast. If no 

candidate wins an outright majority, a runoff election may be held between the top two vote -getters. 

Make Void 

An error, mistake, omission, or intentional act that results in a vote not counting towards the final 

election result. 

Malware 

Software or firmware intended to perform an unauthorized process that will have adverse impact on the 

confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a system. For example, a virus, worm, Trojan horse, or other 

code -based entity that infects a host. Spyware and some forms of adware are also examples of malware. 

Mandate 

An official or authoritative command, usually by legislative statute or executive order. 54 

Manual Tabulation of Ballots 

Counting ballot sheets and/or selections on ballot sheets by human exa mination. 

Manually -Marked Paper Ballot 

Paper ballot marked by a voter using a writing utensil. The paper ballot is the independent voter 

verifiable record. 

Mark 

Any symbol made by the signer that represents execution of a document or indicates a voting selection. 

Marked Ballot 

Ballot that contains voter’s selections. 

Marking Device 

A device that permits contest options to be selected and reviewed on an electronic interface and does 

not make any other lasting record of the voter's selections. 

Marksense 

System by which votes are recorded by means of marks made in voting response fields designated on 

one or both faces of a ballot card or series of cards. Marksense systems may use an optical scanner or 

similar sensor to read the ballots. Also known as optical scan. 

Master Voter Registration List 

A list of voters maintained in a single, uniform, official, computerized statewide or local registration 

database of registered voters. 

Measure 

A proposal to enact a new law or constitutional amendment that is placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

Measure Information 

The portion of voting materials that contains information about a new law or constitutional amendment 

that is placed on the ballot for approval or rejection by voters. 

Measure Register 

Record that reflects the total votes cast for and against a specific ballot issue. 

Mechanical Lever Voting Machine 

Machine that directly records a voter’s choices via mechanical lever -actuated controls into a counting 

mechanism that tallies the votes without using a physical ballot. 

Memory Card 

An electronic data storage device used for storing digital information, typically using flash memory. 

Method of Application 

Several methods of application are available to the public so they may register to vote. 55 

Midterm Election 

Elections that take place between presidential elections. 

Military Voting 

A member of the Uniformed Services in active service, including army, navy, air force, marine corps, 

coast guard, and merch ant marine, and their spouses and dependents. 

Military Voting Assistance Officer 

Voting Assistance Officers (VAOs) work to ensure that military and overseas voters understand their 

voting rights, how to register to vote absentee, and have access to accurate nonpartisan voting 

information and assistance. VAOs may be members of the Uniformed Services, civilians, or members of 

overseas U.S. citizen organizations. 

Minimum Standards 

The lowest level of quality or achievement that is acceptable. 

Minimum Voting Age 

The age established by law that a person must attain before they become eligible to vote in a public 

election. 

Minor Party 

A political party that does not meet the requirements to be recognized as a major party, but otherwise is 

recognized typi cally because its candidates have received a certain percentage of the vote or through a 

petition process. 

Mismarked 

An error, mistake, omission, or intentional act that results in a voter's intent not counting towards the 

final election result. 

Mixed Ticket 

A ballot where voters may select candidates of their choice regardless of party affiliation up to the 

maximum allowed for each race. 

Mock Election 

A non -partisan educational event that primarily teaches young people how to vote. 

Modified C losed Primary 

A primary election that allows state parties to decide whether they permit vote rs registered without a 

political party affiliate to [participate in their primary elections .

Modified Open Primary 

A primary election that allows state parties to decide whether they permit voters registered without a 

political party affiliate to [participate in their primary elections. 

Monitor and Device Controller 

An audio -tactile interface that allows users to make selections. 56 

Motor Voter 

This act, commonly known as the “Motor Voter Law,” requires that states offer the opportunity to 

register to vote at their motor vehicle licensing offices (known as the DMV in many states). The law also 

requires states to offer voter registration at offices tha t provide public assistance or state -funded 

programs primarily engaged in providing services to persons with disabilities, and armed services 

recruitment offices. NVRA also provides guidelines on registration list maintenance and sets limits on 

how voters can be removed from the rolls. 

Multi -Member District 

An electoral district or constituency having two or more representatives in a legislative body rather than 

one. 

Multi -Seat Contest 

Contest in which multiple candidates can run, up to a specified numbe r of seats. Voters may vote for no 

more than the specified number of candidates. 

Municipal 

Relating to a city, borough, village or town, except in the New England states, New York, and Wisconsin, 

where the name town signifies a subdivision of the county o r state by area. 

Municipal Ballot 

A ballot for candidates or measures related to a municipal governing body. 

Municipal Bond Election 

An election where a proposal to allow a municipal government to approve additional spending in which 

a debt and obligatio n are repaid with interest appears on the ballot for approval or rejection. 

Municipal Elections 

A regular election of candidates and measures within a municipal governing body. 

Municipal School District 

A geographical unit for the local administration of elementary or secondary schools. 

Municipal Water District 

A geographical unit of local government given the task of supplying water and sewer needs to a 

community. 

Municipality 

Relating to a city, borough, village or town, except in the New England states, New York, and Wisconsin, 

where the name town signifies a subdivision of the county or state by area. 

# N

National 

Belonging to or maintained by the federal government. 57 

National Association Of Secretaries Of State (NASS) 

A non -partisan professional organization of public officials composed of the secretaries of state of U.S. 

states and territories. 

National Association Of State Election Directors (NASED) 

A non -partisan professional association of state election directors and administrators of U.S. states and 

territories. 

National Certification Test Report 

Report of results of independent testing of a voting system by an accredited test lab delivered to the 

U.S. Election Assistance Commission w ith a recommendation regarding granting a certification number. 

National Certification Testing 

Examination and testing of a voting system to determine if the system complies with the performance 

and other requirements of the national certification standards and with its own specifications. 

National Change of Address Program (NCOA) 

A secure dataset of approximately 160 million permanent change -of -address (COA) records consisting of 

the names and addresses of individuals, families, and businesses who have filed a change -of -address 

with the USPS. Election officials use NCOA to update records in their voter registration databases. 

National Convention 

A meeting where state and territory parties convene to select a presidential nominee. 

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 

Federal organization tasked with assisting in the development of voting system standards. NIST develops 

and maintains standards for a wide array of technologies. NIST scientists assist the U.S Election 

Assistance Commission in developing testable standards for voting systems. 

National Party Convention 

A meeting where state and territory parties convene to select a presidential nominee. 

National Presidential Nominating Convention 

A meeting wher e state and territory parties convene every four years in the United States to field 

nominees in the upcoming U.S. presidential election. This allows the nominees to be decided before the 

National Convention opens. 

National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditat ion Program (NVLAP) 

The National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program operated by National Institute of Standards 

And Technology (NIST). 

National Voter Registration Act Of 1993 (NVRA)[Also Known As The “Motor Voter Act"] 

This act, commonly known as the “Motor Voter Law,” requires that states offer the opportunity to 

register to vote at their motor vehicle licensing offices (known as the DMV in many states). The law also 

requires states to offer voter registration at offices that provide public assist ance or state -funded 

programs primarily engaged in providing services to persons with disabilities, and armed services 

recruitment offices. NVRA also provides guidelines on registration list maintenance and sets limits on 

how voters can be removed from the rolls. 58 

No Excuse Absentee Voting 

A term used when any registered voter can request an absentee ballot, without restrictions. 

Nominate 

To propose an individual to be considered for public office. 

Nominated Officials 

Individuals who have been proposed for consideration to appointment to public office or who have 

received enough votes in a primary election to move onto a general or run -off election. This term can 

also refer to individuals selected by state and territory parties at a National Party Convention to 

represent the party as a candidate for U.S. President. 

Nominating Petition 

A formal written document signed by registered voters to request the names of candidates be placed on 

election ballots. 

Nomination 

The process of being proposed for consideration to public office. 

Nomination Paper 

A formal written document issued by an election office to request the name of a candidate be placed on 

election ballots. 

Nominee 

An individual who has been pro posed for consideration to public office. 

Non -Accepted Ballots 

An error, mistake, omission, or intentional act that results in a vote not counting towards the final 

election result. 

Non -Paper Media 

Any type of media on which information is stored, but wh ich does not qualify as Paper or Printed Media, 

such as Micro Media (micro fiche and microfilm) or Computer Hard Drives. 

Non -Partisan 

Not affiliated with a political party. 

Nonpartisan Primary 

Primary election held to narrow the field of candidates in non -party -specific contests. 

Non -Party -Specific Contest 

Contest where eligibility to vote in that contest is independent of political party affiliation. 

Noncompliance 

Failure or refusal to comply with something (such as a rule or regulation). 59 

Nondiscriminatory 

Fair and equitable. 

None of The Above 

A ballot option in some jurisdictions or organizations, designed to allow the voter to indicate disapproval 

of all candidates in a voting contest. 

Nonpartisan Canvas Board 

A group of individuals with either no party affiliation or undisclosed party affiliation, working together 

following specific rules and procedures, to compile, review, and validate election materials. 

Nonpartisan Election 

Election held with candidates in non -party -specific contests. 

Nonpartisan Office 

Elected office for which candidates run without political party affiliation. 

Nonpartisan Office Declaration of Candidacy 

The act of completing the required paperwork to become a candidate for nonpartisan public office. 

Nonvolatile Memory 

Memory in which information can be stored indefinitely with no power applied. ROMs and PROMs are 

examples of nonvolatile memory. 

Not Contested 

When not more individuals file to become candidates than there are open seats up for election. 

Notarized Statement 

A document that has been certified by a notary public, who is an official who verifies the identities of 

everybody signing the document and certifies the document with a stamp. 

Notice 

The announcement of an orga nization's intention, action or reminder. 

Notice of Clarification 

Document providing further guidance and explanation on the requirements and procedures of the 

Election Assistance Commission’s (EAC) Voting System Certification or Voting System Testing Lab (VSTL) 

programs. NOCs may be issued in response to a clarification request from a Voting System Test Lab or an 

EAC registered manufacturer. EAC may also issue Notice of Clarifications when it determines general 

clarifications are necessary. 

Notice of Dis position 

The final settlement of a matter, and with reference to decisions announced from an agency. 

Notice of Election 

The legal term used when an authorized government authority provides public notice that an election 

will take place at a particular tim e and under particular rules and statutes. 60 

Notice to Voters 

Official communication from an elections office about an election, voter registration, or election 

process. 

Notices of Noncompliance 

Official communication from an agency that a statute and rule has been violated. 

# O

Oath 

A solemn attestation of the truth of what one says or that one sincerely intends to do what one says. 

Oath of Office 

An oath or affirmation a person takes to make a public commitment to the duties, responsibilities and 

obl igations associated with holding public office. 

Observational Test 

Operational test conducted on voting devices during an election by real voters to establish confidence 

that the voter verifiable paper record is produced correctly when assistive technolog y is used. Devices 

subjected to observational testing are used for normal collection of votes; the votes collected are 

included in the election tally. 

Observers 

Individuals that monitor the opening and closing of voting locations, voting, the counting and tabulation 

of results, or any other part an election. 

Office 

Any federal, state, county, town, parish, borough , municipal, school, district or other government 

position. 

Office Holder 

A term used to describe an individual who has been sworn into public office and is currently serving in 

the position. 

Office of The Registrar Of Voters 

An official responsible for administering an election or an election process. 

Officer 

A term used to describe an individual who has been sworn into public office and is currently serving in 

the position. 

Official 

(1) Of or relating to an office, position, or trust (2) Holding an office : having authority 61 

Official Ballot 

The official p resentation of all of the contests to be decided in a particular election. Either in paper or 

electronic format, the mechanism for voters to show their voter preferences. 

Official Ballot Card 

An official card or a number of cards upon which are printed, o r identified by reference to the ballot, the 

names of candidates for nomination or election to one or more offices or the ballot titles of one or more 

measures. 

Official Ballot Card Secrecy Sleeve 

A paper, envelope, or folder that encloses a ballot to mai ntain the secrecy of how a voter marked their 

ballot. 

Official Envelope 

The official inner, outer, and secrecy envelopes used to transport or enclose ballots. 

Official Party Affiliation List 

A list of the individuals that have registered with a party affiliation on an electoral roll, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled or permitted to vote. 

Official Roster of Voters 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Official Sample Ballot 

An example ballot provided to voters with information specific to the voter. Sample Ballot bo oklets 

often provide additional election information such as the voter's polling place and hours, information 

about candidates, questions, and instructions for voting. 

Online Registration 

Online voter registration follows essentially the same process as a traditional paper -based process, by 

which new voters fill out a paper form that is submitted to election officials, but instead of filling out a 

paper application, the voter fills out a form via an Internet site, and that paperless form is submitted 

elec tronically to election officials. In most states the application is reviewed electronically. If the request 

is confirmed to be valid, the new registration is added to the state’s voter registration list. 

Open Primary 

Primary election in which any voters c an participate, regardless of their political affiliation. Some states 

require voters to publicly declare their choice of party ballot at the polling place, after which the poll 

worker provides or activates the appropriate ballot. Other states allow the vo ters to make their choice 

of party ballot within the privacy of the voting booth. 

Open Records 

Documents or pieces of information that are not considered confidential and generally pertain to the 

conduct of government. 62 

Open Source 

Computer software with its source code (human readable code) made available with a license in which 

the copyright holder provides the rights to study, change, and distribute the software to anyone and for 

any purpose. Open source software may be developed in a collaborative public manner. Voting and 

election systems that contain open source software have had that software reviewed by multiple 

professional and amateur programmers. Open source systems are usually not free and are typically 

licensed like other software. Systems can be fully open source or may have only a portion of their 

software open source. 

Operating System 

A collection of programs that controls the hardware of a computer system and provides utilities and 

services to application software tha t is installed on the device. Operating systems use complex release 

version numbers to indicate which version is installed and require frequent patches or updates to 

maintain security and functionality. Managing the software revisions in an election office requires 

careful coordination of updates to the operating system as well as to the application software. 

Operation Manual 

The documentation by which an organization provides guidance for members and employees to 

perform their functions correctly and reas onably efficiently. It documents the approved standard 

procedures for performing operations safely to produce goods and provide services. 

Operational Environment 

All software, hardware (including facilities, furnishings and fixtures), materials, documentation, and the 

interface used by the election personnel, maintenance operator, poll worker, and voter, required for 

voting equipment operations. 

Opponent 

Other candidates for offices up for elections who belong to a diff erent party or who have different aims 

or policies. 

Oppose 

Disapproving of or disagreeing with. 

Optical Scan 

A voting system that can scan paper ballots and tally votes. Most older optical scan systems use Infrared 

(IR) scanning technology and ballots wi th timing marks to accurately scan the ballot. Newer (digital) 

optical scan systems can also capture images of ballots as they are tabulated. 

Optical Scan Ballots 

A card or a number of cards upon which are printed, or identified by reference to the ballo t, the names 

of candidates for nomination or election to one or more offices or the ballot titles of one or more 

measures, that can be tabulated on an optical scanner. 

Optical Scan System 

System by which votes are recorded by means of marks made in voting targets designated on one or 

both sides of a ballot card or series of cards. An optical scan system reads and tabulates ballots, usually 

paper ballots, by scanning the ballot and interpreting the contents. 63 

Order 

An authoritative command, direction, or instruction. 

Order on The Ballot 

The order in which contests and candidates appear on a ballot. 

Ordinance 

A piece of legislation enacted by a local authority. 

Original Petition 

A master document with information about measures, initiatives, referendums, or candidates used to 

gather signatures from registered voters. 

Out -Of -State 

To be outside the physical boundaries of a particular state. 

Outer Envelope 

An official envelope used to transport absentee and mailed ballots and prot ects voter privacy. 

Overseas Ballot 

A ballot cast by a member of a uniformed service in active service overseas, or by a civilian living 

overseas. 

Overseas Citizen 

A citizen of the United States who is living or located in another country outside of the United States. 

Overseas Military Voter 

A member of a uniformed service in active service, including army, navy, air force, marine corps, coast 

guard, and merchant marine, and their spouses and dependents. Members of the uniformed services 

while in the active service who are permanent residents of the state and are temporarily residing 

outside the territorial limits of the United States and the District of Columbia; members of the Merchant 

Marine of the United States who are permanent residents of the s tate and are temporarily residing 

outside the territorial limits of the United States and the District of Columbia; and/or other citizens of 

the United States who are permanent residents of the state and are temporarily residing outside the 

territorial lim its of the United States and the District of Columbia - who are qualified and registered to 

vote as provided by law. 

Overseas Voter 

A U.S. citizen who is living outside of the United States and is eligible to vote in their last place of 

residence in the U nited States. 

Overvote 

When the number of selections made by a voter in a contest is more than the maximum number 

allowed. 

Overvoting 

Voting for more than the maximum number of selections allowed in a contest. 64 

# P

Paper Ballot 

A piece of paper, paper roll or multiple card stock, on which all voter selections are either hand marked 

or printed, depending on the particular voting system. 

Paper Printout 

A piece of paper on which information from a computer, scanner or similar devic e has been printed. 

Paper Record 

Paper cast vote record that can be directly verified by a voter. 

Paper Ballot Sheet 

A single piece of paper that forms part of a paper ballot. Paper ballots may contain multiple sheets. 

Paper Trail 

A series of documents providing written evidence of a sequence of events or the activities of a person or 

organization. 

Paper -Based Voting System 

Voting system that records votes, counts votes, and tabulates the vote count, using one or more ballot 

cards or paper ballots. 

Pa rallel Monitoring 

Testing a number of randomly selected voting stations under conditions that simulate actual Election 

Day usage as closely as possible, except that the actual ballots seen by ‘test voters’ and the voting 

behavior of the ‘test voters’ are known to the testers and can be compar ed to the results that these 

voting stations tabulate and report. 

Parish 

A small administrative district corresponding to a county in other states , such as in the State of 

Louisiana. 

Partisan 

A committed member of a political party who strongly supports their party's policies. 

Partisan Election 

An election in which candidates run for offices as representatives of a political party, often in which their 

party affiliation is printed on the ballot. 

Partisan Office 

An elected office for which candi dates run as representatives of a political party. 

Partisan Office Declaration of Candidacy 

The act of completing the required paperwork to become a partisan candidate for public office. 65 

Partisan Primary 

Election in which political parties choose their no minees for a general or run -off election .

Party 

An organization that coordinates candidates to compete in a country's elections. It is common for the 

members of a political party to have similar ideas about politics, and parties may promote specific 

ideol ogical or policy goals. 

Party Affiliation 

Refers to a candidate or elected official's relationship to a particular party, not necessarily to a particular 

set of philosophical beliefs. In terms of voting, this usually refers to voters registering with a re cognized 

political party. 

Party Candidate 

A candidate who is running as representatives of a political party for an elected office. 

Party Convention 

A meeting where states and territory parties convene to select a presidential nominee. 

Party Designation 

The political party printed with the name of a candidate on a ballot or election materials. 

Party Enrollment 

The act of registering to vote and selecting a political party affiliation. Note, some states refer to 

registering with a party prefer ence, and not formal enrollment or affiliation. 

Party Label 

The political party printed with the name of a candidate on a ballot or election materials. 

Party Preference 

The act of registering to vote and selecting a political party preference. Note, som e states refer to 

registering with a party as party enrollment or affiliation. 

Pattern Voting 

Selecting contest options across multiple contests in a predetermined pattern intending to signal one’s 

identity to someone else. The possibility of pattern vot ing can be an issue for publishing Cast Vote 

Records (CVR) because it may compromise voter privacy if there are enough selections in each published 

CVR to make it likely a selection pattern might be unique. 

Penetration Testing 

An evaluation method that en ables researchers to search for vulnerabilities in a system. Election 

systems, such as the Voter Registration system, are periodically submitted to Penetration Tests to 

determine their vulnerabilities to cyber -attacks. Also called Pen Testing. 

People’s Ve to Referenda 

A proposal to repeal a law authorizing what was previously enacted by a governing body, and that is 

placed on the ballot by a citizen petition. 66 

Permanent Absentee Application 

An application to automatically receive an absentee ballot in the mail for all future elections. 

Permanent Absentee Voter 

A voter who has applied to use an absentee ballot to vote for all elections and has met the qualifications 

to be a permanent absentee voter in their jurisdiction. 

Permanent Absentee Voter Status 

A term used by election officials when a voter has applied for and is eligible to use an absentee ballot for 

all elections. 

Permanent Advance Voter 

Synonymous with permanent absentee voter. 

Personal Assistive Device 

A device that is carried or wo rn by an individual with some physical impairment whose primary purpose 

is to help compensate for that impairment. 

Persons with Disabilities 

The disability community is rapidly evolving to using identity -first language in place of person -first 

language. T his is because it views disability as being a core component of identity, much like race and 

gender. Some members of the community, such as people with intellectual and developmental 

disabilities, prefer person -first language. In this column, the terms are used interchangeably. 

Petition 

A document with information about measures, initiatives, referendums, or candidates used to gather 

signatures from registered voters. 

Petition Drive 

An organized effort to collect sufficient valid signatures to support an initiative, candidate, measure, or 

referendum. 

Petition Fund 

The act of raising and spending funds for purposes related to a petition. 

Petition Signature Gathering 

The act of attempting to gather signatures from voters for initiatives, referendums, or candidates. 

Petition Verification 

Term used when elections officials examine submitted petitions and determine whether they are in 

proper form, if the signatures of voters are valid, and if the requisite number of valid signatures have 

bee n filed to accomplish its purpose. 

Physical Configuration Audit (PCA) 

Inspection by an accredited test laboratory that compares the voting system components submitted for 

certification testing to the vendor’s technical documentation and confirms that the documentation 

submitted meets the national certification requirements. Includes witnessing of the build of the 

executable system to ensure that the certified release is built from the tested components. 67 

PII 

Information that permits the identity of an indiv idual to be derived and any information about an 

individual maintained by an agency, including: information that can be used to distinguish or trace an 

individual’s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden 

na me, or biometric records; any other information that can be linked to an individual, such as medical, 

educational, financial, and employment information. 

Platform 

The declared policy of a political party, candidate or group. 

Plebiscite 

A proposal to repe al a law that was previously enacted by a governing body, and that is placed on the 

ballot by a citizen petition. 

Plurality 

The number of votes cast for a candidate who receives more than any other but does not receive an 

absolute majority (more than 50% ). 

Pointer 

Provide an alternative method of using equipment for people with limited hand use, for activities 

including turning pages, drawing, as a keyboard aid or a pencil holder. 

Pointing to The Candidate or Question on the Ballot 

On certain ballots, voters are instructed to draw a single line to connect the head and tail of the arrow 

that points to the choice to vote for a candidate or measure, instead of filling in a bubble or marking an 

X. 

Political 

(1) relating to the government or the pu blic affairs of a country. (2) Relating to the ideas or strategies of 

a particular party or group in politics. 

Political Action Committee (PAC) 

From FEC's glossary: Popular term for a political committee that is neither a party committee nor an 

authorized committee of a candidate. PACs directly or indirectly established, administered or financially 

supported by a corporation or labor organization are called separate segregated funds (SSFs). PACs 

without such a corporate or labor sponsor are called nonconne cted PACs. 

Political Appointee 

Any employee who is appointed by the President, the Vice President, or agency head. 

Political Caucus 

A meeting at which local members of a political party register their preference among candidates 

running for office or sel ect delegates to attend a convention. 

Political Disclaimer 

The required information that must accompany any political advertisement that is paid for by a 

candidate, committee, or individual that is published, displayed, or circulated for the purposes of 

influencing an election. 68 

Political Organizations 

Any organization that involves itself in the political process, including political parties, non -governmental 

organizations, advocacy groups, and special interest groups. 

Political Party 

An organization tha t coordinates candidates to compete in a country's elections. It is common for the 

members of a political party to have similar ideas about politics, and parties may promote specific 

ideological or policy goals. 

Political Party Affiliation 

Refers to a candidate or elected official's relationship to a particular party, not necessarily to a particular 

set of philosophical beliefs. In terms of voting, this usually refers to voters registering with an authorized 

political party. 

Political Party Statements of Purpose 

The declared policy of a political party or group. 

Political Subdivision 

Any unit of government, such as counties and cities, school districts, and water and conservation 

districts having authority to hold elections f or public offices or on ballot issues. 

Politician 

A person who is professionally involved in politics, especially as a holder of or a candidate for an elected 

office. 

Poll 

(1) To check the status of or record the opinion of a voter. (2) The process of vo ting in an election. 

Poll Book 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issuing them a ballot. 

Poll Book Station 

A site used to check in, process, or tabulate ballots from multiple prec incts as a central location. 

Poll Hours 

The opening and closing times for voting at polling locations. 

Poll List 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issuing them a ballot. 

Poll Officer 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Poll Watcher 

Individuals that monitor the opening and closing of voting locations and the voting process. 69 

Poll Worker 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Polling Location 

Physical address of a polling place. 

Polling Place 

Facility to which voters are assigned to cast in -person ballots. 

Polling Place Assig nment 

The location of the facility where a voter will be on the official list of voters authorized to cast a ballot. 

Polling places are based on a voter's residential address and the site may change from one election to 

the next. 

Polling Place Officer 

Th e official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Popular Vote 

The vote for a candidate or issue made by the qualified voters, as opposed to a vote made by elected 

representatives. 

Portable Document Format (PDF) 

A standard and commonly used file format, used for creating, sharing, and reading documents, forms, 

and reports. PDF files can only be opened and read by a reader, such as Adobe Acrobat. 

Position 

(1) The proper, appropriate, or usual place; such as the location a contest or candidate will appear on a 

ballot. (2) An opinion or what a person thinks about a political candidate, issue or policy. 

Post -Election 

Relating to or occurring in the time foll owing an election. 

Post -Election Procedures 

Laws, policies, and administrative procedures that are conducted after an election, often related to the 

canvassing, auditing, and certifying of election results. 

Post -Election Tabulation Audit 

A post -election audit that involves hand -counting a sample of votes on paper records, then comparing 

those counts to the corresponding vote totals originally reported as a check on the accuracy of election 

results, and to detect discrepancies using accurate hand -counts o f the paper records as the benchmark. 

Postage 

The fee to use a postal service. 

Postage Paid 

A form of indication on an envelope that the costs for sending were paid in another way than using 

stamps or a franking machine. The indication is usually placed in the upper right corner of the front side 

of an envelope, where otherwise stamps would have been stuck. 70 

Postage Stamp 

A small piece of paper issued by a post office, postal administration, or other authorized vendors to 

customers who pay postage, who the n affix the stamp to the face or address -side of any item of mail —

an envelope or other postal cover —that they wish to send. 

Postal Registration 

A mail service offered by postal services in many countries, which allows the sender proof of mailing via 

a m ailing receipt and, upon request, electronic verification that an article was delivered or that a 

delivery attempt was made. 

Postmark 

A postal marking made on a n envelope, parcel, postcard or the like, indicating the place, date, and time 

that the item was delivered into the care of a postal service, or sometimes indicating where and when 

received or in transit. 

Pre -Clearance 

Under the Federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, specified changes in voting procedures in certain states or 

political divisions cannot take effect in a state or political subdivision until the change is approved by a 

specified federal authority. The process that certain states or political divisions must follow t o make 

specified changes in voting procedures Under the Federal Voting Rights Act of 1965. 

Pre -Election Procedures 

Laws, policies, and administrative procedures that are conducted prior an election, often related to 

candidacy filings, ballot preparation, logic and accuracy testing of voting machines, poll worker training 

and all of the other activities required to prepare for voting in an election. 

Precandidacy 

The time period that a person, otherwise qualified to be a candidate for any public office or position to 

be determined by public election, prepares to be a candidate and may receive contributions or make 

expenditures, or both personally or by another individual. 

Precinct 

Election administration division corresponding to a contiguous geographic ar ea that is the basis for 

determining which contests and issues the voters legally residing in that area are eligible to vote on. 

Precinct Board 

A group of individuals working together, following specific rules and procedures, responsible for the 

proper an d orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Precinct Board Member 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Precinct Captain 

A party leader who organizes political activities in a specific geographic area. 

Precinct Count 

Counting of ballots in the same precinct in which those ballots have been cast. 71 

Precinct Count Optical Scan System (PCO) 

System by which votes are recorded in a voting location by means of marks ma de in voting targets 

designated on one or both sides of a ballot card or series of cards. An optical scan system reads and 

tabulates ballots, usually paper ballots, by scanning the ballot and interpreting the contents. 

Precinct Count Voting System 

A voting system that tabulates ballots at the polling place. These systems typically tabulate ballots as 

they are cast and print the results after the closing of the polls. With an Optical Scan System, after 

ballots are marked either by hand or with a ball ot marking device, they are tabulated when a ballot is 

placed into the scanner. For direct -recording electronic voting machines (DREs), and for some paper -

based systems, these systems provide electronic storage of the vote count and results are later 

uploa ded to a central voting system. 

Precinct Official 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting at a polling location or an election process. 

Precinct Register 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issuing them a ballot. 

Precinct Split 

A subdivision of a precinct which arises when a precinct is split by two or more election districts that 

may require different ballot styles. 

Precinct Technician 

The official responsible for the proper and orderly voting of the technology used at a polling location. 

Precinct Voting 

Voting before or on Election Day where the voter completes the ballot in person at a designated polling 

site that is overseen by election officials or poll wo rkers. 

Precision 

(1) Extent to which a given set of measurements of the same sample agree with their mean. Thus, 

precision is commonly taken to be the standard deviation estimated from sets of duplicate 

measurements made under conditions of repeatability, that is, independent test results obtained with 

the same method on identical test material, in the same laboratory or test facility, by the same operator 

using the same equipment within short intervals of time. (2) Degree of refinement in me asurement or 

specification, especially as represented by the number of digits given. 

Presentable Ballot Style 

Ballot style that includes all presentational details required to generate a ballot. This may include 

language, ordering of contests and candidat es, and structural content such as headers. 

Presidential Candidate 

A candidate who is seeking nomination or election to the office of U.S. President and who either has met 

the legal requirements to have their name printed on the ballot or is eligible to have their name written 

in on the ballot and counted as the voter's choice for the contest. 72 

Presidential Delegates 

Individuals who represent their state at national party conventions for the purpose of nominating a 

candidate for U.S. President . The candidate who receives a majority of the party's delegates wins the 

nomination. 

Presidential Elector 

A member of the electoral college, who is authorized to cast a ballot for U.S. President on behalf of the 

voters of their state or the District of C olumbia. 

Presidential Primary Election 

Primary election in which voters choose the delegates to the presidential nominating conventions 

allotted to their states by the national party committees. 

Prevailing Party 

Successful or winning individual or organ ization .

Primary 

Election held to determine which candidate will represent a political party for a given office in the 

general election. Some states have an open primary, while others have a closed or modified -closed 

primary. Sometimes elections for nonpa rtisan offices and ballot issues are consolidated with primary 

elections. 

Primary Calendar 

The official list of key dates and voting deadlines for a primary election. 

Primary Election 

Election held to determine which candidate will represent a political party for a given office in the 

general election. Some states have an open primary, while others have a closed or modified closed, 

primary. Sometimes elections for nonpartisan offices an d ballot issues are held during primary elections. 

Primary Presidential Delegation Nomination 

Primary election in which voters choose the delegates to the presidential nominating conventions 

allotted to their states by the national party committees. 

Primary Results 

Tallies of votes cast in a primary election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Prior Registration 

When a voter updates their registration in the same or a different jurisdiction, their previous voter 

registration on the official voter rolls is known as their Prior Registration. 

Prior To An Election 

Relating to or occurring in the time before the first official act related to an election. 

Prior To Election Day 

Relating to or occurring in the time before the day of an election. 73 

Privacy 

The ability to prevent others from determining how an individual voted. 

Private Key 

The secret part of an asymmetric key pair that is typically used to digitally sign or decrypt data. 

Process the Application 

The act of verifying eligibility, adding information to a database, and creating a new or updated voter 

record upon the receipt of elections application, such as a voter registration card or absentee ballot 

request. 

Product Standard 

Standard that specifi es requirements to be fulfilled by a product or a group of products, to establish its 

fitness for a purpose. 

Programmed Device 

Electronic device that includes software. Most electronic voting devices include application logic 

(software) and are, therefore, programmed devices. 

Proof of Residence 

A document confirming where a voter lives. 

Proponent 

Someone who proposes something, or at least supports it by speaking and writing in favor of it. 

Proportional Representation 

An electoral system in whi ch parties gain seats in proportion to the number of votes cast for them. 

Proportional Voting 

A vote variation used in multi -seat contests where the votes allowed in the contest are distributed to 

the selected candidates proportionally depending on the nu mber of selections. This may result in 

candidates receiving fractional votes. 

Proposition 

A proposal to enact a new law or constitutional amendment that is placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

Protest Petitions 

A petition or process to challenge or to raise objections against the conclusions of an administrative 

action. 

Provisional Ballot 

A ballot cast by a voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was incomplete or 

not accurate, or who had already r eceived a ballot in the mail and was allowed to vote. Fail -safe ballots 

are usually kept separate from the other ballots until an election official can determine if the voter is 

eligible to vote. These ballots are sometimes called fail -safe ballots. 74 

Provisional Ballot Envelope 

An official envelope used to enclose a ballot that was cast provisionally to separate the ballot from other 

cast ballots until the voters eligibility can be determined .

Provisional Vote 

A ballot cast by a voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was incomplete or 

not accurate, or who had already received a ballot in the mail and was allowed to vote. Provisional 

ballots are usually kept separate from the other ballots until an election official can det ermine if the 

voter is eligible to vote. These ballots are sometimes called fail -safe votes. 

Provisional Voting 

The act of casting a ballot by a voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was 

incomplete or not accurate, or who had already received a ballot in the mail and was allowed to vote. 

Provisional ballots are usually kept separate from the other ballots until an election official can 

determine if the voter is eligible to vote. These ballots are sometimes called fail -safe vot es. 

Provisional Voter Instructions 

An outline of the rules and procedures for voting provisionally, published by the official authority who is 

responsible for administering an election. 

Proxy Absentee Ballot 

A form of voting whereby a member of a decisi on -making body may delegate his or her voting power to 

a representative, to enable a vote in absence. 

Public Jurisdiction 

The authority of a sovereign power to govern or legislate. 

Public Key 

Public part of an asymmetric key pair that is typically used to verify digital signatures or encrypt data. 

Public Measure 

A proposal to enact a new law or constitutional amendment that is placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

Public Network Direct -Recording Electronic (DRE) Votin g System 

A DRE that transmits vote counts to a central location over a public telecommunication network. 

Public Notice 

A notice issued by a government agency or legislative body to make the public aware of the various 

government activities, hearings, public bids or other actions. 

Public Office 

Any federal, state, county, municipal, town, parish, borough or other district office or government 

position. 

Public Officer 

A term used to describe an individual who occupies any federal, state, county, municipal, town, parish, 

borough, or other district office or government position. 75 

Public Records Request 

A formal request made by a member of the public for documents or pieces of information that are not 

considered confidential and generally pertain to the conduct of government. 

Punch Card Ballot 

A ballot card that contains voting position targets that a marking device must pierce to form a hole in 

order to record a voter's choice for a candidate or measure. 

Punch Card Voting System 

A voting system where voters punch holes in a ballot card with a ballot marking device to mark their 

selections. After voting, the voter may pl ace the ballot in a ballot box, or the ballot may be fed into a 

computer vote tabulating device at the precinct. 

Punching Device 

A ballot marking device used by voters to punch holes in a ballot card to mark their selections. 

Punching Tool 

A ballot marki ng device used by voters to punch holes in a ballot card to mark their selections. 

Purge 

Terminology sometimes used to describe a process that states and counties use to maintain and update 

voter rolls and data by canceling registrations for voters who are no longer eligible. 

# Q

QR Code 

A machine -readable code consisting of an array of black and white squares, typically used for storing 

URLs or other information for reading by the camera on a smartphone typically used for storing vote 

information on ballots that are printed from ballot marking devices to be read and tabulated by a ballot 

scanne r. 

Qualification 

A requirement, such as being a registered voter, that is necessary in order for a voter, candidate, or 

election process to be a cceptable for a specific purpose. 

Qualification Number 

A number issued by NASED (National Association of State Election Directors) to a system that has been 

tested by an accredited independent testing authority for compliance with the voting system standa rds. 

Issuance of a qualification number indicates that the system conforms to the national standards. 

Qualification Test Report 

Report of results of independent testing of a voting system by an independent testing authority 

documenting the specific system configuration tested, the scope of tests conducted and when testing 

was completed. 76 

Qualification Testing 

Examination and testing of a voting system by a NASED -accredited independent testing authority to 

determine if the system conforms to the performance and other requirements of the national 

certification standards and the vendor’s own specifications. 

Qualification to Register 

The conditions necessary in order for an individual to register to vote, such as being a citizen of the 

United States and over 1 8 years of age. 

Qualification to Vote 

The conditions necessary in order for a voter to cast a ballot, such as registering to vote by a certain 

deadline. 

Qualified 

Officially recognized as having met the requirements; certified. 

Qualified Candidate 

Any person who files all of the required forms to become a candidate with the proper election authority 

before the appropriate deadline. The candidate's name will be printed on ballot. 

Qualified Elector 

An individual who has registered on an ele ctoral roll with the proper election authority and is entitled to 

vote. 

Qualified Voter 

An individual who has registered on an electoral roll with the proper election authority and is entitled to 

vote. 

Qualified Voting Systems 

Voting Systems that have met the standards to be certified for use in a jurisdiction. 

Qualified Write -in Candidate 

Any person seeking election, but whose name will not be printed on the ballot. For these votes to be 

tallied and certified, the candidate must file forms with the el ection official during the qualifying period. 

A space will be provided on the ballot for voters to write in the candidate's name. The candidate must 

educate voters to write in the candidate's name in the space provided. 

Qualify 

The process of meeting all of the requirements to be officially recognized as certified. 

Qualifying Period 

The official time period for individuals to file all of the required forms with the proper election authority 

to be eligible to be a candidate for public office or to have a b allot measure printed on the ballot for 

voters to vote on in a public election. 

Question Petitions 

A formal written request signed by voters, to propose to create, amend, or repeal a state law or 

constitutional provision. 77 

Questions on The Ballot 

Proposals to enact new laws or constitutional amendments that are placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

# R

Random Audit 

A public process of manually tallying a percentage of votes, selected at random by the elections officia l, 

and typically involves a defined minimum number of precincts or races. This procedure is conducted to 

verify the accuracy of an automated count. 

Ranked Choice Voting 

A vote variation which allows each voter to rank contest options in order of the voter ’s preference, in 

which votes are counted in rounds using a series of runoff tabulations to defeat contest options with the 

fewest votes, which elects a winner with a majority of final round votes in a single winner contest and 

provides proportional repres entation in multi -winner contests. 

Ranked Order Voting 

A vote variation which allows each voter to rank contest options in order of the voter’s preference, in 

which votes are counted in rounds using a series of runoff tabulations to defeat contest options with the 

fewest votes, which elects a winner with a majority of final round votes in a single winner contest and 

provides proportional representation in multi -winner contests. 

Ransomeware 

Malware that holds the victim’s device (computer, phone, etc.) and data for ransom (a sum of money or 

other payment), by means of encrypting the files on the device or preventing access to the device. 

Re -Elect 

To elect for another term to the same public office. 

Read Ballot 

Cast ballot that has been successfully accepted and initially processed. 

Reappointment 

To appoint for another term to the same public office. 

Reapportion 

To assign or distribute seats differently in a legislative body based on changes in population. 

Reapportionment 

The process b y which seats in a legislative body are distributed among administrative divisions based on 

changes in population. 78 

Recall 

Process that allows voters to remove elected representatives from office prior to the expiration of their 

terms of office. 

Recall Election 

An election in which the question of whether to remove an elected official from office before their term 

is completed appears on the ballot for approval or rejection. 

Recall Grounds 

Refers to the reasons that citizens would begin the process to r emove an elected official from office in a 

political recall. 

Recall Issue with Options 

Process that allows voters to remove elected representatives from office prior to the expiration of their 

terms of office. The recall may involve not only the question of whether a particular officer should be 

removed, but also the question of naming a successor in the event that there is an affirmative vote for 

the recall. 

Recall of Public Officer 

Process that allows voters to remove elected representatives from office prior to the expiration of their 

terms of office. 

Recall Petition 

The procedure by which citizens can gather signatures from voters, using an official form, to propose a 

recall election directly to a governing body. 

Recall Pro cess 

Process that allows voters to remove elected representatives from office prior to the expiration of their 

terms of office. 

Recall Statement 

The general statement included on a petition, when attempting to gather signatures from voters for a 

recall el ection, which describes the reason for seeking a recall election. 

Recall Vote 

Vote cast in a recall election. 

Recallable Ballot 

Recorded ballot that can be individually retrieved and included or excluded from further processing. 

Receiving Boards 

A group of individuals appointed, usually by local authorities, and charged with control of an elections 

procedure, such as receiving voted ballots , voting material or voting equipment from poll workers after 

the polls have been closed .79 

Recertification 

Re -ex amination, and possibly retesting of a voting system that was modified subsequent to receiving 

national and/or state certification. The object of this is to determine if the system as modified still 

conforms to the requirements. 

Reconcile 

An accounting or auditing process that compares two sets of records to check that figures are 

consistent, accurate, and complete. 

Record (noun) 

Preserved evidence of activities performed or results achieved (for example, forms, reports, test 

results). 

Reco rd (verb) 

To document an action or create a record. 

Recorded Ballot 

A ballot for which there is an associated cast vote record. 

Recount 

An additional count of the votes cast in an election, typically required due to state law, a candidate 

request, or a c ourt order, that is used to determine the accuracy of the reported results of an election. 

This process may be conducted using ballot tabulation equipment or by -hand depending on local laws 

and procedures. 

Redistrict 

The process by which seats in a legis lative body are distributed among administrative divisions based on 

changes in population. 

Referenda 

The plural of Referendum, which is a process whereby a state law or constitutional amendment may be 

referred to the voters before it goes into effect. 

Re ferendum 

Process whereby a state law or constitutional amendment may be referred to the voters before it goes 

into effect. 

Referendum Petitions 

A formal written request signed by voters, to refer a state law or constitutional amendment to the 

voters before it goes into effect. 

Referendum Question 

Proposals to enact new laws or constitutional amendments that are placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

Referendum Vote 

Vote cast in a referendum election. 80 

Register 

To complete a form with information to be added to an electoral roll for the jurisdiction where a voter 

resides, as a prerequisite for being entitled to vote. 

Register by Mail 

To complete a form with information to be added to an electoral roll, sent thr ough the mail, to the 

jurisdiction where a voter resides, as a prerequisite for being entitled to vote. 

Register to Vote 

To complete a form with information to be added to an electoral roll for the jurisdiction where a voter 

resides, as a prerequisite fo r being entitled to vote. 

Registered 

A voter who is listed on an electoral roll for the jurisdiction where a voter resides. 

Registered Voter 

A voter who is listed on an electoral roll for the jurisdiction where a voter resides. 

Registrar 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Registrar of Records 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Registrar of Voters 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Registration 

A term used by election officials when referring to a voter's record. 

Registration Affidavit 

An official sworn statement of information used to register to vote by voters. This is sometimes referred 

to as a Voter Registration Card. 

Registration Application 

An official sworn statement of information used to register to vote by voters. This is sometimes referred 

to as a Voter Registration Card. 

Registration Book 

A list of the indi viduals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Registration by Mail Form 

A form voters use to supply information to be added to an electoral roll, sent through the mail, to the 

jurisdiction where a voter resides, as a prerequisite for being entitled to vote. 

Registration Card 

An official sworn statement of information used to register to vote by voters. 81 

Registration Certificate 

An official document providing proof of registration. 

Registration Certificate Number 

The serial number associated with a voter's registration on an electoral roll. 

Registration Database 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Registration Deadline 

The last day to complete the documents to become a registered voter to participate in a specif ic 

election or election process. 

Registration Form 

An official sworn statement of information used to register to vote by voters. This is sometimes referred 

to as a Voter Registration Card. 

Registration Official 

An official who is responsible for electi on administration. 

Registration Status 

A term used by election officials to describe whether a voter's record shows that the voter is eligible to 

vote. Status terms include: Active, Inactive, Canceled, and others. 

Registration -By -Mail 

To complete a form with information to be added to an electoral roll, sent through the mail, to the 

jurisdiction where a voter resides, as a prerequisite for being entitled to vote. 

Rejected Ballot 

A ballot which has been cast but cannot be counted due t o a defect or ineligibility of the voter. 

Removal (Of A Candidate) 

When a candidate has withdrawn, been disqualified, or passed away, or when there is a formal process 

to remove a candidate from a ballot or from public office. 

Repeal 

The removal or reversal of a law. 

Report of Election Results 

A report of the tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Represent 

An arrangement whereby one is enabled to speak and act with authority on the behalf of another. 82 

Representation System 

A type of democracy founded on the principle of elected persons representing a group of people, as 

opposed to direct democracy. Representative democracy places power in the hands of representatives 

who are elected by the people. 

Repr esentative (noun) 

(1) A person who has been chosen to speak or vote for somebody else or on behalf of a group. (2) A 

member of the House of Representatives, the lower house of Congress. 

Representative (Adj.) 

Typical of a particular group of people. 

Representative Districts 

Administrative area in which voters are entitled to vote in contests that are specific to that area. 

Reproducibility 

Ability to obtain the same test results by using the same test method on identical test items in different 

testing laboratories with different operators using different equipment. 

Requirement 

Provision that conveys criteria to be fulfilled. 

Requirements for Elected Offices 

All of the legal requirements to hold an elected office. 

Reregister 

To compl ete a form to update your information on an electoral roll for the jurisdiction where a voter 

resides, as a prerequisite for being entitled to vote. 

Residence for Voting 

The place in which a voter's habitation is fixed, wherein the person has the intenti on of remaining, and 

to which, whenever they are absent, the person has the intention of returning. Persons experiencing 

homelessness can register and vote, as long as they can describe the physical location where they sleep 

at night. At a given time, a pe rson may have only one voting residence. 

Residency Requirement 

The rules that govern if an individual is entitled to become a candidate or vote, based on where they 

live, and how long they have lived there. 

Residual Vote 

Vote that could not be allocated to a specific contest option due to an undervote or overvote. 

Resilience 

The ability to recover gracefully from error conditions and unexpected circumstances. For example, 

manually marked paper preserves evidence of exceptions that can advise bo th adjudication and audit to 

achieve better interpretation of original voter intent. 83 

Resolution 

A statement of policy by the governing body or an order by the governing body that a specific action be 

taken. 

Restoration of Voting Rights 

The process of restoring voting rights to people who lost their voting rights under felony 

disenfranchisement or for any other reason that might have disqualified them from voting. 

Results 

Tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Retention Vote 

A periodic process whereby voters are asked whether an incumbent (usually a judge) should remain in 

office for another term. The office holder, who does not face an opponent, is removed from the position 

if a percentage of voter s indicate that they should not remain in office. 

Retractable Ballot 

Recorded ballot that can be individually retrieved and included or excluded from further processing. 

Return Envelope 

An official envelope used to transport absentee and mailed ballots a nd protects voter privacy. 

Returns 

Tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Reverse Side 

The front or back of a flat object which has two sides, such as a ballot card. 

Right to Vote 

A set of legal and constitutional protections designed to ensure the opportunity to vote in free and fair 

elections. 

Rights Restoration 

The process of restoring voting rights to people who lost their voting rights under felony 

disenfranchisement or for any other reason that might have disqualified them from voting. 

Risk Assessment 

The process of identifying the risks to system security and determining the probability of occurrence, the 

resulting impact, and safeguards that would mitigate this impact. 

Risk -Limiti ng Tabulation Audit 

Post -election tabulation audit procedure for checking a sample of ballots (or voter verifiable records) 

that provides a pre -specified statistical chance of correcting the reported outcome of an election if the 

reported outcome is wrong (that is, if a full hand -count would reveal an outcome different from the 

reported outcome). 84 

Roster 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issuing them a ballot. 

Run -Off 

Election to select a winner following a primary or a general election in which no candidate in the contest 

received the required minimum percentage of the votes cast. The two candidates receiving the most 

votes for the contest in question proceed to the ru n-off election. 

Run -Off Election 

Election to select a winner following a primary or a general election in which no candidate in the contest 

received the required minimum percentage of the votes cast. The two candidates receiving the most 

votes for the con test in question proceed to the run -off election. 

Run -Off Primary 

The election to select a winner in a primary, in which if no candidate in the contest received the required 

minimum percentage of the votes cast the two candidates receiving the most votes for the contest in 

question proceed to the run -off election. 

Run -Off Results 

Tallies of votes cast in a run -off election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Running for Office 

Person contending in a contest for office. A candidate may be explicitly presented as one of the choices 

on the ballot or may be a write -in candidate. 

Running Mate 

A person running together with another person on two closely associated political offices in an election. 

For example, President and Vice President, and (in some states) Governor and Lieutenant Governor. 

Rural Route 

A mail delivery route in a rural area where mail is typically delivered to a box number for destinations 

without street addresses, as opposed to a P.O. Box .

# S

Sample Ballot 

An example ballot provided to voters with information specific to the voter. 

Sample Ballot Pamphlet 

Sample Ballot Pamphlets often provides additional election information such as the voter's polling place 

and hours, information about candidates, question s, and instructions for voting, in addition to an 

example ballot specific to the voter. 85 

Sample Official Ballot 

An official example ballot provided to voters with information specific to the voter. 

Satellite Location 

An office that is physically separ ate from the main election office and may provide limited services. 

Voters can typically register to vote or receive an absentee ballot from these offices. Satellite offices are 

also known as branch offices. 

Satellite Voting Stations 

Temporary site set up by an elections office for the purposes of voting. 

Scan -Line 

A horizontal line traced across a cathode -ray tube by an electron beam to form part of an image. 

Typically, this issue is caused by wet ink or some other substance transferred from a piece of paper as it 

goes through the scanner. The ink or other substance gets on the glass as the paper moves through, and 

blocks the light of the scanner in that area for future copies. 

Scanner 

A device that scans documents, images, printed text, handwriting, o r an object and converts them into 

digital data. A Ballot scanner is a de vice used to read the voter selection data from a paper ballot or 

ballot card. 

Scanning 

The practice of using scanners to convert paper documents into digital images. This is done when 

capturing images of paper voter registration cards, and other election correspondence and when 

tabulating ballots. 

Scheduled Elections 

Existing law that requ ires any federal, state, county, municipal, district, or other district election to be 

held on certain dates, usually on a reoccurring basis. 

School District 

A geographical unit for the local administration of elementary or secondary schools. 

Score Votin g

A single -winner voting system where voters rate candidates on a scale. The candidate with the highest 

rating wins. 

Seal 

A security mechanism using strategically placed serialized or tamper -evident materials that alert officials 

if a device used in the e lections process has potentially been altered or accessed without authorization. 

Sealed Container 

A container used to hold or transport election materials, such as ballots, where strategically placed 

serialized or tamperproof evident seals have been used to alert officials if it has been altered or 

accessed without authorization. 86 

Seat 

An elected office position that a single officeholder may occupy for a term of office. 

Second -Chance Voting 

Feature of a voter -facing scanner that reviews the ballot for possible marking mistakes, informs the 

voter, and presents an opportunity to cast as -is or return the ballot. 

Secrecy Cover 

A paper, envelope, or folder that encloses a ballot to maintain the secrecy of how a voter marked their 

ballot. 

Secrecy Envelope 

An envelope that encloses a ballot to maintain the secrecy of how a voter marked their ballot. 

Secrecy of The Ballot 

A set of rules and procedures to establish the fundamental right of voters in the United States to cast a 

secret ballot. These p rocedures ensure that no ballot can be associated with a voter, thereby allowing 

voters to mark their ballots freely and without fear of repercussion or reprisal. 

Secrecy Sleeve 

A paper, envelope, or folder that encloses a ballot to maintain the secrecy o f how a voter marked their 

ballot. 

Secret Ballot 

A set of rules and procedures to establish the fundamental right of voters in the United States to cast a 

secret ballot. These procedures ensure that no ballot can be associated with a voter, thereby allowi ng 

voters to mark their ballots freely and without fear of repercussion or reprisal. 

Secret Ballot Envelope 

An envelope that encloses a ballot to maintain the secrecy of how a voter marked their ballot. 

Secretary of State 

A state -level officer who is responsible for various departments and functions. Secretaries of State are 

often, but not always, the Chief Election Official in their state. 

Secure Receptacle 

An object used to store and safeguard election material. 

Security Analysis 

An inquiry into the potential existence of security flaws in a voting system. Includes an analysis of the 

system's software, firmware, and hardware, as well as the procedures associated with system 

development, deployment, operation and management. 

Secur ity Controls 

Management, operational, and technical controls (i.e., safeguards or countermeasures) prescribed for 

an information system to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the system and its 

information .87 

Semi -Static Voting Syste m Software 

Software that may change in response to the voting equipment on which it is installed or to election -

specific programming. 

Senate 

A deliberative assembly, often the upper house or chamber of a bicameral legislature. 

Senate District 

One of a fi xed number of districts into which a state is divided, each district electing one member to the 

higher house of the state legislature. 

Serial Number 

A number showing the position of an item in a series, such as a unique voter registration card number or 

on a manufactured article for the purposes of identification. 

Sign -In Book 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issuing them a ballot. 

Signature 

A person's name written in a distinctive way as a form of identification in authorizing. This can also be 

made by a mark. 

Signature Roster 

An official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify and check in voters prior to 

issui ng them a ballot. 

Simple Majority 

A majority in which the highest number of votes cast for any one candidate, issue, or item exceeds the 

second -highest number, but less than 50%. 

Single -Member District 

An electoral district or constituency having a singl e representative in a legislative body rather than two 

or more. 

Sip and Puff 

An interface that allows voters to use their mouth on a straw to send inputs to an election voting 

machine. 

Slate 

A group of candidates that run in multi -seat or multi -position elections on a common platform. The 

common platform may be because the candidates are all members of a political party, have the same or 

similar policies, or some other reason. 

Slate Mailer 

A mass mailing that supports or opposes multiple candidates or b allot measures. 88 

Software 

The collection of programs that control the computer and perform a specific collection of tasks. 

Software has version numbers and is licensed (not sold) to the end user. Software can be altered to 

change the functionality of the computer. 

Software Independence 

Quality of a voting system or voting device where a previously undetected change or fault in software 

cannot cause an undetectable change or error in election outcome. 

Software Patches 

Corrections to existing programs, designed to be integrated into the programs without major release 

changes. Also called fixes or bug fixes. 

Source Code 

Human readable computer instructions that when compiled or interpreted, become an application. 

Source code can be written by humans or by computers. 

Spear Phishing 

A targeted attack by hackers, via bogus emails, that attempts to get the victim to provide login 

information or personal information to the hackers. Spear Phishing attempts may appear to originate 

from leg itimate known sources, such as organizational IT or known vendors. 

Special District 

Public agencies created to provide one or more specific services to a community, such as water service, 

sewer service, parks, fire protection, and others. 

Special Electio n

Primary, general, municipal, proposition, run -off, or recall election that is not held on a date and time 

regularly scheduled through statute. A special election may be combined with a scheduled election. 

Special Interest Group 

A group of people who hav e particular requests and who try to influence political decisions involving 

them. 

Split Precinct 

A precinct that contains an election district subdivision, e.g., parts of the precinct are in different 

political jurisdiction such as a water district or sc hool board district, requiring an additional ballot 

configuration. 

Split Ticket 

The act of selecting candidates from different parties for different contests. In states with Straight Ticket 

Voting, this action overrides the straight ticket vote, and allow s voters to select the candidates of their 

choice. For non -partisan races and proposals, the voter must make selections in these races separately. 

(Note: Split Ticket Voting is often not allowed during primary elections in some jurisdictions. )

Spoil 

To mark or otherwise alter a ballot so it indicates in a human -readable manner that the ballot is not to 

be cast. 89 

Spoiled Ballot 

A ballot which has been mistakenly marked or altered by a voter. A spoiled ballot is not cast, and the 

voter may request a new ba llot to mark correctly. 

Spoiled Ballot Affidavit 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation, that a voter made a mistake on a ballot and is 

requesting a new one. 

Standards Board 

HAVA designates a 110 -member Standards Board to assist the EAC in carrying out its mandates under 

the law. The board consists of 55 state election officials selected by their respective chief state election 

official, and 55 local election officials selected through a process supervised by the chief state election 

offici al. 

State 

A territory with its own government and borders within a larger country. There are 50 states in the 

United State s of America. 

State Assembly 

The name given to various legislatures, especially lower houses or full legislatures in states. 

State Central Committee 

The organization of the central or executive committees of the political parties in several states. 

State Certification 

State examination and possibly testing of a voting system to determine its compliance with state 

requirements for vo ting systems. 

State Election Commission 

A group of individuals appointed and charged to oversee elections and voting procedure in a state. 

State Election Fund 

The special revenue account created in a State Treasury, where expenditures from the account are used 

for the administration of elections. 

State Elections 

Elections for members to State offices, including Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Secretary of State, 

Controller, Treasurer, Attorney General, Insurance Commissioner, Superintendent of P ublic Instruction, 

and State Legislative Offices, among others. 

State Measures 

Proposals to enact new laws or constitutional amendments that are placed on the ballot for approval or 

rejection by voters. 

Statement of Contest 

The court filings and general requirements to contest the results of an election. 90 

Statewide 

Extending throughout a particular U.S. state. 

Statewide Election Results 

Tallies of votes cast in an election, that have been compiled from voting jurisdiction throughout a state, 

after the po lls have been closed for voting. 

Statewide Office 

Any government position in a State. State elected offices, include Governor, Lieutenant Governor, 

Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney General, Insurance Commissioner, and 

Superintendent of Public Instruction. 

Statewide Uniform Registry Of Electors (SURE) 

A platform that supports the functions of election systems, including voter registration, voter list 

maintenance, precinct data, and the production of poll books. 

Static Voting System Software 

Software that does not change based on the election being conducted or the voting equipment upon 

which it is installed, e.g., executable code. 

Statute 

A written law passed by a legislative body of a city, county, state, country, or other p olitical body. 

Statutory Initiative Petitions 

A citizen -initiated ballot measure that amends statute. 

Statutory Provisions 

Provisions that expand on the subject matter of the statute, or law, to provide more information about 

who the law applies to, when it applies, and what the penalties are for violating it. 

Statutory Violations 

To break the rules of or act against a law. 

Straight Party Ballot 

A ballot with all candidates from a single political party. 

Straight Party Override 

Explicit voter selection that overrides or supplements the vote selections made by a straight party voting 

option. Straight party overrides may be subject to state election rules for how they work or whether 

they are allowed. 

Straight Party Voting 

Mechanism that allows voters to cast a single vote to select all candidates on the ballot from a single 

political party. 91 

Straight Ticket 

The action of voting in one oval or box next to a party name at the top of the ballot to cast a vote for 

every candidate of that political party. No vote will be cast in individual races in which the selected party 

does not have a candidate. If the voter wishes to vote in any non -partisan races and proposals, the voter 

must make selections in these races separately. 

Straight Vote 

When a voter selects every candidate of a single political party on a ballot. 

Straw Ballot 

An ad hoc or unofficial vote. It is used to show the popular opinion on a certain matter. 

Straw Poll 

An ad hoc or unofficial vote. It is used to show the pop ular opinion on a certain matter. 

Stray Mark 

A mark made by a voter outside of the area of the ballot adjacent to each candidate or measure or that 

area of the ballot specifically designated to record the voter's choice for that contest. 

Street Segment Data 

The portion of a street between two consecutive cross streets that can be assigned to a precinct. 

Strike Out 

To draw a line through or attempt to remove a mark on a document or ballot, with the purpose of 

erasing it. 

Stylus 

Adaptive device that allo ws individuals to access screens, boards, and other devices. 

Substitute Candidate 

A different candidate for vice president from the one whose name appears on the party's certification or 

nominating petition at any time before seventy -five days before the general election, by certifying the 

change to the secretary of state. 

Successor 

Someone that follows and takes the office or position that was held by another. 

Suffrage 

The right to vote in political elections. 

Supervisor of Elections 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Supplemental Ballot Pamphlet 

Official information about your ballot issued from an elections office, after an initial ballot pamphlet has 

been mailed. 92 

Supplemental Petition 

Addition al petition sections, after a master document has been issued with information about 

measures, initiatives, referendums, or candidates used to gather signatures from registered voters. 

Supplemental Roster 

Additional pages added to an official register of electors entitled to vote at an election, used to verify 

and check in voters prior to issuing them a ballot. 

Support Software 

Software that aids in the development, maintenance, or use of other software, for example, compilers, 

loaders, and other utilitie s. 

Suspend Voting Rights 

Deprive someone of the right to vote. 

Suspended Status 

A term used by election officials when a voter's record shows that the voter is ineligible to vote. 

Swear 

A solemn attestation of the truth of what one says or that one sincerely intends to do what one says. 

Swing Voter 

A person who is not a firm supporter of any political party, and whose vote in an election is difficult to 

predict. 

Switch 

Switches connects computers into networks. A switch acts as a controller. Routers connect and manage 

traffic between different networks. 

Sworn 

Having taken a solemn attestation of the truth of what one says or that one sincerely intends to do what 

one says. 

Sworn and Subscribed To 

Having taken a solemn attestation of the truth of what one says or that one sincerely intends to do what 

one says and signing docum entation to provide evidence of the fact. 

Symmetric Cryptography 

Encryption system that uses the same key for encryption and decryption. This key must be kept secret. 

Symmetric (Secret) Encryption Algorithm 

Encryption algorithms using the same secret key for encryption and decryption. 

System 

A collection of unified components that convert inputs to outputs. Systems consist of integrated 

subsystems. Systems are typically complex and highly interconnected. Information systems consist of 

hardware, software, data, people, and procedures. 93 

System Audit 

A systematic and independent examination to determine whether activities and related results comply 

with the planned arrangements and whether these arrangements are implemented effectively and are 

suita ble to achieve objectives. Also defines as a systematic, independent, and documented process for 

obtaining audit evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which audit criteria are 

fulfilled. 

Systematic List Maintenance Program 

Terminology used to describe a process that states and counties use to maintain and update voter rolls, 

on a periodic basis and by canceling registrations for voters who are no longer eligible. 

System Extent 

Administrative unit that is the entire scope within which the voting system is used (for example, a 

county). The system extent corresponds to the top -level reporting context for which the system 

generates reports. 

# T

T-Coil 

Inductive coil used in some hearing aids to allow reception of an audi o band magnetic field signal, 

instead of an acoustic signal. The magnetic or inductive mode of reception is commonly used in 

conjunction with telephones, auditorium loop systems and other systems that provide the required 

magnetic field output. 

Tabletop E xercise 

A discussion -based drill where qualified personnel discuss scenarios and responses in order to validate 

plans and procedures. Also called Incident Response Planning or TTX .

Tabulate 

Process of totaling votes. 

Tabulating Equipment 

The hardware, software, or supplies used to count votes. 

Tabulating Equipment Memory Card 

An electronic data storage device used for storing digital vote totaling information, typically using flash 

memory. 

Tabulation 

Process of totaling votes. 

Tabulation Audit 

A post -election audit that involves hand -counting a sample of votes on paper records, then comparing 

those counts to the corresponding vote totals originally reported as a check on the accuracy of election 

results, and to detect discrepanc ies using accurate hand -counts of the paper records as the benchmark. 94 

Tabulation Report 

A report containing the counts associated with ballots tabulated for a given election district. 

Tabulator 

The person or device that counts votes. 

Tactile Controls 

Con trols that are discernable or perceptible by touch using hands, feet, or other parts of the body. (Does 

not include touch screens.) Dual switches are a form of tactile controls that can be used by voters with 

minimal use of their hands. 

Tally 

Process of t otaling votes. 

Tally Sheet 

The paper form or electronic record used to collect data in the process of counting votes. 

Tape 

Report run from a vote tabulation device to show the total number of votes cast per candidate or issue. 

Technical Data Package 

Vendor documentation relating to the voting system required to be submitted with the system as a 

precondition of certification testing. 

Telecommunications 

Transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's ch oosing, 

without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 

Term Limits 

A legal restriction that limits the total number of terms an officeholder may serve in a particular elected 

office. 

Term of Office 

The period of time for which a person is elected or appointed to hold a public office. Terms of elected 

office are usually 2, 4 or 6 years. 

Test 

Procedure used to determine one or more characteristics of a given product, process, or service 

according to a specified procedure for conformity assessment. A test may be an operational test or a 

non -operating test (for example, a n inspection). 

Test Campaign 

Sum of the work by a voting system test lab on a single product or system from contract through test 

plan, conduct of testing for each requirement (including hardware, software, and systems), reporting, 

archiving, and respondi ng to issues afterwards. 95 

Test Deck 

A set of marked ballots with a predetermined outcome. Used for logic and accuracy testing of a voting 

system. 

Test Method 

Specified technical procedure for performing a test, procedures by which tests are derived, or a 

combination of these. 

Test Plan 

Document created prior to testing that outlines the scope and nature of testing, items to be tested, test 

approach, resources needed to perform testing, test tasks, risks, and schedule. 

Test Suite 

Implementat ion of a set of operational tests for a particular object (such as a specific voting system) or 

class of objects (such as all voting systems that can interpret the language in which the test data are 

expressed). 

Testing Laboratories 

The process of performing any tests or procedures that are conducted in a controlled environment 

where the appropriate equipment, supplies, and certified expertise are available. Laboratory testing can 

be simply referred to as a laboratory test or lab test. 

Testing Stan dard 

Standard that is concerned with test methods, sometimes supplemented with other provisions related 

to testing, such as sampling, use of statistical methods or sequence of tests. 

Third Party 

A person or group besides the two primarily involved in a si tuation. 

Third Party Auditor 

A certified or otherwise credentialed individual or group, other than an election official, who is tasked 

with reviewing election materials. 

Third Party Candidate 

A candidate seeking nomination for office, with a political p arty affiliation other than the two majority 

political parties (Republican and Democratic). 

Third Party Logic 

Software, firmware, or hardwired logic that is neither application logic nor COTS. This includes, for 

example, general -purpose software developed by a third party that is either customized (for example, 

ported to a new platform, as is Windows Embedded Compact), not widely used, or source -code 

generated by a COTS package. 

Third Party Notification 

A notification from a person or group besides the two primarily involved in a transaction. An example is 

a change of address notification from the US Postal Service forwarded to an elections office. 96 

Ticket 

Another name for a ballot. 

Tie Vote 

An equal n umber of votes for more than one candidate or issue of the same contest .

Time Limit 

An amount of time in which something must be done or completed. 

Time of Recall 

The legal time period for the process by which citizens can remove elected officials from office before 

their term is completed. 

Time Off for Voting 

Almost every state prohibits employers from disciplining or firing an employee who takes time off work 

to vote. Some state law s require employers to give their employees a specific amount of time off to cast 

their ballots. In some states, this time off must be paid; in others, it may be unpaid. 

Touch Screen 

A display device which allows the user to interact with a computer by to uching areas on the screen. 

Touchscreen Voting 

Voting using a machine that utilizes a computer screen to display the ballot and allows the voter to 

indicate his or her selections by touching designated locations on the screen. 

Touchscreen Voting Machine 

A voting machine that utilizes a computer screen to display the ballot and allows the voter to indicate 

his or her selections by touching designated locations on the screen. 

Touchscreen Voting System 

A voting system that utilizes machines with a computer screen to display the ballot and allows the voter 

to indicate his or her selections by touching designated locations on the screen. 

Town 

A civil and political subdivision of a state, which varies in size and significance according to location but is 

ordinarily a division of a county. A town may or may not have a local government. 

Town Clerk 

A town official who is responsible for election administration for a town. 

Town Council 

The governing body of a town in many U.S. states, consisting of members elected by the voters. 

Township 

A widely used unit of local government in the United States, subordinate to a county, with some form of 

local government for which it generally conducts elections. 97 

Township Clerk 

A township official who is responsible for election administration for a township. 

Translate 

Express the sense of (words or text) in another language. 

Translation 

The process of trans lating words or text from one language into another. 

Translator 

A person or program that translates from one language into another. 

Transmitted Electronically 

A communication sent or received through technological apparatuses, including computer terminals or 

other equipment or mechanisms linked by telephone or microwave relays, or any similar apparatus 

having electrical, digital, magnetic, wireless, optical electromagnetic, or similar capabilities. 

Tribal Lands 

The land within the jurisdiction of a federally recognized Indian tribes for which the United States 

government has a trust responsibility to a Native American tribe or a member of a Native American 

tribe. This includes reservations, pueblo land grants, tribal trust lands, an d individual trust allotments. 

Trusted Build 

A witnessed software build where source code is converted into machine readable binary instructions 

(executable code) in a manner providing security measures which help ensure that the executable code 

is a veri fiable and faithful representation of the source code. 

Turnout 

The number of people attending or taking part in an event, especially the number of people voting in an 

election. This number is typically reported as a percentage of the total number of voter s in an election 

divided by the total number of registered voters in a given precinct or jurisdiction. 

# U

U.S. Election Assistance Commission (EAC) 

Election Assistance Commission was created by the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) to assist the states 

regard ing HAVA compliance and to distribute HAVA funds to the states. The EAC is also charged with 

creating voting system guidelines and operating the federal government’s first voting system 

certification program. The EAC is also responsible for maintaining the National Voter Registration form, 

conducting research, and administering a national clearinghouse on elections that includes shared 

practices, information for voters, and other resources to improve elections. 

Unauthorized Use 

Use of technology or data for unapproved or illegal activities. 98 

Unconstitutional 

Not in accordance with a political constitution, especially the U.S. Constitution, or with procedural rules. 

Under Oath 

Having sworn to tell the truth. 

Undervote 

Occurs when the number of choices selected by a voter in a contest is less than the maximum number 

allowed for that contest or when no selection is made for a single choice contest. 

Undervoting 

The act of a voter selecting less than the maximum number allowed for a voting contest or when no 

selection is made for a single choice contest. 

Unenrolled 

An individual who is not affiliated with a political party. 

Unenrolled Candidate 

A candidate for public office who is not affiliated with a political party. 

Unexpired Term 

The number of calendar days left between a vacancy of a public office and the date that the term is 

regularly scheduled to end. Unexpired terms may be filled through an appointment or special election. 

Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (UOCAVA) 

UOCAVA citizens are U.S. citizens who are active members of the Uniformed Services, the Merchant 

Marine, and the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic and 

Atmospheric Administration, their eligible family members, and U.S. citizens residing outside the United 

States. This Act provides the legal basis for these citizens' absentee voting requirements for federal 

offices. 

Uniformed Services Voter 

U.S. citizens who are active members of the Uniformed Services, the Merchant Marine, and the 

commissioned corps of the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 

Administration, their eligible family members. 

Uninterruptable Power Supply (UPS) 

A battery powered back -up system that quickly switches to b attery power when electrical current to the 

computer system is disrupted (surge, sags, and failures). 

United States Citizen 

An individual with a legal status that provides them with certain rights within the United States. 

Citizenship may be derived from place of birth, paternal citizenship, or naturalization. 

Unmarked Ballot 

An issued ballot without any selections made. 99 

Unregistered 

Not having entered one's name on an official voting list .

Upload 

Transfer data from a smaller computer or device to a larger computer. 

Usability 

Effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction with which a specified set of users can achieve a specified set of 

tasks in a particular environment. Usability in the context of voting refers to voters being able to cast 

valid votes as they intended quickly, without errors, and with confidence that their ballot choices were 

recorded correctly. It also refers to the usability of the setup and operation in the polling place of voting 

equipment. 

Usability Testing 

Encompasses a range of methods that examine how users in the target audience actually interact with a 

system, in contrast to analytic techniques such as usability inspection. 

# V

Vacancy 

When a public office becomes vacant before the end of a term. This can be due to death, resignation, 

moving out of the jurisdiction when residency is required, removal from office, among other reasons. 

Valid 

Legally binding due to having been executed in compliance with the law. 

Valid Identification (ID) 

A means of proving a person's identity, according to the laws of the jurisdiction. Common forms of 

Identification are Driver's Licenses and Passports. 

Valid Registered Voter 

A voter whose record is current with the appropriate election authority and is eligible to vote. 

Valid Vote 

Vote from a ballot or ballot image that is legally acceptable according to state law. 

Validation 

Process of evaluating a system or component during or at the end of the development process to 

determine whether it satisfies specified re quirements. 100 

Verification 

Process of evaluating a system or component to determine whether the products of a given 

development phase satisfy the conditions (such as specifications) imposed at the start of the phase. 

Verify Status 

In some states, a flag within a voter's record stating that the voter needs to confirm a certain piece of 

data in their record, such as an address or date of birth, before they can be issued a ballot. 

Verify Your Voter Registration 

Confirm that all of yo ur voter registration information is accurate and up to date so that you are able to 

vote in the next election. 

Video Ballot 

Electronic voter interface which presents ballot information and voting instructions as video images. 

Violate 

Fail to comply with a rule or statute. 

Violation 

Action of failing to comply with a rule or statute. 

Virus 

A malicious computer program that may replicate itself on a computer network, insert or attach copies 

of itself into computer programs, and cause harm to computers or systems by corrupting, stealing, or 

modifying data or access. 

Visual Format 

A display format in which contest options and other information are displayed on screen or paper for 

perception using sight. 

Visually Impaired 

Any kind of vision loss. 

Visually Inspected 

A common method of quality control, data acquisition, and data analysis by looking over a piece of 

equipment, or a ballot envelope, using the naked eye to look for flaws. 

Void Ballot 

A ballot that has been issued but cannot be cast by a voter. This could be because a ballot was lost in the 

mail, spoiled, or the voter is no longer eligible to vote using that ballot, among other reasons. 

Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG) 

A set of specifications and requirements against which voting systems can be tested to determine if the 

systems meet required standards. Under HAVA, the EAC is responsible for developing, maintaining, and 

approving these standards. Some factors examined under th ese tests include basic functionality, 

accessibility, and security capabilities. 101 

Vote 

A valid mark on an official ballot indicating the voter's preference for a particular candidate or ballot 

question. 

Vote A Provisional Ballot 

The act of casting a bal lot by a voter who was not on the list of eligible voters, whose information was 

incomplete or not accurate, or who had already received a ballot in the mail and was allowed to vote. 

Provisional ballots are usually kept separate from the other ballots unti l an election official can 

determine if the voter is eligible to vote. These ballots are sometimes called fail -safe votes. 

Vote Absentee in Person 

Voting before election day where the voter completes an absentee ballot in person at an elections office 

or other designated polling site prior to election day. 

Vote Against 

To cast a ballot in opposition to a political candidate or proposition. 

Vote by Emergency Paper Ballot 

Method of casting a ballot using a paper ballot, when the primary voting sy stem or ballot marking device 

is not available or not functional. 

Vote by Mail 

Method of casting ballots by which eligible voters are mailed ballots and information packets by the 

local jurisdiction. Voters can return their marked ballots by mail, to a vo ting location, or in drop boxes, 

depending on the jurisdiction. 

Vote by Mail Ballot 

A ballot cast by a voter other than in -person at a voting location. Vote by mail ballots are typically 

mailed to voters but can be issued over the counter from an election's office. Depending on the 

jurisdiction, vote by mail ballots can be returned by mai l, in a drop box, or in -person. 

Vote by Mail Ballot Application 

A document used by a voter to request a ballot be mailed to the voter. 

Vote Capture Device 

An electronic voting device that is used directly by a voter to make selections on a ballot. 

Vote Center 

A vote center is one of multiple voting locations in an election jurisdiction where voters may choose to 

vote at any of the locations offered (i.e. they are not assign ed to one location). Vote centers are typically 

opened for multiple days and offer a variety of election services. 

Vote Counting System 

The total combination of mechanical, electromechanical, or electronic equipment (including the 

software, firmware, and documentation required to program, control, and support the equipmen t) that 

is used to count votes; to report or display election results; and to maintain and produce any audit trail 

information. 102 

Vote For 

To cast a ballot in favor of a political candidate or proposition. 

Vote for N Of M 

A ballot choice in which voters ar e allowed to vote for a specified number (“N”) of candidates in a multi -

seat (“M”) contest. 

Vote for No More Than 

The maximum number of selections allowed in a contest. 

Vote for Up To 

The maximum number of selections allowed in a contest. 

Vote Illegally 

To cast a vote in an election when the individual is not authorized to participate by law. 

Vote in Honor of a Veteran Program 

A program that provides citizens the opportunity to pay tribute and dedicate their vote to a veteran or 

active -duty ser vice member. 

Vote in Person 

Voting before or on Election Day where the voter completes the ballot in person at a designated polling 

site, elections office, or vote center that is overseen by election officials or poll workers. 

Vote Independently 

Voters have the right to an accessible voting system must provide the same opportunity for access and 

participation including independence. 

Vote Recorder 

A device that permits contest options to be reviewed on an electronic interface, produces a human -

readable paper ballot, and does not make any other lasting record of the voter's selections. 

Vote Rigging 

Illegal interference with the process of an electi on, either by increasing the vote share of a favored 

candidate, depressing the vote share of rival candidates, or both. 

Vote Tabulating Device 

The hardware, software, or supplies used to count votes. 

Vote Tabulating Program 

The total combination of mecha nical, electromechanical, or electronic equipment (including the 

software, firmware, and documentation required to program, control, and support the equipment) that 

is used to count votes; to report or display election results; and to maintain and produce any audit trail 

information. 

Vote Tabulation District (VTD) 

Counting of ballots in the same District in which those ballots have been cast. 103 

Vote Total 

Tallies of votes cast in an election after the polls have been closed for voting. 

Vote Variation 

Voting style or feature, including but not limited to the following: approval voting, baseline voting, 

cumulative voting, N -of -M voting, proportional voting, ranked choice voting, score voting, and super 

majority voting. 

Vote Without Assistance 

The ability to mark, cast, and verify a ballot privately and independently. 

Voted Ballot 

Ballot that contains all of a voter's selections and has been cast. 

Voter 

Person permitted to cast a ballot. 

Voter Access Card 

Device used with some electronic voting machines programmed for each voter to enable the machine to 

display the correct ballot style for the voter's precinct .

Voter Aid Card 

A card identifying that a voter requires assistance with the voting process, and in some cases the type of 

assistance required. 

Voter Approval 

When a question on the ballot has received enough votes to pass. 

Voter Assistance Card 

A card identifying that a voter requires assistance with the voting process, and in some cases the type of 

assistance required. 

Voter Checklist 

A list designed to help voters successfully navigate the elections process, from registering to vote to 

casting a ballot on Election Day. 

Voter Complaint 

When a voter files a formal allegation of a violation of voting rights, s uch as intimidation or refusal to 

uphold an election law. 

Voter Concern Form 

A form used to file a complaint or allegation of a violation of voting rights. 

Voter -Facing Scanner 

System by which votes are recorded in a voting location by means of marks made in voting targets 

designated on one or both sides of a ballot card or series of cards. An optical scan system reads and 

tabulates ballots, usually paper ballots, by scanning the ballot and interpreting the contents. 104 

Voter Files 

Digital databases of publicly available records of who is registered to vote and who cast ballots in past 

elections. Voter file records indicate whether or not someone voted in a given election, but does not 

indicate whom they voted for. 

Voter Fraud 

Illegal interference with the process of an election, either by increasing the vote share of a favored 

candidate, depressing the vote share of rival candidates, or both. 

Voter Fraud Hotline 

Phone number whe re any individual can report a complaint or allegation of a voting rights violation. 

Voter Guide 

A guide that provides additional election information such as the voter's polling place and hours, 

information about candidates, questions, and instructions for voting. 

Voter Identification (ID) 

A means of proving a person's identity for the purposes of voting, according to the laws of the 

jurisdiction. Common forms of Identification are Driver's Licenses and Passports. 

Voter Information Card 

Cards furnished by an elections office to registered voters that contains information regarding a voter's 

registration record, such as registration number, registration date, name, party affiliation, birth date, 

residence address, precinct number, polling p lace address, etc. The elections office may include 

additional information on the card if they deem it necessary. 

Voter Information Guide 

A guide that provides additional election information such as the voter's polling place and hours, 

information about candidates, questions, and instructions for voting. 

Voter Information Pamphlet 

A guide that provides additional election information such as the voter's polling place and hours, 

information about candidates, questions, and instructions f or voting. 

Voter Intent 

How the voter attempted to express their vote choices through actions taken to mark, verify, and cast 

an issued ballot. 

Voter Intent Standard 

A standard for counting ballots that aims to ensure that ballots are counted in accordan ce with the goals 

of the voter, using written rules for both human processes and machine algorithms to ensure that all 

ballots marked in a similar way are counted in the same way. 

Voter Initiative 

A means by which voters may propose new laws or amend exis ting laws by gathering signatures from 

registered voters to either enact a law or place the issue on the ballot for the public to vote on. 105 

Voter Intimidation 

Threat of violence, manipulation, harassment, or fear for the purpose of influencing how a person votes. 

Voter List 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Voter Notification Card 

Cards furnished by an elections office to registered voters that contains information regarding a voter's 

registration record, such as registration number, registration date, name, party affiliation, birth date, 

residence address, precinct number, polling place address, etc. The elections office may include 

additional information on the card if they deem it necessary. 

Voter Qualifications 

Everything that is necessary in order for a n individual to be able to vote in an election. 

Voter Registrar 

An official who is responsible for election administration. 

Voter Registration 

A term used by election officials when referring to a voter's record. Voter Registration also refers to the 

requirement for citizens to register with a state or local elections office in order to be eligible to receive 

an official ballot for a given election, and to participate in certain election -related activities (including 

but not limited to signing petitions, serving as poll workers, and running for office ). 

Voter Registration Application 

An official sworn statement of information used to register to vote by voters. This is sometimes referred 

to as a Voter Registration Card. 

Voter Registration Card 

An official sworn statement of information used by indiv iduals to register to vote. 

Voter Registration Certificate 

An official sworn statement by an elections office to attest that a citizen is a registered voter. 

Voter Registration Drive 

An effort by a government authority, political party, or other entity to register to vote persons otherwise 

entitled to vote. Part icipants in a voter registration drive distribute voter registration forms, provide 

assistance in completing them, and return the forms to elections offices. 

Voter Registration List 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll wher e a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Voter Registration Rolls 

A list of the individuals that have registered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 106 

Voter Registration System 

A distributed or centralized system that permits the collection, storage, editing, deletio n, and reporting 

of voter records. The Help America Vote Act (HAVA) requires each state to have a centralized, statewide 

voter registration system (VRS). VRS have multiple interfaces and can interact with Department of 

Motor Vehicle (DMV) systems, election officials, voters, and other stakeholders. The VRS may be 

vendor -provided or “homegrown”. They may be client -server architecture or mainframe based. 

Voter Statistics 

Data on reported voting and registration activities, including factors such as turnout a nd age. 

Voter Turnout 

The number of people voting in an election. This number is typicall y reported as a percentage of the 

total number of voters in an election divided by the total number of registered voters in a given precinct 

or jurisdiction. 

Voter' s Bill of Rights 

A set of legal and constitutional protections designed to ensure the opportunity to vote in free and fair 

elections. 

Voter's Declaration 

A written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation, declaring a fact or set of facts. 

Voter -Verifiable 

A voting system feature that provides the voter an opportunity to verify that his or her ballot selections 

are being recorded correctly, before the ballot is cast. 

Voter -Verifiable Audit Record 

Human -readable printed record of all of a vo ter’s selections presented to the voter to view and check 

for accuracy. 

Voter -Verified Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) 

In DRE systems, a paper document containing evidence of a voter’s contest selections that they can 

check before officially casting the ballot. 

Voter -Verified Paper Record System (VVPRS) 

Physical paper records of voter ballots as voters have cast them on a voting system. In the event that an 

election recount or audit is called for, the VVPPRS provides the official record of the ballot. 

Voter -Verified Paper Trail (VVPT) 

Physical paper records of voter ballots as voters have cast them on an electronic voting system. In the 

event that an election recount or audit is called for, the VVPT provides a supporting record. The ‘voter -

verified’ pa rt of the VVPT refers to the fact that the voter is given the opportunity to verify that the 

choices indicated on the paper record correspond to the choices that the voter has made in casting the 

ballot. Thus, the result of an election is an electronic tal ly of the votes cast and a paper record of the 

individual votes that have been cast. 107 

Voters with Disabilities 

A voter who requires assistance or assistive technology to assess processes that are not universally 

designed. 

Votes Cast 

The number of ballot s received which includes ballots that have not yet been accepted for counting. 

Voting Booth 

An enclosed area in which a person stands for privacy while casting a ballot. 

Voting Device 

A device that is part of the voting system. 

Voting Equipment 

All devices, including the voting machine, used to display the ballot, accept voter selections, record voter 

selections, and tabulate the votes. 

Voting Indicator 

The space provided next to the name of each candidate and ballot question choice, t o be used for 

marking a vote. 

Voting Instructions 

Information provided to a voter that describes the procedures for voting. This information may appear 

directly on the paper or electronic ballot or may be provided separately. 

Voting Lever 

The mechanism that directly records a voter’s choices via mechanical lever -actuated controls into a 

counting mechanism that tallies the votes without using a physical ballot. 

Voting Location 

A physical location where voters may cast their ballots. 

Voting Machine 

The m echanical, electromechanical, and electric components of a voting system that the voter uses to 

view the ballot, indicate his/her selections, and verify those selections. In some instances, the voting 

machine also casts and tabulates the votes. 

Voting Off icial 

Term used to designate the group of people associated with elections, including election personnel, poll 

workers, ballot designers and those responsible for the installation, operation and maintenance of the 

voting systems. 

Voting Position 

Specific response field on a ballot where the voter indicates the selection of a candidate or ballot 

proposition response. 108 

Voting Position Target 

A voting position target refers to that area of the ballot adjacent to each candidate or measure, or that 

area of the ballot specifically designated to record the voter's choice for that contest. The term applies 

to all types of voting position targets on ballots, regardless of what form they may take, including, but 

not limited to, rectangle, oval, circle, square, ho le punch, cross punch, slotting, and open arrow. 

Voting Precinct 

Election administration division corresponding to a contiguous geographic area that is the basis for 

determining which contests and issues the voters legally residing in that area are eligib le to vote on. 

Voting Process 

Entire array of procedures, people, resources, equipment, and locations associated with conducting 

elections. 

Voting Punch 

A ballot marking device used by voters to punch holes in a ballot card to mark their selections. 

Voting Restrictions 

A law or set of laws that make it more difficult for people to vote. 

Voting Right 

The set of laws that protect a citizens ability to participate in public elections. 

Voting Rolls 

A list of the individuals that have regis tered on an electoral roll where a voter resides, as a prerequisite 

for being entitled to vote. 

Voting Session 

A collection of activities including ballot issuance, voter interaction with the vote -capture device, voting, 

verification, and casting. 

Voting Station 

The location within a polling place where voters may record their votes. A voting station includes the 

area, location, booth, or enclosure where voting takes place as well as the voting machine. 

Voting Status 

A term used by election officia ls to describe whether a voter's record shows that the voter is eligible to 

vote and/or if they have voted .

Voting Stylus 

A device used to mark either an analog ballot or direct -recording electronic voting machine. 109 

Voting System 

The total combination of mechanical, electromechanical or electronic equipment (including the 

software, firmware, and documentation required to program, control, and support the equipment) that 

is used to define ballots; to cast and count votes; to report or display election results; and to maintain 

and produce any audit trail information; and the practices and associated documentation used to 

identify system components and versions of such components; to test the system during its 

development and maintenance; to mai ntain records of system errors and defects; to determine specific 

system changes to be made to a system after the initial qualification of the system; and to make 

available any materials to the voter (such as notices, instructions, forms or paper ballots). 

Voting System Certification 

The process by which the EAC, through testing and evaluation conducted by an accredited Voting 

System Test Laboratory, validates that a voting system meets the requirements set forth in existing 

voting system testing standards (VVSG), and performs according to the Manufacturer’s specifications for 

the system. 

Voting System Procedures 

The EAC operates a voting system testing and certification program. This program tests and certifies 

hardware and software and may also decertify those systems. This program accredits test laboratories 

to perform this testing for the EAC. While states are not required to participate in the program, some 

have enacted laws or have regulations that require a level of participation. 

Voting System Soft ware 

All the executable code and associated configuration files needed for the proper operation of the voting 

system. This includes third party software such as operating systems, drivers, and database 

management tools. 

Voting System Standards (VSS) 

Voting sy stems certified by the EAC are tested to a set of voluntary standards providing requirements 

that voting systems must meet to receive a Federal certification. These standards are referred to as 

Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG). 

Voting System Test Laboratory (VSTLs) 

VSTLs are privately owned testing laboratories that test voting systems (and other election systems) for 

conformance to the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG) or to other requirements, including 

individual state requirements. VST Ls are periodically reviewed for conformance to National Voluntary 

Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) administered by the National Institute for Standards and 

Technology. 

Voting System Testing 

Examination and testing of a computerized voting system by using test methods to determine if the 

system complies with the requirements in the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines and with its own 

specifications. 110 

# W

Waive (The Right To) 

The legal ability to request an exemption to a rule or regulation. 

Waiver 

The voluntary relinquishment or surrender of some known right or privilege. Regulatory agencies of 

state departments or the federal government may issue waivers to exempt companies from certain 

regulations. 

Ward 

An administrative division of a city or borough that typically elects and is represented by a councilor or 

councilors. 

Water District 

A geographical unit of local government given the task of supplying water and sewer needs to a 

community. 

Wheelchair Accessible 

Building features that allow for the free movement of individuals using wheelchairs. Accessible doors 

should provide at least 32 inches of clear width. Door hardware must not require more than 5 lbs. of 

force to operate. It must also be operable with one hand and without tight grasping, pinching, or 

twisting of the wrist. Thresholds cannot be higher than 1/2 inch at accessible doors, including sliding 

doors. Doors require a certain amount of clear space around th em, in all cases, the maneuvering space 

should have a level surface, that is, a maximum slope of 1:48. 

White Box Testing 

Testing based on an analysis of the internal structure of the component or system. 

Wi -Fi 

A wireless networking technology that uses r adio waves to provide wireless high -speed Internet and 

network connections. Wi -Fi is a trademarked phrase for the IEEE 802.11x standard. 

Wide Area Network 

A network that connects computers across metropolitan, regional, and national boundaries. 

Wireless 

Network connectivity using radio waves instead of wire connections. Wireless signals can be intercepted 

and, if not encrypted, deciphered. 

Withdrawal of Candidacy 

When a person announces a candidacy or files for an election but later decides, by their own choice, not 

to appear on the final ballot. 111 

Withdrawal of Nominating Petition 

When a person files paperwork to be considered for Nomination to public office, but later decides, by 

their own choice, to not seek the nomination. 

Withdrawn Candidates 

Candidates who had announced a candidacy or filed for an election but later decided, by their own 

choice, not to appear on the final ballot. 

Writ of Election 

The legal term used when an authorized government authority proclaims that an election will take place 

at a particular time. 

Write -In 

A vote for a candidate that was not listed on the ballot. In some jurisdictions, voters may do this by 

filling in a writ e-in space provided on a paper ballot, or they may use a keypad, touch screen, or other 

electronic means to enter the name on an electronic voting device. 

Write -In Campaign 

Any person seeking election, but whose name will not be printed on the ballot. The candidate must 

educate voters to write in the candidate's name in the space provided on the ballot. 

Write -In Candidate 

Any person seeking election, but whose name will not be printed on the ballot. For these votes to be 

tallied and certified, the candida te must file forms with the election official during the qualifying period. 

A space will be provided on the ballot for voters to write in the candidate's name. The candidate must 

educate voters to write in the candidate's name in the space provided. 

Write -In Candidate Requirements 

Any person seeking election, but whose name will not be printed on the ballot, must still complete and 

file forms with the election official during a qualifying period, in order for these votes to be tallied and 

certified. 

Write -In Space 

A space provided on a ballot for voters to write in candidate's names that are not pre -printed on the 

ballot. 

Write -In Vote 

A vote for a candidate that was not listed on the ballot. In some jurisdictions, voters may do this by using 

a mark ing device to physically write their choice on the ballot or they may use a keypad, touch screen, 

or other electronic means to enter the name. 

Write -In Voting 

To make a selection of an individual not listed on the ballot. In some jurisdictions, voters may do this by 

using a marking device to physically write their choice on the ballot or they may use a keypad, touch 

screen, or other electronic means to enter the name. 112 

# X

X of Y 

Refers to the number of voting precincts that have been tabulated and reported. Example: 8 of 10 voting 

precincts have been tabulated and reported. 

XML Extensible Markup Language 

XML is a text -based language used to organize and present information on th e World Wide Web. 

# Y

Yard Sign 

A sign advertising a particular vote. 

# Z

Zero Report 

Report produced prior to tabulation to check that there are no stored votes.
