Title: IRAPFM-FINAL_7fev_2025

URL Source: https://icom.museum/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/IRAPFM-FINAL_7fev_2025-1.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 10 Feb 2025 08:45:59 GMT

Markdown Content:
Museum and public funding 

# DECREASE 

# IN PUBLIC 

# FUNDING ? 

# A worldwide answer 

# from Museums 

International Research 

Alliance on Public Funding 

For Museums (IRAPFM) I

# Museum and 

# public funding 

# International Research Alliance on 

# Public Funding for Museums 

# (IRAPFM) II 

LEAD PARTNER 

Chair on Museum Governance and Cultural Law – Université du Québec à 

Montréal 

Lisa Baillargeon : Co -Director, UQAM 

Yves Bergeron : Director, UQAM 

Michèle Rivet : Lead Scientific Director 

Camille Labadie : Research Coordinator 

Léa Le Calvé : Research Coordinator 

Heidi Weber : Research Coordinator 

INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS 

For Africa : Catherine Snel (Sanlam Archive and Museum, South Africa). 

For Asia : Yang Jin, assisted by Ma Jinwen, Jia Yutong, Hou Zelin, Tan Zhongyan, Liu 

Nianqing ( Shaanxi Normal University , China) and Wang Siyu, Beijing University .

For Europe : Xavier Roigé, assisted by Alejandra Canals Ossul (Universitat de 

Barcelona, Spain). 

For Latin America and the Caribbean : Luciana Menezes de Carvalho assisted by 

Luciene Pereira da Veiga Givisiez and Luiza Henriques Costa Pereira (UNIRIO, 

Brazil). 

For North America : Marc Lajoie, assisted by Lisette Carine Pedraza -Cala (Musée 

national des Beaux -Arts du Québec, Canada). 

For Oceania : Conal McCarthy, assisted by Anna Abernethy (Victoria University of 

Wellington, Aotearoa/New Zealand). 

ISBN 978 -2-487970 -02 -1I

# Executive Summary 

Overview 

The International Research Alliance on Public Funding for Museums (IRAPFM) has 

conducted a comprehensive study on the state of public funding for museums 

worldwide, highlighting the critical financial challenges facing these vital cultural 

institutions and the innovative strategies they adopt in response to a research project 

generated by ICOM -IMREC, the international research and exchange partnership 

established by ICOM and Shanghai University. This report, spearheaded by the Université 

du Québec à Montréa l (UQAM) and supported by a global consortium of experts, offers a 

detailed analysis of funding trends, their impacts, and museums’ responses to them 

across different world regions. Additionally, the report proposes targeted calls for action 

to address the se challenges, support the sustainability of museums and identify key 

areas for future research'. 

Key Findings 

£ Decline in Public Funding : The study reveals a global decline in public funding for 

museums, exacerbated by the 2008 financial crisis and the COVID -19 pandemic. 

This reduction in funding has led to significant operational challenges, including staff 

layoffs, reduced programming, an d delayed projects. Notably, even when budgets 

remain nominally stable, inflation and increased responsibilities result in a real 

decrease in available funds. 

£ Shift to Self -Financing and Hybrid Models : Museums are increasingly turning to self -

generated revenues and hybrid funding models that combine public and private 

sources. This shift is driven by the need to offset the instability of public funding and 

ensu re financial sustainability. Governments are exerting pressure on museums to 

generate their own revenue, leading to a rise in self -financing efforts. 

£ Digital Transformation and Community Engagement : The pandemic has accelerated 

digital initiatives, with museums developing online platforms, virtual tours, and 

digital exhibitions. Strengthening community engagement through outreach and 

educational progra ms has also become a crucial strategy for maintaining relevance 

and attracting local funding. 

£ Regional and Institutional Disparities : There are significant disparities in funding 

between countries, as well as between national and smaller -scale museums. 

National museums often receive more stable funding, whereas smaller institutions 

struggle to com pete. The varied types and themes of museum institutions also 

influence the level of funding they receive, some themes attracting more financial 

support than others. 

£ Increasing Competition : The expansion of the heritage field and the multiplication of 

private museums have intensified competition for funding. Public museums are at a II 

disadvantage compared to private museums, leading to a two -tiered funding system. 

This increased competition pressures museums to innovate and diversify their 

revenue streams. 

£ Cultural Diplomacy : Governments often overlook the critical role museums play in 

cultural diplomacy. Enhanced recognition and support for museums' contributions 

to cultural diplomacy could improve funding and operational stability. 

£ Impact of New Definitions and Responsibilities : The new ICOM definition of 

museums, which includes broader responsibilities such as inclusivity and 

sustainability, has added pressure on museums to adapt and expand their missions. 

This expansion necessitat es additional funding and resources, further straining 

financial capabilities. 

Proposed Calls for Action 

1. For Museums : Insofar as possible, diversify funding sources by integrating private 

donations, corporate sponsorships and revenue -generating activities. Embrace 

digital tools and community -focused initiatives to build a loyal visitor base and 

increase fina ncial resilience. 

2. For Governments : Implement multi -year grants adjusted for inflation, provide 

resources for digital transformation and ensure equitable funding across museums 

of different statuses. Enhance transparency in funding allocation to reduce 

disparities and suppo rt the long -term planning of museums. Recognize and support 

museums' role in cultural diplomacy. 

3. For ICOM : Advocate for increased and equitable public funding for museums 

globally. Develop guidelines and best practices for museums to enhance their self -

financing capabilities and resilience. Promote the importance of museums in 

cultural diplomacy and support their efforts in expanding digital and community 

engagement initiatives. 

4. For Civil Society : Actively advocate for museums at all levels of government, support 

museum associations, and participate in museum activities. Civil society's 

involvement is crucial for sustaining museums' educational and cultural missions. 

Conclusion 

This report highlights the critical need for a sustainable financial framework for museums 

globally. By implementing diversified funding strategies, embracing digital 

transformation, promoting community engagement, and advocating for greater support, 

museu ms can navigate financial uncertainties and maintain their essential role in 

cultural preservation and education. This report also underscores the need for further 

research to ensure museums' resilience and sustainability in an evolving financial 

landscape . The growing financial pressures and competition call for a unified effort to 

support museums in their expanded roles and responsibilities. III 

# Acknowledgements 

ICOM IMREC initiated, managed and funded the Museums and Public Funding Project. 

The IRAPFM would like to thank :

£ The Steering Committee : Chair : Dr. Carol Scott, Chair of the Academic and 

Programming Board of ICOM -IMREC; Prof François Mairesse, member of the APB; 

Prof. Melissa Campos, member of the APB; Prof Laishun An, Director of ICOM -

IMREC; Ludovica Antonucci, ICOM Capacity Building Coo rdinator. 

£ The ICOM National Committees and Associations, as well as all museums 

throughout the world who meticulously filled out the survey. 

£ ICOM -Europe and ICOM -Korea, for letting us present our preliminary results in 

their conferences. 

£ Christian Agbobli, Vice -Recteur à la recherche et à la création, Université du 

Québec à Montréal (UQAM). 

£ Nathalie Bondil, Director of the Museum and Exhibitions departments of the 

Institut du Monde Arabe. 

£ Geneviève Béliveau -Paquin and Chantal Prud’homme, of L’Institut de la 

statistique du Québec. 

£ Patrick Coulombe, of UQAM’s School of Management. 

£ Aleksander M. Janicki, copy editor. 

£ Michel Côté, former director of the Musée des Confluences (Lyon) and the Musée 

de la civilisation (Québec). 

£ All persons who took time to share and promote the survey through their personal 

and professional contacts. 

The IRAPFM wishes to express special thanks to ICOM -IMREC for generating, managing 

and financing this study. 

This Report expresses the views of IRAPFM and does not engage ICOM -IMREC. IV 

# Foreword 

As Chair of the Academic and Programming Board of ICOM -IMREC and Head of the 

Steering Committee overseeing this research project into museums and public funding, 

it gives me great pleasure to write the foreword for the final report of this project. 

Public funding has been in decline in many parts of the world for nearly two decades. 

Gaining momentum following the global financial crisis of 2007/8 and growing to a 

crescendo during and after the Covid pandemic, these declines have put considerable 

pres sure on the current and future sustainability of the sector. 

The problem has been forcefully brought to ICOM’s attention through three research 

initiatives conducted over the last 5 years. In 2018, a survey sent to ICOM National and 

International Committees as part of a mid -term strategic planning exercise revealed that 

the decline in public funding was the most pressing concern facing the sector. Three 

surveys conducted during Covid exposed the vulnerability of museums without public 

funding and, when a survey of the membership was conducted as part of research for the 

ICOM Strategic Plan 2022 -8, funding was again found to be the most important issue of 

concern for the global museum community. 

However, although there is a growing literature on the subject, the true range and extent 

of the problem has remained elusive. In part, this is because much of the published 

material has been generated in specific regions of the world or has focused on the 

situation particular to one nation. In addition, successive world crises and their aftermath 

have tended to focus attention on a particular time -period rather than encouraging a 

longitudinal view of progressive patterns of decline. 

Responding to these concerns, ICOM -IMREC wanted to interrogate and bring some 

clarity to this subject on behalf of the global museum community. It prepared a research 

brief highlighting five major questions: 

• What does the term ‘public funding’ currently encompass and how is the term 

understood across the globe? 

• Is declining public funding for museums a global phenomenon? 

• Where, to what extent and what kind of declines are occurring? 

• With what impact? and 

• In areas where reductions are occurring, how are museums responding? Are there 

discernible trends emerging from new business models? 

We sought expressions of interest from consortiums willing to explore how public funding 

is evolving and what this means for museums. We found a like -minded partner in the 

IRAPFM (International Research Alliance on Public Funding for Museums) led by the 

Un iversity of Quebec at Montreal assisted by a global consortium of museum 

researchers representing each of the major regions of the world. V

The result of their research over the last 18 months is a report which is a significant 

addition to the growing body of research on this subject. 

It provides evidence that, even taking regional differences into account, declining public 

funding for museums is a global phenomenon with significant implications for the world -

wide museum sector. It is one of the first studies to trace the trajectory of funding decline 

over nearly two decades and map how this progressive decline in traditional sources of 

income is creating an unpredictable funding universe further exacerbated by geo -

political tensions and the energy crisis. It encourages us to interrogate the language we 

use, providing nuanced insights into how the term ‘public funding’ is evolving and 

addressing the increasingly fluid boundaries between notions of ‘public’ and ‘private’ 

museums which has important implications for the very definition of t he term ‘museum’ 

and the allocation of resources. 

Importantly, it reveals the resilience of museums as they develop innovative ways of 

generating other sources of income and generate new funding models. 

Finally, one of the great strengths of this report is the breadth and extent of regional 

comparisons which locate the problem of funding within the different political and policy 

contexts within which museums are operating and illustrates the many ways in which 

they are responding. 

The first section discusses the findings of a quantitative survey which explored the 

situation pre, during and post pandemic. It highlights the volatile and evolving nature of 

public funding in the last two decades bringing multiple impacts and challenges. Section 

two takes a deep -dive into these impacts and challenges with special attention to the 

ways in which museums across six regions of the world are responding through new 

business models and innovative ways of resource -building. Looking ahead, the fin ancial 

challenges facing museums are discussed in section three. The increasingly complex 

pattern of funding required for on -going sustainability, the imperative to be selective 

about programme choices in the absence of resources and the challenges inheren t in 

balancing financial necessity with ethical considerations are discussed in detail. 

Proactive advocacy to ensure the sustainability of the museum sector is the subject of 

the final section which contains recommendations for action by the museum sector, by 

museum associations, by civil society and by government. 

Public funding is a necessary component if the vitally important contributions that 

museums make to public value are to be sustained. This is report is a call to action; one 

which, as a sector, we cannot ignore. 

Carol A. Scott 

Chair of the Academic and Programming Board 

ICOM -IMREC VI 

# TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 1

Museum funding 1

Decrease in public funding ? 2

Thinking about public funding 3

Research objectives 3

Preferred methodological approach : A two -level methodology 5

Quantitative survey 6

Qualitative survey 6

Structure of the report 6

CHAPTER I - QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS :

ANSWERS FROM ICOM NATIONAL COMMITTEES 

AND MUSEUM ASSOCIATIONS 7

Methodology 7

1.1. The situation of museums in responding countries 8

1.1.1. The responding countries 8

1.1.2. Museum funding in the responding countries 13 

1.1.3. The part of private funding 18 

Summary 21 

1.2. Pre -pandemic - 2008 -2019 21 

1.2.1. Funding Fluctuations 22 

1.2.2 Exploring new revenue streams 24 

Summary 27 

1.3. Public financing measures during the COVID -19 crisis 27 

Summary 29 

1.4. Post -pandemic 2021 -2022 29 

1.4.1. Funding Fluctuations 29 

1.4.2. Exploring new revenue streams 32 

Summary 35 

1.5. Impacts of Funding Variations 35 

Summary 42 

1.6. Highlights 43 

Summary 45 

1.7 Conclusion 46 

CHAPTER II – QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS :

ANSWER FROM MUSEUMS 47 

Methodology 48 

2.1 Africa 48 

2.1.1 Overview 48 

2.1.2 Funding Fluctuations 50 VII 

2.1.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 52 

2.1.4 Key Finding 54 

Innovative approaches 54 

2.2 East Asia 55 

2.1.1 Overview 55 

2.2.2 Funding Flucuations 57 

2.2.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuation 59 

2.2.4 Key Finding 61 

Innovative approaches 61 

2.3 Europe 63 

2.3.1 Overview 63 

2.3.2 Funding Fluctuation 64 

2.3.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 66 

2.3.4 Key Findings 68 

Innovative approaches 68 

2.4 Latin America and the Caribbean 69 

2.4.1 Overview 69 

2.4.2 Funding Fluctuations 70 

2.4.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuations. 73 

2.4.4. Key Findings 75 

Innovative Approaches 75 

2.5 North America 76 

2.5.1 Overview 76 

2.5.2 Funding Fluctuations 78 

2.5.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 80 

2.5.4 Key Findings 82 

Innovative Approaches 82 

2.6 Oceania 83 

2.6.1 Overview 83 

2.6.2 Funding Fluctuations 85 

2.6.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuations 86

2.6.4 Key Findings 87 

Innovative Approaches 87

2.7 Conclusion 89

CHAPTER III - LOOKING AHEAD :

MUSEUMS’ CHALLENGES 90

3.1 Financial Sustainability 90

3.1.1 Alternative sources of funding 91

3.1.2. Short -Term Budgeting 92

3.1.4 Professionals and Volunteers 92

3.1.5 Advocacy 93

3.2 More with less 95 

3.2.1 Increased Responsibilities 94

3.2.2 Museums as third spaces 96VIII 

3.2.3 Environmental Sustainability 97

3.3 Ethical Considerations 98

3.3.1 Partnerships 98

3.3.2 Philanthropy and Donations 99 

3.3.3 Accessibility 99 

3.3.4 Governance 10 0

3.4 Conclusion 10 1

CHAPTER IV – PROPOSED CALLS FOR ACTION 10 2

4.1 To Museums Throughout the World 10 2

4.2 To ICOM National Committees and Museums’ Associations 10 3

4.3. To ICOM 10 4

4.4 To All Levels of Government 10 5

4.5. To Civil Society 10 6

Conclusion 10 7

CONCLUSION 109 

Suggestions for Future Research 11 1

BIBLIOGRAPHY 123

LIST OF FIGURES 119 

ANNEXES 12 1

I - Quantitative Survey I

II - Qualitative Survey X

III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums XXIII 1

# INTRODUCTION 

# An overall assessment of museum funding :

# some preliminary reflections 

Museum funding 

According to UNESCO (UNESCO 2020; 2021), there are between 95,000 and 104,000 

museums worldwide, with a wide variety of business models and funding sources. Within 

this diversity, there are three types of logics structuring museum funding : the market 

logi c, the public subsidy logic and the donation logic (Mairesse 2022). Museums can 

generate independent revenue by relying on sources such as entrance fees, shops, and 

space rentals. Second, museums can receive public funds, which include operational 

and proj ect -specific subsidies, as well as fiscal resources. Public funding can be direct 

or indirect and comes from different levels of government (states, provinces, regions and 

cities). Third, museums can turn to individual or collective patrons to bolster thei r

funding. Friends of museums and fundraising campaigns are part of the logic of 

donation. 1 As a result, the definition of public funding varies from country to country. 

Distinct political regimes and economic models, as well as new categories of museums, 

generate different understandings of the role of governments in museum funding 2.

Conversely, the distinction between the public and private systems stems from divergent 

financing methods, but also, importantly, from the distinct status of different institutions 

(Mairesse 2022). However, in many cases nominal distinctions are increasing ly giving 

way to hybrid models in practice (Hervé et al. 2011). Institutions’ status and funding 

methods do not always overlap, but the legal status of a given museum (private for -profit 

institution or non -profit organization) influences its goals and how it proceeds to achieve 

them (Ginsburgh and Nicolas 2022). The status of museums, which differs across various 

regions and political structures, has an effect on funding. In addition, the large number of 

private museums, which are supported by various gover nment programs (e.g. culture, 

science, sports, tourism, etc.) have a different understanding of public funding, which 

they receive in addition to private or independent funding, and so are comparable to other 

cultural industries. 

An analysis of public funding of museums in Canada shows it to be structured around 

three central axes : public and parapublic assistance, own -source revenues and private     

> 1Based on a synthesis of two entries in the Dictionary of Museology: Financement (Mairesse 2022) and Économie
> Muséale (Ginsburgh and Nicolas 2022). It should be noted that Nicolas and Gingsburgh have added a fourth main
> source of financing: investment income.
> 2Examples include : Canada (Canadian Heritage 2019), China (Bollo and Zhang 2017), Poland (Murzyn -Kupisz et al.
> 2019), South Korea (Park and Kim 2019), Brazil (Araújo Santos 2012), and Italy (Romolini et al. 2020). 2

funding. Detailed analysis clearly shows that museum funding has become complex 

(Institut de la statistique du Québec 2007) and relies on additional sources of revenue. 

Decrease in public funding ?

Overall, beyond specific public policies on culture, academic research has highlighted 

diverse challenges and transformations characterizing museum funding. Research 

articles and book chapters underline the decline in public funding and budget cuts (Frey 

and Meier 2006; Alexander 2018; Lee and Shon 2018; Prokůpek and Ballarini 2022), while 

similar challenges have also been reported by professional associations and government 

agencies in Ireland (Mark -FitzGerald 2016), Sweden (Myndigheten för kulturanalys 20 22; 

Riksantikvarieämbetet 2021) and Switzerland ( Office fédéral de la statistique [OFS] 

2021). In 2006, Frey and Meier pointed out a certain paradox :

The world of museums has changed significantly over the past decade and 

has become more important economically. Visitor numbers have increased 

in the United States and Europe, as museum visits have become one of the 

most important leisure activities and to urist attractions. […] Most 

museums, however, are struggling to survive and chronically lack financial 

resources. (Frey and Meier 2006, 398) 

Beyond the issue of public funding, museums have been facing new challenges since the 

1980s, with the commercialization of culture and a market -centric paradigm (Ekström 

2020; Mathieu and Visanich 2022). The penetration of neoliberal values (Alexander 2018 )

has led to the development of a museum -business model (Tobelem 2023), much 

criticized by researchers and museums (Arpin 2002). The emergence of international 

partnerships and the commodification of certain museums such as the Louvre and the 

Guggenheim (C hong 2019) are examples of these developments. These realities also lead 

to increasing competition among museums for grants and public donations (Frey and 

Meier 2006). In a neoliberal world, can we speak of museum commodification (Ekström 

2020) ?

Financing in times of crisis 

Fluctuations in the public funding of museums are a global phenomenon, but vary 

considerably from region to region (Woodward 2012; Alexander et al. 2017). While 

museums in all parts of the world have faced challenges, they have also shown resilience 

and adaptability. Museums have relied heavily on a combination of various fundin g

sources, allowing them to hedge against financial volatility, maintain operations and 

expand their programs (Rentschler and Hede 2007; Woodward 2012). The economic 

crisis of 2008 (Bergeron 2009 -2010) was a rude awakening for museums, which saw their 

fund ing, both private and public, decrease drastically, leading to staff losses, the 

cessation of programming, and closures. All this has jeopardized museums' mission of 

intergenerational transmission (National Committees of European Countries 2013). 3

The COVID -19 pandemic also resulted in severe financial hardships, with temporary 

closures, drastic reductions in visitor numbers, and significant government 

disengagement. Emergency government support and private donations became 

essential to survival (Fi nnis et al. 2011; American Alliance of Museums 2017). This period 

underscored the importance of having flexible and diversified sources of funding to 

withstand unprecedented disruptions (Woodward 2012). While museums have resumed 

normal activities since 20 22, global geopolitical instability, the energy crisis and climate 

change, to name but a few factors, have contributed to weaken cultural life and 

institutions. Museums, therefore, must move towards sustainability (Styx 2022). 

In summary, the economic crisis of 2008 and the COVID -19 crisis of 2020 are important 

benchmarks for examining the challenges facing museums. Both crises forced museums 

to innovate and develop non -traditional sources of funding (Romolini et al. 2020; 

Proků pek et al. 2023). Although Lindqvist (2012) argues that economic crises have little 

effect on museums, citing their reliance on several sources of revenue, especially 

shareholders, to support their financial planning, the financial pressures on museums 

are undeniable. Around the world, even national museums do not receive sufficient funds 

to cover all their missions and mandates (Greffe et al. 2017). 

With a view to an initial exploratory study, a literature review made it possible to sketch 

out an initial inventory of knowledge on the public financing of museums. This inventory 

then allowed us to formulate a research proposal in alignment with the obje ctives of 

ICOM -IMREC. 

# Thinking about public funding 

Research conducted by ICOM between 2018 and 2021 revealed the following findings :3

1. The term “public funding ” is traditionally associated with a government grant for 

ongoing operating costs, including salaries, programs, collections maintenance, 

public engagement, and general maintenance. 

2. In many countries, government subsidies have been declining steadily since the 

2007 -2008 global financial crisis, but there is little information on the extent to 

which this is a global trend or its magnitude and impact. 

3. In countries where public funding is declining, new business models are emerging, 

but analyses or evaluations of their long -term sustainability are not available. 

Funding was therefore identified by ICOM as one of the six priority areas for museums, 

but the situation is complex and the picture remains incomplete. In view of the issues 

raised by the 2007 -2008 crisis, the COVID -19, as well as of ICOM’s findings concerning 

the impact of a decrease in public funding for museums, the International Centre for 

Museum Research and Exchange (ICOM -IMREC) launched a call for research. The 

Centre, created in partnership by ICOM and the University of Shanghai, aims to 

“encourage museums around the world to engage in more diverse, inclusive and  

> 3As indicated in the ICOM -IMREC call for research.

4

democratic cultural dialogue and collaboration.” The impact of decreasing public 

funding, which affects museums worldwide, is central among ICOM -IMREC's concerns. 

# Research objectives 

As part of its call for research, ICOM -IMREC solicited well -developed proposals from 

interested research partners to explore and formulate answers to four questions :

£ What does the term “public funding ” mean and how is it understood around the 

world ?

£ Is the decline in public funding for museums a global phenomenon ?

£ When cuts to public funding are evident, to what extent do they occur and with 

what impact ?

£ How are museums reacting ? Are new sustainable business models emerging ?

The project brief was sent out in July 2022 and was closed in October the same year. The 

International International Research Alliance on Public Funding for Museums (IRAPFM), 

led by the Université du Québec à Montréal, was selected as the lead partner. 

# Our proposal 

Our team : The involvement of experts from around the world 

To answer the four research 

questions, the lead partner 

(Research Chair on Museum 

Governance and Cultural 

Law at the Université du 

Québec à Montréal) 

proposed to form an 

international consortium of 

experts to cover various 

world regions : Africa (South 

Afr ica), Asia (China), Europe 

(Spain), Latin America and 

the Caribbean (Brazil), North 

America (Canada) and 

Oceania (Aotearoa/New 

Zealand). 

> Organigramme 5

# Preferred methodological approach : A two -level methodology 

The global overview made it possible to formulate a research proposal. In order to meet 

the objectives of the research project, we proposed to combine, first, a statistical study 

and, second, a qualitative study which was conducted with a team of international 

researchers and museums. 

Quantitative survey 

The statistical survey 4 distributed to the national associations of ICOM member countries 

was designed to provide an overall picture of the financial situation of museums and to 

allow for a complementary analysis through the qualitative survey conducted with 

international expert s. We initially considered distributing the survey to both the national 

ICOM associations and all the various government ministries providing funding. 

However, since funding channels overlap many branches of government , as evidenced 

by the survey results, it became impossible to reach all the ministries concerned. 

In accordance with Canadian research policy, we sought and obtained ethical 

certification from the Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) Ethics Board for Research 

Involving Human (CIEREH). The board ensures the methodology of data collection from 

among in dividuals representing international organizations and the use of that data with 

respect to protecting the confidentiality of survey participants. 

The statistical survey was sent to ICOM's 124 National Committees (NC’s) through a 

series of email campaigns between June 2023 and April 2024. Other methods of contact 

were used when emails were not answered. The questionnaire was administered online 

on a secure UQAM -hosted server. 

The purpose of the survey was to validate whether public funding for museums within the 

international museum network has declined in recent years. A total of 59 NC’s from all 

continents responded to the survey. 

Structure of the questionnaire 

The statistical survey garnered data on the current status and recent trends of funding 

obtained from governments and other sources. The sections of the survey were designed 

to allow for comparisons between the pre -pandemic period (2008 to 2019) and the po st -

pandemic period (2021 -2022). The survey questions concerned three major topics : the 

decline in public funding, other sources of funding, and public funding of museums. The 

design was intended to measure the impact of the COVID pandemic and the overall 

impact of a decrease in public funding. 

It should be noted that, in addition to questions concerning statistical data, several open -

ended questions yielded a quantity of comments and testimonies that complement and 

clarify the quantitative data.In compliance with the requirements of ethical cert ification, 

all comments have been anonymized.  

> 4See Annex I for the quantitative survey. 6

Qualitative survey 

The second part of th e study was based on a qualitative approach and was conducted by 

international experts familiar with specific geographical areas and museum ecosystems. 

The qualitative survey 5 was carried out among a sample of museums proposed by the 

international experts, representing 20 to 25 museums per each geographical area under 

study, namel y : Africa, East Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, North 

America, and Oceania .

The aim was to identify and document new financing and management models. The 

qualitative survey was complementary to the statistical survey and covered the same 

pre - and post -pandemic periods. Museums were asked to describe the impact of the 

decline in public funding on their institutions and to highlight the innovative and 

alternative ways in which they responded. 

Each expert collected data between August 2023 and May 2024 in order to produce a 

comprehensive regional report on their respective geographical area of expertise. 

A total of 119 museums responded to the survey, making it possible to identify a wide 

range of possible solutions and innovative approaches to the decline in public funding in 

each region. In addition, the lead partner conducted a literature review to complement, 

contrast and contextualize the findings. The international experts were invited to provide 

documentation if they wished. 

# Structure of the report 

The first chapter presents statistical data from the quantitative survey of 59 ICOM NC’s. 

As a global update on latest developments, it underscores emerging trends and new 

economic models, as applicable, in each region under consideration. 

The second chapter presents the emerging trends identified through the qualitative 

survey of 119 responding museums. The chapter is divided by major geographical area 

(Africa, East Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, North America, and 

Oceania), identifying regional fluctuations in funding, describing museums’ responses, 

as well as discussing key findings, and highlighting innovative strategies. 

The third chapter examines concerns and points of interest emerging from the answers 

collected through to the quantitative and qualitative surveys, in particular sustainability 

and ethics, as well as the need for a more comprehensive understanding of museu ms’ 

innovative approaches to funding. 

The report concludes with a series of proposed calls for action addressed to museums, 

ICOM and its NC’s and museum associations, as well as all levels of government and civil 

society.  

> 5See Annex II for the qualitative survey.

7

# CHAPTER I - QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS :

# ANSWERS FROM ICOM NATIONAL COMMITTEES 

# AND MUSEUM ASSOCIATIONS 

This chapter presents the results of the statistical survey conducted among responding 

ICOM National Committees (NC’s), offering a comprehensive overview of their financial 

situation before and after the COVID -19 pandemic, including variations in funding and 

their impacts. Divided into four main sections, the chapter first addresses the survey 

framework and the participating countries, as well as the definition of what constitutes a 

museum. It then analyzes the sit uation of museums before the pandemic ( 2008 -2019), 

and afterwards (2021 -2022). Finally, it explores the impacts of resulting fluctuations, with 

testimonies from respondents on the challenges and opportunities faced by museums in 

specific countries. 

METHODOLOGY 

§ The statistical survey targeted ICOM’s 124 National Committees (NC’s). 

§ The statistical survey garnered data on the current status and recent trends of funding 

obtained from governments and other sources. The sections of the survey were designed 

to allow for comparisons between the pre -pandemic period (2008 to 2019) and the po st -

pandemic period (2021 -2022). The survey questions concerned three major topics: the 

decline in public funding, other sources of funding, and public funding of museums. The 

design was intended to measure the impact of the COVID pandemic and the overall 

impact of a decrease in public funding. 

§ The statistical survey was sent to ICOM's 124 NC’s through a series of email campaigns 

between June 2023 and April 2024. Other methods of contact were used when emails 

were not answered, including personal contacts on social media, as part of the permitted 

restrictions of ethical certification in accordance with university research policies in 

Canada. 

§ A total of 59 NC’s from all world regions responded to the survey. 8

# 1.1 The situation of museums in responding countries 

This section provides an overview of the museum context in the responding countries, 

based on the results of a statistical survey. It explores the challenges related to the 

definition, number, and funding of museums across different geographical regions. 

1.1.1 The responding countries 

Question : What country are you filling this survey for ?

Geographical 

Zone 

Total 

number 

of ICOM 

NC’s 

Number of 

ICOM NC’s 

without 

available 

contact 

information 

Number of 

ICOM NC’s 

with available 

contact 

information 

Number of 

ICOM NC’s 

completing 

the survey 

Completed 

surveys as % of 

NC’s with 

available 

contact 

information 

Africa 26 9 17 13 76% 

Asia 32 4 28 14 50% 

Europe 42 2 40 19 47.5% 

> Latin America and
> the Caribbean

19 2 17 9 52% 

North America 2 0 2 2 100% 

Oceania 3 1 2 2 100% 

Total 124 18 106 59 55.7%    

> Figure 1.2. -Breakdown of responding ICOM National Committees by geographical area

The survey received responses from 59 countries, representing a response rate of 55.7% 

across five continents (based on the NC’s with available contact information). We    

> Figure 1.1. -The Responding Countries

9

received no responses from 44 existing ICOM NC’s, the majority of whom were 

concentrated in Asia and in Europe. It should be noted that 18 NC’s, for the most part in 

Africa and Asia, could not be reached. 6 Note that for three countries data were collected 

with the help of either museum associations or individual researchers. 

Question : On estimate, how many museums are there in your country ? If possible 

please tell us the exact number of museums in your country. 

Researchers agree on the difficulties of accurately estimating the number of museums in 

the world (Guiragossian 2024). UNESCO's report The World's Museums in the Face of the 

COVID -19 Pandemic estimates that there are nearly 95,000 museums across five 

continents. It is important to note that their distribution is uneven. It is estimated that 

65.1% of all museums are located in Western Europe and North America, 12.8% in Asia -

Pacific, 12% in Eastern Europe, 8.5% in Latin America and the Caribbean, 0.88% in Africa 

and 0.5% in Arab countries (UNESCO 2021, 5). Considering these statistics, the 

percentage distribution of respondents can be considered to represent an accurat e

reflection of the relative number of museums in the major geographical areas. 

As apparent from Figure 1.3., t he 

overwhelming majority of 

respondents (41%) indicated that 

their countries have fewer than 

100 museums. Then, in

ascending order of number of 

museums , the second group 

(17%) represents countries with 

101 to 250 museums ; t he third 

group (10%) reported having 

between 251 and 500 museums; 

the fourth group (12%) has 

between 500 and 1000 

museums; and a t the high end of 

the spectrum, two groups of countries have over 1000 museums : 8% with between 1001 

and 1500, and 10% with over 1501 museums. This is a good illustration of the diversity of 

the international museum network. It should be noted that only one country did not 

answer this question, which does not affect the data overall. Another issue was that some 

countries reported t hat they did not have official statistics.     

> 6The National Committees were contacted based on the information available through the Committees’ directory
> accessible on the ICOM website (as of January 2024). Where contact information did not appear in the directory, was
> erroneous, or had changed, the NC was considered non -reachable. Other efforts, including through personal contacts
> on social media, were deployed to ensure that each NC was at least aware of the survey. Despite this, 18 NC’s proved
> unreachable.
> Figure 1.3. –Distribution of Museums Across Responding
> Countries

10 

When asked how many museums there are in their country, 83% of NC’s were able to 

indicate a precise or estimated number. It should be noted that 17% of countries did not 

answer the question. It may be surmised that some countries with large numbers of 

muse ums do not have precise statistics. While the majority of the responding countries 

indicated that the numbers were approximate, some countries were able to specify the 

composition of their museum network :

o In 2023 there are 11 government -owned museums, 24 in the regions and 3 

private owned museums […] as total 38. These 38 museums registered as 

legal entities by state registration. Also by 2020 there were 16 small 

museums run by university, different organiz ations, around 10 private 

museums and art galleries 7.

It should be noted that several NC’s recognize that it is also difficult to draw an accurate 

picture of the composition of the museum network. Because the term “museum” is not 

protected, there is potential overlap between museums recognized by governments and 

museums created by companies or collectors. This is why establishing a definition is 

important in order to clarify the status of public and private museums, and thereby to 

clarify the statistical data. 

Question : What is a museum in your country ? How is it defined ?

In 2022, at the triennial conference in Prague, ICOM adopted the following 

definition :

A museum is a not -for -profit, permanent institution in the service of society 

that researches, collects, conserves, interprets and exhibits tangible and 

intangible heritage. Open to the public, accessible and inclusive, museums 

foster diversity and sustain ability. They operate and communicate ethically, 

professionally and with the participation of communities, offering varied 

experiences for education, enjoyment, reflection and knowledge sharing. 

(ICOM 2022) 

A majority of respondents confirmed that they recognise this definition . The second 

largest group is made up of countries that reported having passed legislation defining 

what constitutes a museum. In most of these cases, the definition is based on the ICOM 

definition adopted in 2022 or its previous iteration (2007). It is likely that some national 

legislation has not yet been updated and that its recasting should be based on the current 

ICOM definition. In some specific cases, the adopted definitions are inspired by certain 

elements identified in the ICOM def inition, but also include notions specific to distinct 

national cultures. It is important to note that the principle of “non -profit institutions” is a 

common point among these definitions.  

> 7Quotes in blue are drawn from the National Committees' survey responses. Due to the sensitive nature of some
> answers and the anonymity required by the Ethical Certificate, as per North American research standards, all
> responses have been anonymized.

11 

Several NC’s listed the main functions assigned to museums within their countries. We 

have identified responses that mention the three main functions of museums 

(conservation, research, dissemination), as well as those that mention other 

specific functions . Thus, some countries associate the museum with notions of tangible, 

intangible or natural heritage, as well as with collections and places of collective 

memory. 

Some definitions emphasize the categories of museums recognized by states, i.e. 

national, private, community or “other types” of museums. 

Two countries indicated that they do not follow the ICOM definition and that they have 

not adopted strict rules to define a museum, but specified that they have put in place 

tools to assess the quality of museums. One country stands out in stating that no 

definition has been adopted “due to an incredible range of types and structures for 

museum institutions.” 8

Question : Do other institutions, such as libraries, community centers, historical 

sites, etc., receive similar consideration and public funding ?

Many public institutions such as libraries, archives, community centres, historic sites 

and universities perform functions similar to those of museums and receive public 

funding. In some countries, these places of conservation and enhancement of heritage 

are classified in the same categories as museums and are therefore considered museum 

institutions. Once again, this observation explains the difficulty of counting the exact 

number of museums and other types of institutions using the "museum" designation. 

Several respondents added that the network of publicly funded public libraries and 

community centres in their country generally offers free access to exhibitions and 

cultural or educational activities, thus creating unfair competition with museums. It 

shou ld also be noted that the funding of libraries and cultural centres, worldwide, 

represents greater investments than those granted to museums. In short, the funding 

boundaries are not always clear in the mandates of these public institutions. This 

situation creates a form of competition for financial support from governments.     

> 8The following definition is accepted throughout the United States and covers both tangible and intangible cultural
> heritage, as well as natural heritage: “The American Alliance of Museums is the only organization representing the
> entire museum field, from art and history museums to science centers and zoos” (AAM, n.d.). 12

Question : Are there museum associations in your country ?

Museum associations are an important part 

of the ecosystem. The presence of an 

association indicates that a group is 

dedicated to helping museums fulfill their 

various missions and can therefore help 

museums exert stronger impact, such as on 

governments, for example. ICOM's NC’s 

reveal that, in 81% of countries covered by 

the survey, museums are represented by a 

professional association, or even by several 

associations, through which they interact 

with governments. These associations take 

different forms. I n several countries, the NC’s 

act as museums' main representatives, but in a majority of countries various 

associations represent museums and museum professionals. In countries with a large 

number of museums, professional bodies represent occupations such as curators, 

museologists, res torers and heritage interpreters. 

In countries with many museums, as is the case in Europe and North America, 

institutions coalesce into national, regional, municipal and other associations of 

museums. For example, there are several hundred local museum associations in 

Finland. Elsewhere, associations bring together museums by type : art museums, history 

museums, archaeology museums, science museums, society museums, children's 

museums, associations of Maisons -Musées, and so forth. 

The associative world plays an important role in the museum network ecosystem. The 

terms that designate groups defending the rights of museums are revealing. There are 

many “associations,” “alliances,” “institutes,” “federations” and “cooperation 

councils” of museums. Within this long list, we have identified categories that are more 

specifically related to museum management, including associations of museum 

administrators, cooperation councils of national museums and associations of private 

museums, all of whom develop management and financing tools; other bodies include 

associations of museum volunteers, associations of museum stores, councils of 

museum directors, federations of ecomuseums, as well as associations of 

economuseums and those grouping corpora te museums. 

It seems that the world of museums is conducive to the effervescence of an associative 

environment (Mairesse 2019, 30). For example, the American Alliance of Museums (AAM) 

took care to list more than 80 different associations in answering the questionnaire ,

including museum associations in each state as well as various groups ranging from the 

American Association for State and Local History, to the American Institute for 

Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, the American Public Gardens Association,   

> F
> i
> g
> u
> r
> e
> 1
> .
> S
> E
> Q
> F
> i
> g
> u
> r
> e
> \
> *
> A
> R
> A
> B
> I
> C
> 4
> –
> P
> r
> e
> s
> e
> n
> c
> e
> o
> f
> M
> u
> s
> e
> u
> m
> ’
> s
> A
> s
> s
> o
> c
> i
> a
> t
> i
> o
> n
> Figure 1.4. –Presence of Museum’s Associations
> in Responding Countries 13

the Heritage Rail Alliance, the Historic Naval Ships Association, the National Interpretive 

Association, the Natural Science Collections Alliance, and the International Museum 

Theatre Alliance. In short, the museum world is deeply engaged in various sphere s of 

social activity. Consequently, it is unsurprising that the museum network is dedicated 

not only to the conservation and preservation of historical heritage, but is also committed 

to present -day social causes. 

1.1.2 Museum funding in the responding countries 

Museums rely on funding sources whose diversity is to a high degree influenced by 

governmental recognition and policy. This section delves into the various types of funding 

obtained by museums, the proportion of museums that depend on private versus public 

funding, and the impact of government recognition. The analysis covers direct and 

indirect financial support, highlighting regional differences and the growing importance 

of self -generated revenues for museum sustainability. It also highlights regional 

variations in public funding and the impact of privatization laws. Finally, it provides a 

detailed analysis of the percentage of museums receiving public f unds, revealing 

significant geographical differences. 

Question : How does government recognition of museums affect their funding ?

Opening with a qualitative component, this question received a variety of answers, 

testif ying to the multiplicity of museum funding models and rules of governance. Public 

funding is generally distributed by three levels of government : central, regional, and 

municipal . In 80% of countries, the museums are recognized by these three levels of 

government and this recognition has a crucial effect on public funding. 

¡ National museums and “recognized” private museums 

The so -called “national ” museums are funded by governments, but these are few in 

number. It is usually these national museums that represent countries in international 

relations. In the vast majority of countries, the network is generally made up of private 

museums, recognized a nd financed in part by line ministries. It should be noted that this 

status gives them greater autonomy than national museums. Some states have an 

evaluation process in place to determine whether a museum can be recognized and 

funded by the state , but the majority do not .

¡ Ministries 

In many countries, museum funding is the responsibility of various ministries (culture, 

education, science, tourism, finance, defence). In contrast with national museums, 

financial support for private museums is not always recurrent and is often based on 

special projects funded by governments (e.g. digitization, construction of reserves, 

renewal of permanent exhibitions, educational programs). 14 

¡ Two types of financing 

Two types of financial support for museum institutions can be identified . The first may be 

termed direct f inancing , where the recognition of public museums by the state 

corresponds to regular financial support ; it is most often indexed, although several 

respondents pointed out that this type of funding is not always sufficient to support 

museum missions . The second type, indirect financing, relies on laws and financial 

policies that promote patronage and donations through tax credits to companies, 

individual patrons , and foundations. This type of financing is particularly prevalent in the 

English -speaking world , including the United States, which has very few national 

museums, with the exception of the Smithsonian Institute in Washington and the national 

parks system. Museums generally have the status of non -profit organizations and depend 

on self -financing through own -source revenues : ticketing, product sales, public funding, 

and the establishment of foundations with mandates to raise funds and generate 

revenue. It should also be noted that some countries have adopted laws to privatize 

national museums, as was the case in the Netherlands with the adoption of a special law 

in 1993, which nevertheless stipulated that buildings and collections remain the property 

of the government. 

In many countries, public funding only covers operating costs and so museums must 

develop stand -alone revenues in order to carry out exhibitions and special projects. This 

trend serves to instill a corporate culture focused on increasing own -source revenues 

within the museum ecosystem . Most importantly, respondents emphasized that own -

source revenues are increasingly importan t and even necessary. As private museums 

become increasingly numerous, p ublic museums face fiercer competition in soliciting 

funds from companies and sponsors. 

Question : What percentage of 

museums receive public funds ?

We attempted to identify more accurately 

the percentage of museums receiv ing 

public funding. In 37% of the responding 

countries, more than three -quarters of 

museums (76 -100%) receive public 

funding. In the second tier, representing 

22% of the countries, between 51% and 

75% museums are publicly funded. For 

the rest, in 29% of the responding 

countries, less than 50% of museums receive public funding. Note that 12% of surveyed 

countries did not answer this question .  

> Figure 1.5.1. -Percentage of Museums Receiving
> Public Funds in Responding Countries

15 

When we look at the results by 

geographic area, we see that support 

from various levels of government is 

varie d. Museums receiving public 

funding are more numerous in 

Europe : in 58% of European 

countries, more than 76% of 

museums are publicly funded. We 

see also that countries with the 

fewest publicly funded museums (0 -

9% of the total number of museums) 

are in Africa. Overall, the data vary 

widely from one country to another, 

even within the same geographic 

area. There w as little available data 

for Oceania and Latin America. 

Question : Are the following levels of government responsible for funding 

museums ?

In our sample (Figure 1.6.), museums in 51 countries receive funding from the central 

government. Museums in 33 countries receive funding from regional or state 

governments. Meanwhile, 10 countries indicated that yet other levels of government 

provided mus eum funding. 

When asked which other levels of 

government are responsible for 

funding museums, respondents 

identified villages, cantons, 

independent government institutes, 

central banks and specific ministries, 

among others. 

It is observable that funding levels 

vary considerably between central 

and local governments. 

Question : Please list any and all other levels of government that are responsible 

for funding museums .

Answers to t his question made it possible to note that many public bodies are 

responsible for financing museums and there is no standard model outside the ministries     

> Figure 1.5.2. –Breakdown by geographical zone
> Figure 1.6. –Level of government that funds museum in
> responding countries 16

dedicated to culture and education. In several countries, ministries of culture oversee 

heritage and museum bodies. Governments entrust the management of museum funding 

to various ministries and public agencies , such as ministries of Culture, Arts and 

Heritage, of Antiquities and Culture, of Communication and Culture, of Religious Affairs 

and Culture, of Infrastructure, of Transport, of Agriculture, of Defence, or of Education ( in 

the case of university museums). It is clear that different countries have different 

understandings of which spheres of government should be responsible for funding 

museums. 

Several government bodies have developed structures specifically dedicated to 

museums and heritage , such as : Brazilian Institute of Museums (Ibram) , National 

Culture Fund (FNC) , the National Institute of Historical Heritage (Iphan) , National Arts 

Foundation (Funarte) , Municipal and State Secretaries for Culture and Local Cultural 

Institutions , as well as other government agencies. Considering this multiplicity of public 

institutions responsible for museum financing, it would likely be difficult, if not 

impossible, to identify all such institutions across all ICOM member countries in order to 

draw up a truly exhaustive portrait. 

Question : Has the government implemented indirect financing measures for 

museums (such as tax deductions for acquisitions, tax credits, fundings for special 

projects) ? Please comment on your answer. 

It is sometimes difficult to clearly identify 

the limits of “public funding.” We can 

observe that several countries have 

adopted legislation that promotes 

private financing by granting tax credits. 

In other words, companies and 

individuals can support mus eums and 

thus avoid paying some taxes. In reality, 

governments promoting these policies 

relinquish themselves of a share of 

revenue, but also offload a share of 

museum financing responsibilities to the private sector. In order to gauge the prevalence 

of such approaches, we asked the following question : “Has the government put in place 

indirect funding measures for museums (such as tax deductions for acquisitions, tax 

credits, funding for special projects) ?” More than half the surveyed countries (53%) 

answered in the affirmative (Figure 1.7.1.).   

> Figure 1.7. 1. -Presence of Indirect Financing Measures 17

Figure 1.7.2. shows that indirect funding 

for museums exists in all regions of the 

world, highlighting its global importance 

as a financial support model. However, 

the presented data is based only on 

responses received from the National 

Committees, meaning that the full 

picture might not be entirely 

represented. Despite this limitation, the 

information gathered provides a good 

overview of regional trends. Europe 

stands out with a strong presence of 

indirect funding measures, suggesting 

more developed insti tutional support, while all responding countries in North America 

have indicated the presence of indirect funding. In Latin America and the Caribbean, and 

Oceania the balance between museums with and without indirect funding suggests a 

diversity of financi al models and potentially varied cultural policies. Meanwhile, Africa 

and Asia show a lower representation of museums with indirect funding, indicating either 

a more limited use of this mechanism or a lack of responses from some stakeholders. 

These regiona l trends reveal heterogeneity in the implementation of indirect funding 

measures, offering a foundation for better understanding the different approaches 

adopted worldwide. 

This aspect of indirect funding is important and 60% of respondents provided comments 

with additional information; what follows is a summary of those statements. While 

several countries have introduced special programs in recent years, there has also been 

indirect support for museums through the creation of new taxes to finance national 

cultural funds, for example through a tax on gambling. The examples most often cited by 

respondents concerned special budgets to support museums and the cultural sector 

more broadly. Typically, governments provide capital grants through special programs or 

loans for self -financing projects. Certain governments have launched initiatives to 

support the acquisition of works and objects. The Flemish government, for example, 

opera tes a program for the purchase of objects of “national importance” to develop 

collections that remain government property but are hosted by accredited museums on 

a permanent loan basis. In Canada, the Cultural Property Export and Import Act allows 

private collectors to obtain tax credits in exchange for donations to museum collections, 

thus also alleviating the need for acquisition budgets. The fair market value of these 

cultural assets of national interest is 100% deductible from the donors' income. 

In the case of countries reporting that governments had not adopted any new measures, 

it is noted that pre -existing measures continue to apply and contribute to the public 

funding of museums, as evidenced by these comments :  

> Figure 1.7. 2. -Presence of Indirect Financing Measures
> (Breakdown by region) 18

o The main source of funding for museums (private and public museums) is 

taxation, with the exception of the Federal Law on the Promotion of Culture 

which allows companies to deduct 100% of the money donated to cultural 

projects and institutions from their t axes. 

o No, the government has not actually implemented indirect funding 

measures for museums (such as tax deductions for acquisitions, tax 

credits, funding for special projects). 

One country in particular reported an observation that appears relevant to explaining the 

decline in public funding for museums : rising energy costs, specifically, as well as the 

rising costs of materials, transport and labour, have contributed to growing inflation. 

Several others also pointed out that significant inflation since the pandemic has had a 

direct impact on the salaries and operating costs of museums. While this factor did not 

feature prominently in most answers to the survey, there is no doubt that it would be 

important to explore the impact of inflation, which has contributed to increasing the 

economic pressures on museums. This is especially true for countries where public 

funding is primarily dedicated to museum operations, but funding for e xhibitions and 

other activities must be sought from private partners. 

o I would just like to point out that “remaining stable” means decreasing in 

practice, because the level of costs has increased considerably. So we're 

actually seeing a decrease, even though the numbers are the same. Many 

museums – especially smaller ones – are in very uncertain financial 

situations due to a sharp rise in the costs of energy, labour, materials and 

indeed almost everything, but budgets are still the same! 

1.1.3 The part of private funding 

Museums worldwide depend on a mix of direct and indirect funding sources in 

proportions that are significantly influenced by government recognition and policies. This 

section identifies the proportion of museums funded by private sources and explores 

how access to different types of funding impacts museums’ financial stability and 

operational capabilities. 

Question : What proportion of museums in your country receive the majority of their 

funding from private sources (Ex. : Non profit organization , company museums, 

foundation, etc.) ?19 

Testimonies indicate that the most 

successful museums are financed 

through external partnerships with 

entities such as banks and large 

companies, and sometimes they are 

financed by cooperative services, 'as 

well as by the public. This is a

strategic advant age since public 

museums are only funded through 

special projects. This trend towards 

the development of private funding 

contributes to the transformation of 

the museum ecosystem overall 

through the spread of modes of 

operation previously adopted only by 

private museums by seeking out alternative forms of financing. 

Question : Are there museums which operate with a combination of private and 

public funding ? If yes, how are they classified and could you explain their funding 

model, when they are neither private or public ?

The proportion of countries by 

geographic area reporting hybrid 

financing methods makes clear that this 

mode of financing predominates on all 

continents. In North America and 

Oceania, 100% of NC’s structure their 

budgets by combining public and private 

fun ding. This practice is also significant 

in Asia (64%), Europe (68%) and Latin 

America and the Caribbean (67%). The 

situation is different in Africa, where less 

than half (38%) receive private financing. 

It appeared important to identify distinctions between public and private museums. 

Respondents were asked to describe the funding model for museums that are neither 

exclusively public or exclusively private. This question, touching on a complex issue, 

obta ined a response rate of 58%. The answers reveal potential avenues for understanding 

transformations in museum funding over the past two decades. 

Respondents pointed out that distinctions between public and private museums are 

based on legal definitions and on administration methods. Some countries found it 

difficult to answer this question and indicated that they did not have detailed information. 

They also acknowledged that it would be important to conduct a survey on this subject to     

> Figure 1.8. -Proportion of Museums Receiving the
> Majority of Their Funding From Private Sources
> Figure 1.9. -Museums Receiving Public and Private
> Funding 20

better understand the changing financial ecosystem of museums. However, as one 

respondent commented, it is recognized that :

o For most museums, funds are crucial in achieving their goals. There are 

several funds, often linked to public bodies. Each fund has different 

objectives and systems. Some funds are linked to lotteries, others to 

certain government policies or through bequests and other sources. 

¡ Hybrid financing 

Some respondents questioned hybrid financing models as administered in their country :

o They have a split personality, they are mostly located in government -

owned buildings and some of their employees come from the government. 

However, the collection, activities and their administration are private. 

In addition to funding from various levels of government for certain museums, there exist 

project -based funding programs open to public and private museums. Respondents 

pointed out that some museums in their country are not officially considered 

“museums” , but nevertheless meet the functions of museums as defined by ICOM. 

Examples include university museums and associative museums. 

¡ Diversity of financing methods 

Respondents mentioned various sources of autonomous income : ticketing, room 

rentals, shops, sale of services, philanthropy, legacies, foundations, donations, private 

donations, patronage, support from businesses, time contributions from associations of 

fr iends or members, lotteries or even churches associated with exhibitions and 

mediation projects. In recent years, many museums have organized crowdfunding 

campaigns. However, some respondents noted that this strategy requires considerable 

effort and that its costs are especially high. Respondents also pointed out that these 

activities are sometimes time -consuming for museum staff. 

Survey answers show that in some countries museums’ deficits are covered by public 

funds, but this is not a prevalent reality and museums which are not supported by various 

levels of government must manage their deficits independently. This forces them to 

review their priorities and their programs of activities. 

Finally, respondents pointed out on several occasions that the emergence over the past 

two decades of private art museums financed entirely by companies or foundations has 

created competition for the public museums model. 

¡ A significant trend : self -financing 

Respondents point out that self -financing has been a trend observed for almost two 

decades :

o All museums funded by public funds (state, regional or local) must do their 

best to obtain income from private sources, as funding from the state, 21 

region and local authorities is not sufficient to keep museums running. This 

demand has increased from the government over the past 15 years. 

o In some private museums, a large part of the financial resources necessary 

for its operation come from : receipts from entrance fees, while part comes 

from government subsidies. Many private museums have a high rate of 

self -income (entrance fees, shops, et c.), and in many cases the deficit is 

covered by public funds from the state or local authorities. 

The line ministries usually ask the museums they support financially to generate as much 

autonomous revenue as possible, often sourced from non -profit foundations, 

associations of friends, and crowdfunding. 

¡ Hybrid museums 

It seems that increasing numbers of museums operate in an intermediate zone between 

public and private institutions, creating a new category of hybrid museums. This change 

has led some governments to define this new category. In Latin America, for example ,

they are defined as “gestión mixta” [mixed management] museums. In some countries, 

respondents reported another form of hybrid institution where museums are owned or 

operated by charitable organizations, which allows them to be exempt from taxes. 

# 1.2 Pre -pandemic - 2008 -2019 

This part of the survey explores how public funding for museums evolved between 2008 

and 2019, the decade leading up to the Covid -19 pandemic. The period saw varied 

financial trends, with nearly half of the respondents reporting budget decreases, while 

oth ers noted increases or stable funding levels (when adjusted for inflation). The 

disparities in funding fluctuations reflect a diverse global landscape, with museums in 

some countries experiencing significant increases in financial support, while others 

SUMMARY 

The funding landscape for museums is complex and varies significantly across 

different countries. Government recognition plays a critical role in providing direct 

financial support, while indirect funding mechanisms, such as tax incentives, also 

contribute significantly, especially in countries with strong traditions of private 

patronage. The trend towards increasing self -generated revenues highlights the 

growing ne ed for museums to adopt more entrepreneurial approaches to secure 

their financial stability. Understanding these diverse funding models is essential for 

developing effective strategies to ensure the sustainability and growth of museum 

institutions worldwid e. 22 

faced substantial cuts. Understanding these pre -pandemic funding patterns provides 

essential context for assessing the pandemic's impact on museum finances. 

1.2.1 Funding Fluctuations 

This section explores changes in public funding for museums in the period 2008 -2019. It 

examines whether budgets have increased, decreased or remained stable, and 

discusses the impact of these changes. We will also address the percentage of public 

funding in museum budgets and the disparities ac ross different types of museums and 

regions. 

Question : In the last ten years (between 2008 -09 and 2018 -19), how did public 

funding change ? On estimate, by how much did it increase or decrease ?

This was one of the central questions of 

this study. Almost half of respondents 

(42%) indicated that between 2008 and 

2019, their budget had decreased, while 

27% said that their budget increased in the 

same period. Another 31% specified that 

their budget r emained stable and that their 

funding kept pace with the level of 

inflation. 

In 8 countries (13% of the responding 

countries), public funding decreased 

by 10 -25% and the decline was 36% 

and more in 6 countries (10%). On 

the other hand, public funding for 

museums increased by 10 -25% in 6 

responding countries (10%), and by 

as much as 26 -35% in 3 countries 

(5%). This reveals significant global 

disparities. Note that some 

countries, although they stated that 

public funding remained stable, still 

indicated a variation. This is 

reflected in Figure 1.10.2.     

> Figure 1.10.1. -Funding Fluctuations between 2008
> and 2019
> Figure 1.10.2. -Breakdown of Funding Fluctuations Between
> 2008 and 2019 23

Question : In 2018 -2019 for museums that receive public funding, approximately 

what percentage did this funding represent in their annual budget ?

In 2018 -2019, museums in 37% of the 

responding countries received on 

average between 71% and 100% of 

their annual budget from public 

funding. In second place, 17% of the 

respondents indicated that museums 

were publicly funded at 51 -70% of 

their annual budget. In 19% of the 

responding countries, museums 

obtained less than 10% of their annual 

budget from public funding. 

Question : Did all museums receive similar amounts or are there significative 

differences between museums ?

It was important to ascertain whether, within individual countries, museums receive 

similar or disparate amounts of public funding in order to determine whether there are 

significant differences between museums. The response rate for this important questio n

was 92 percent. As the question was open -ended, we collected a significant amount of 

feedback through which to better understand the situation in which museums operate. 

Overall, respondents were unanimous in saying and demonstrating that there are 

significant differences in public funding for museums. We also recall the gap between the 

funding of national museums and regional or municipal museums (see Figure 1.6., 

above). One rule emerges from the comments : the sums received by museums do not 

correspond to a linear distribution. Rather, the distribution of funds takes into account 

such factors as the physical dimensions of the establishments, their number of workers, 

the programming of exhibitions and dissemination of educational activities, and the 

execution of projects of political interest to the legislature, among others. Respondents 

emphasized that the level of funding received by nationally recognized institutions is a

function of both previous funding and periodic government evaluations. In addition, 

museums recognized as operating on a nonprofit basis received less financial support. 

In addition to recurrent financial support, governments develop special programs such 

as, for example, collections digitization, the improvement of storage facilities or the 

creation of online content.   

> Figure 1.11. -Percentage of Public Funding in
> Museums’ Annual Budgets for 2018 -2019 24

Some respondents noted that the line ministries did not always keep track of the 

fluctuations in the annual budget of museums, so that this data is rarely accessible or 

known. In some countries, the rules of distribution for public funds are not transparen t :

o It is difficult to know the answers to such questions overnight. 

o Government funding for museums fluctuates in this country. Because of 

the problem mentioned earlier where every time the government increases 

our budget, a portion comes back unused, so they reduce the funding in 

the next cycle. The money spent by the Nati onal Museum on stationery 

exceeds the total budget allocated to community museums. I don't think 

before/after Covid will provide useful indicators. The problem here is the 

poor because of the distribution of funds. Again, the watchdog is also the 

benefacto r. I think that is the real problem. As long as there is no real 

separation of powers, this problem will persist. I believe in the good 

intentions of the central/superior government. And honestly, they just can't 

understand why community museums keep compl aining and fighting. 

1.2.2 Exploring new revenue streams 

This section explores the emergence of new revenue streams for museums between 

2008 -09 and 2018 -19. While some respondents saw no change, many reported 

innovations like increasing own -source revenues, digital culture development, and 

public -private partnerships. 

Question : In the last ten years (between 2008/09 and 2018/19), did museums 

explore alternative sources of revenue ?

In the ten years leading up to the 

pandemic, 71% of respondents said 

that they explored new sources of 

funding. However, 20% indicated that 

they had not taken such steps and 9% 

did not answer the question.                 

> Strategies to increase own -source
> revenues include investments, the
> multiplication of museum points of sale,
> and sponsorships. Several countries
> have chosen to focus on the
> development of digital culture in order to
> reach new audiences, beyond in -person
> Figure 1.12.1. -Alternative Sources of Funding, 2008 -
> 2019

25 

visits, by offering educational and cultural online activities. 

Some trends emerge from the examples provided by respondents. Museums’ are 

developing self -financing strategies and public -private partnerships are growing in 

number. As a result, there has been an increase in the budgets of museums taking on 

broader mandates, including added responsibilities with regard to tangible and int angible 

heritage, the development of digital culture and engagement with pressing social issues, 

such as the displacement of populations, poverty, climate change, wars and economic 

crises. 

In addition, a number of responses pointed out that the emergence of new private 

museums creates competition for public museums in the search for financial partners :

o There are more private museums (6 out of 8 have been founded in the last 

10 years). 

o Over the past 15 years, we have seen an increase in the number of private 

museums. Like us, we see a new generation of officially independent 

institutes, but highly dependent on local authorities. 

o The creation of at least three new museums managed and financed 100% 

by the private sector. 

Respondents point to new practices such as the production of NFTs, or “n on -fungible 

tokens. ”9 There are still few studies analyzing this phenomenon, which should be 

explored more in -depth .10 

In terms of trends, respondents noted that there is a change in the governance model for 

museums :

o The OS (social organization) model appeared at this time. The OS is a 

private company that operates a public museum with private legal status 

but with public funds. 

While respondents agree that shift towards commercial operations is inevitable, some 

countries point out that this logic is not applicable everywhere, as exemplified by the 

Moldovan National Committee :

o According to the legislation of the Republic of Moldova, museums are not 

allowed to carry out commercial activity. However, museums are   

> 9NFTs are unique digital assets relying on blockchain technology to establish their authenticity and ownership. Unlike
> cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin or Ether, which are fungible and can be traded interchangeably, each NFT is unique and
> cannot be replaced b y another.
> 10 For further information, see: Valeonti et al. 2021; Blais 2023. 26

increasingly trying to attract partnerships with economic agents to 

promote the institution's image and attract investment. 

Question : If you answered “yes” to the previous question, what sources provided 

income ? (Select all that apply) 

We identified nine categories of 

museum funding sources. The most 

widespread source of funding 

according to the survey was 

sponsorship, reported by 93% of 

respondents, followed in second 

place by marketing at 90 percent. In 

third place, government subsidie s

and associations of friends and 

volunteers were tied as sources of 

revenue for 85% of respondents. 

Independent income was reported 

by 68% of respondents and 

donations associated with 

sponsorships were cited in 54% of answers. Crowdfunding, in seventh place, was cited 

in a – fairly high – proportion of 51% of answers, while investments appeared in 34% of 

responses. 

The alternatives aimed at generating other revenues are diverse. Some countries 

identified regular sources of independent revenue, i.e. space rentals, membership fees, 

the sale of publications, and increased ticketing revenues. The contribution of partners 

such as educational institutions, funds for European projects or embassies was also 

highlighted. 

It should be noted that the “other” category represents 12% of the responses. The 

examples listed in the survey are varied. These include land rentals, museum space 

rentals, private financing, the European Projects Fund, increased admission fees, the 

sale of publications and agreements with UNESCO and the AFCP ( U.S. Ambassadors 

Fund for Cultural Preservation ) as well as partnerships with educational institutions 

(College and University).   

> Figure 1.12.2. -Breakdown of Alternative Sources of
> Funding Between 2008 and 2019 27

# 1.3 Public financing measures during the COVID -19 crisis 

While public funding measures were implemented in a number of countries to support 

museums during the COVID -19 crisis, the operations of these institutions were 

significantly impacted for almost two years. To understand these effects, we asked 

respondents to share their experiences and provide specific examples. 

Question : Were there any public financing measures put in place for museums 

during COVID 19 ? Are these measures still in place ?

¡ Those who answered “yes” 

More than half of respondents (51%) indicated that exceptional measures were put in 

place to support museums during the pandemic. Some museums used an employee 

retention tax credit. Some countries chose to defer fee payments. While some states 

maintained t heir financial support at a stable level, other countries only financed 

operational services and staff salaries. In addition, governments have honored contracts 

for security, cleaning, disinfection systems, visitor temperature control, IT, contactless 

paym ent systems, and improvement of air conditioning systems, among other measures. 

Special programs were put in place to subsidize museums’ utility costs and grants were 

disbursed to support the activities of museums closed during the pandemic. In short, 

thos e countries chose to take advantage of this period of crisis to improve museum 

infrastructures. 

Respondents reported that al though institutions received the necessary equipment at 

th e time, such as protective screens and hand sanitizer, the lockdown led to a decrease 

in public investment in museums, since public budgets were redirected towards 

pandemic response measures. These measures have created a significant gap between 

approved budgets and budgets received in practic e. 

SUMMARY 

From 2008 to 2019, public funding for museums fluctuated significantly, with nearly 

half of museums experiencing budget cuts, while others saw increases or stable 

funding. This period highlighted the diversity of financial realities across different 

regions and types of museums. Additionally, many museums began exploring new 

revenue streams, such as digital initiatives and public -private partnerships, to 

address financial challenges, including increased competition. These pre -

pandemic trends are crucial for understanding the financial impacts which 

museums faced during the Covid -19 pandemic. 28 

While most national museums were not affected, museums that rely on own -source 

revenues (entrance fees, shops, cafes, space rentals) needed to find new sources of 

revenue. In cases where museums faced serious funding problems, some had access to 

additional stipends from central, regional or municipal governments to cover the costs of 

rent and staff in order to offset loss of income from cancelled events. 

Special cases were reported by respondents as, for example, due to complex political 

contexts, some museums had to cope with budgets that only allowed for 50% of salaries 

to be subsidized. 

¡ Those who answered “no” 

Almost half of respondents answered “no” (49%) to the question. They noted that no 

special budget measures were adopted to support museums during the pandemic. In 

some cases, all museums were closed, so there was no activity or funding. This choice 

had con sequences for museum staff in several countries. One respondent cited a 

noteworthy case :

o Oh boy. Government here never faltered in sponsoring museums. Central 

government that is. But I remember me personally not having food in my 

house during this period because I work for a community museum. 

National Museum workers never really felt the effec ts of the pandemic. 

There is just so much disparity. You would be better served sending one 

questionnaire for community museum workers and one for National 

Museum workers. We are worlds apart. And I think that because the 

National Museum is by far the most visible, there is a belief that it is the 

standard for all museums. That we are all doing ok. This couldn't be further 

from the truth. 

¡ Measures still in effect 

Among those who answered “yes” to the question, we asked if measures adopted during 

the pandemic were still in place 11 . Surprisingly, 10% of museums said that some 

measures are still in place such as hand washing and social distancing. One respondent 

underlined a positive effect of the crisis, insofar as the country chose to maintain the 

development of museums’ digital offer. Respondents noted that there is virtually no 

financial support for infection control measures. In some cases, museums still offer the 

possibility of teleworking part -time.      

> 11 The COVID crisis and its repercussion on museums were discussed in the ICOM Report « Musées, professionnels
> des musées et COVID -19 » (ICOM 2020) and the UNESCO Report “Museums around the World :In the Face of COVID -
> 19.” (UNESCO 2021). See also the sub -section “Adapting to Funding Fluctuations” in Chapter II -Qualitative analysis :
> answers from museums for the responses given by individual museums. 29

# 1.4 Post -pandemic 2021 -2022 

The period following the COVID -19 pandemic brought significant changes to the museum 

sector, marked by funding fluctuations, comparisons to pre -pandemic years, disparities 

in financial support, and the exploration of new revenue streams. This section delve s into 

the evolving landscape of public funding, the challenges faced by different types of 

museums, and the innovative strategies employed to sustain operations and adapt to the 

new normal. Through detailed analysis and survey data, we gain insight into t he financial 

health of museums and their efforts to navigate a post -pandemic world. 

1.4.1 Funding Fluctuations 

Between 2018 and 2022, public funding for museums experienced significant variability. 

This section explores the overall changes in funding levels, highlighting both increases 

and decreases as reported by survey respondents. 

Question : Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, how did public funding overall change ?

SUMMARY 

Responses from museum representatives reveal a diverse range of experiences 

regarding public funding measures during the COVID -19 pandemic. While over half 

of respondents reported receiving significant financial support that helped sustain 

operations and e nhance infrastructure, others struggled with decreased public 

investment and the necessity to seek new revenue sources. The continuation of 

some measures, like digital initiatives and health protocols, indicates a lasting 

impact of the pandemic on museum p ractices. This period highlighted the 

disparities in funding between different types of museums, pointing to the need for 

more customized and equitable funding strategies in the future. 30 

We wanted to measure how 

public funding had evolved 

overall between 2018 and 2022. 

While 22% of respondents 

indicated that funding had 

remained stable, 37% indicated 

that funding had increased, 

while 39% indicated that 

funding had decreased. 

Question : Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, did the following entities decrease their 

funding ?

This question was used to estimate the level of increase and decrease in public funding. 

However, 38% of respondents indicated that state funding has increased, while 31% 

noted that public funding has decreased. It should be noted that the proportion of those 

who did not respond was 22%. 

When asked if central governments 

have decreased funding, 39% of 

respondents said “yes,” while 31% 

answered “no” (See Figure 1.14.). 

When asked about local governments, 

the decline seems less significant : 20% 

of respondents said they had seen a 

decline in financial support from local 

governments. It should be noted that 

27% of respondents indicated that this 

question did not apply and that 32% did 

not answer the question. 

We observe very similar results at the municipal level. A quarter of respondents indicated 

that municipal funding had decreased, while 20% noted that public funding had 

remained stable. 

Some respondents were careful to provide nuance regarding municipal funding in the 

light of emerging social issues. Some also specified that while funding has not 

decreased, inflation and higher operating costs contribute to reduce resources 

necessary for museums to carry out their mission :    

> Figure 1.13. -Changes in Public Funding Between 2018 and 2022
> Figure 1.14. -Central Government Funding Between
> 2018 and 2022 31

o The amount allocated to museums in small towns has decreased due to 

the need to reduce spending and redirect to the health sector. 

o I just checked this option so I could add this information : Funding hasn't 

decreased, but there hasn't been enough compensation for inflation and 

the rise of energy costs (when the war in Ukraine started). 

Question : Do all museums receive similar amounts or are there significative 

difference between museums ?

This question garnered a response rate of 86%. The responses clearly describe significant 

disparities in the financial support of museums. We have retained several comments that 

shed light on these disparities. 

There is a disparity in received amounts between museums, due to museum sizes. The 

sums received by museums do not correspond to a linear distribution, but rather take 

into account the physical dimensions of the establishments, the number of workers, the 

programming of exhibitions and dissemination of educational activities, as well as the 

implementation of projects of political interest to the state. This reality is different for 

each museum and each government, since it is linked to regional and local pol icies. 

Overall, smaller (i.e. local and regional) museums are often more dependent on 

government funds, as they generate less income because they attract fewer visitors and 

charge lower entrance fees. Several respondents said that private sponsors often pr efer 

to support larger and more prominent museums, since donating to these institutions 

provides more notability. 

According to respondents, the drop in funding sometimes varies between 15% and 85%. 

The funding structure has changed in the last decades, as there are often fewer visitors 

and fewer events, resulting in a decrease in the contribution of financial partners .

Respondents noted the marked gap between state institutions and other museums :

o Salaries, maintenance costs, and other expenses related to small projects 

(e.g. museum website design, purchase of physical accessibility aids, 

publications, etc.) are all provided by the Crown. Non -state museums, 

even those generously subsidized by the st ate, receive public funds for the 

modernization of their operations but not for their maintenance or for the 

salaries of employees. 

Some countries responded that there were no differences in the financial support of 

museums, pointing out that the situation has remained stable since before the 

pandemic. Also, the state budget is shared among all branches of the institution. 32 

Respondents noted in some cases that there has been a 10% increase in government 

funding since the pandemic. It should be noted that it has always been easier for private 

museums than for public museums to solicit donors, patrons and companies. 

1.4.2 Exploring new revenue streams 

In response to the operational challenges brought on by the COVID -19 pandemic, 

museums have increasingly sought out alternative sources of revenue. This section 

investigates how museums have adapted their funding strategies between 2018 and 

2022, highlight ing significant changes and the emergence of new business models to 

sustain their operations. 

Question : Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, did museums explore alternative sources 

of revenue ? If you answered “yes” to the previous question, what sources provided 

income ? (Select all that apply) 

Considering that the COVID crisis and more 

specifically the closure of museums had an impact 

on operations, we wanted to know if museums had 

taken advantage of the pause to identify new sources 

of revenue. The result obtained is significant, since 

73% of r espondents answered “yes,” although 24% 

of respondents said they had not looked for new 

sources of income. 

We asked those who answered “yes” to 

the previous question to identify the 

new sources of income. We had 

prepared eight possible choices as well 

as an open category. Respondents were 

asked to select all options which 

applied. We can observe a relatively 

eq ual distribution for five sources :

sponsorship (47%), government 

subsidies (46%), donations (44%), 

friends and volunteers (41%) and 

independent income (41%). A second 

group of less popular strategies 

included : brand marketing (29%), investments (20%) an d crowdfunding (24%). It appears     

> Figure 1.15.1 -Alternative Sources of
> Funding Between 2018 and 2022
> Figure 1.15.2. -Breakdown of Alternative Sources of
> Funding Between 2018 and 2022

33 

that a majority of museums rely on traditional funding source. Crowdfunding, which 

appears to be a trend often seen in mainstream media, is not very prevalent in the 

answers. 

The category of “Other” accounts for 14% of responses. Some of these responses could 

have been included in the specific categories above, but it is understandable that for 

some countries these are new practices. Examples include rental income and 

sponsorship, the sale of handicrafts, and subsidies for European projects. It should be 

noted that one c ountry was reported as considering the reintroduction of paid admission 

to national museums and it would be interesting to know whether this measure would 

bring in sufficient revenue to compensate for the losses due to pandemic disruptions. 

Figure 1.15.3. illustrates the use of alternative funding sources by national committees 

across various regions between 2018 and 2022. Europe emerges as the most diversified 

region, with high utilization across nearly all funding types, particularly government 

grants, do nations, and independent income. Africa also displays a balanced distribution, 

with notable emphasis on government grants, independent income, and 

patronage/sponsorship. In contrast, Asia shows a moderate spread across funding 

sources, although crowdfundin g and commercialization are less prominent. North 

America, Oceania, and Latin America & the Caribbean have considerably lower 

engagement with alternative funding sources, with North America showing limited use 

across most categories and Oceania and Latin A merica/Caribbean indicating minimal to 

no use, especially in crowdfunding and investment. This data highlights regional 

disparities, with Europe leading in diversified funding while other regions show limited 

access or utilization of alternative financial resources.     

> Figure 1.15. 3.-Alternative Sources of Funding Between 2018 and 2022 , breakdown of use by region.
> This graphic shows the number of national committees who have indicated that these alternative sources of funding were used
> in their country. 34

Question : Did you see any new business models emerge in museums between 

2018/19 and 2021/22 ?

This question received a response rate of 86%. 

New business models and new 

revenues were reported by 39% of 

respondents, and they are coming from 

multiple sources. Responses 

mentioned the commercial turn of 

museums, increased donations and 

patronage, new revenues generated by 

digital technology and cro wdfunding, as 

well as the appearance of new private 

museums. 

With regard to the commercial turn, 

respondents point to the increase in 

independent revenues from the rental of spaces, investments in museum outlets, the 

sale of products, as well as new shops, restaurants and bookstores. Respondents also 

cited new exhibitions and special events organized for partners. 

Donations seem to have multiplied. One respondent noted that all national institutions 

generate autonomous revenue through philanthropy, sponsorship, memberships, retail 

and investments, adding that : “even though COVID -19 has had an impact on their abilit y

to generate own -source revenues, they have returned to this model as a way to raise 

funds that are in addition to public funds.“ Support from new patrons was also 

highlighted :

o The emergence of Major Patrons, who undertake investment projects, 

such as the renovation and expansion of museums, as well as the 

financing of international architectural competitions. 

Respondents indicated that museums have become aware of the potential of digital 

technology to generate revenue through online platforms by reaching new audiences 

through the implementation of ongoing community programs. As a result, there has been 

an incr ease in the development of digital platforms and virtual museums. 

New partnerships with universities and research centres are being discussed. As well, 

some institutions are developing crowdfunding strategies in order to compensate for the 

drop in revenue due to the decrease in visitor numbers. Several respondents pointe d out 

that there has been an increase in the number of private museums over the past fifteen 

years. Some governments are developing policies for new models of public funding for 

cultural organizations. A distinction is made between basic public funding for the day -to -

day running of museums, covering staff salaries, social insurance and maintenance   

> Figure 1.16. -Emergence of New Business Models
> Between 2018 and 2022 35

costs, and so -called “additional public funding,” which varies annually according to 

specific projects. As opportunities for public funding become more limited, private 

museums are multiplying. One of their funding strategies is to develop projects finance d

through international donations and sponsorships. 

Finally, one respondent pointed out that the museum sector has been attempting to 

develop new and innovative sources of revenue for several years. The trend is therefore 

not new, but is becoming more widespread in many countries and across different 

catego ries of museums. 

# 1.5 Impacts of Funding Variations 

Variations in funding for museums can have profound and far -reaching impacts on their 

operations, staffing, visitor engagement, and overall sustainability. This section 

examines the consequences of funding decreases from 2018 to 2022, highlighting 

challeng es faced by museums globally. By analyzing responses from various countries, 

we aim to provide a comprehensive overview of how funding fluctuations have affected 

the museum sector, focusing on job losses, operational changes, visitor attendance, and 

outrea ch programs. Understanding these impacts is crucial for developing strategies to 

support and sustain museums in the future. 

Question : Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, what were the impacts of the funding 

decrease in your country ?

We identified four recurring impacts, i.e. job losses, changes in operating operations, 

variations in visitor attendance, and fewer outreach programs. We included an open 

category for other impacts. The responses clearly indicate that the most prominent 

im pact was a drop in visitor numbers (63%), particularly due to COVID. Some 

respondents indicate decreases as large as 50%. The second most -reported impact was 

a decrease in outreach programs (54%). Impacts on museum operations were reported 

SUMMARY 

The post -pandemic period, from 2021 to 2022, has significantly impacted the 

museum sector through various changes in public funding and notable efforts to 

explore new revenue streams. While some museums saw increases in funding, 

others experienced declines, reflecting a complex and shifting financial landscape. 

Comparisons with pr e-pandemic funding levels reveal slight overall declines, but 

also highlight emerging trends and disparities. Museums have demonstrated 

resilience and adaptability by adopting innovative financial strategies to sustain 

their operations in this challenging new environment. 36 

by 49 % of respondents, while 34% reported job losses, as many museums were 

temporarily closed. One respondent reported that 25% of jobs had been lost in their 

country. 

In terms of museum operations, respondents reported a high number of limited or 

cancelled activities. Exhibition programs in some museums were affected due to lack of 

funds to meet planned schedules. For some museums, savings made through 

cancellations of activities made it possible to cover the loss of income, but many 

museums experienced difficulties in covering operating costs. However, it appears that 

community museums for the most part continued their activities despite staff layoffs. 

The open -ended question on the impacts of cuts to public funding was designed to 

collect detailed data and allowed us to identify specific information about the effects of 

public finding decreases on museums. 

¡ Declining incomes and financial crisis 

Respondents pointed out that in some countries the drop in attendance resulted in a 

decrease in state funding. As museums' own -source revenues decline overall, 

promotional activities are limited and museums produce fewer exhibitions. In some 

countries, the pandemic has had the effect of reducing the number of museums’ opening 

days. The financial crisis has also led many museums to cancel acquisitions, equipment 

purchases and research missions. 

The global inflation which has followed the pandemic, combined with a decrease in the 

number of visitors, has created a difficult situation for museums. As a result, revenue 

from entry fees has decreased, causing staff cuts in many museums, affecting the 

museums' service offer and the preservation of heritage :

o The reduction in funding between 2018/19 and 2021/22 has led to a 

decrease in outreach programs, 

limiting educational initiatives and 

community engagement by 

museums. This financial decline 

has impacted employees, leading 

to lower wages, budget cuts and 

the creation of financial pressures. 

Museums have faced operational 

challenges, including potential 

closures, reduced staff, and 

limited capacity for acquisitions 

and new exhibitions. Decreased 

funding has hampered 

technological advances and infrastructure, affecting digital initiatives and 

creating challenges for the preservation of cultural heritage.   

> Figure 1.17. -Impact of Funding Decrease Between 2018 and
> 2022 37

¡ Decline in attendance and in own -source revenue 

Respondents noted that the decline in visitors resulted in a decline in own -source 

revenue due to factors including lockdowns, travel restrictions and public health 

concerns. There is no doubt that COVID -19 and the lockdown created significant 

challenges f or museums. 

There has therefore been a loss of income within the cultural -economic fabric. Obviously, 

this situation, combined with travel restrictions in cities and provinces, led to a drop in 

the number of visitors to museums. While some jurisdictions lifted pandemi c restrictions 

sooner, others maintained strict measures. For example, schools switched to online 

learning, and contributed to the decline in attendance for museums. Respondents also 

noted that the decline in visitors was more significant in museums locate d outside major 

cities. 

¡ Impacts of job losses 

Some public museums did not experience job losses, but had to cut staff hours and 

salaries to manage the decline in their educational and cultural activities. There has been 

a decline in educational and cultural activities. 

Many respondents reported that the crisis context led to the loss of jobs and the 

consequent lack of staff to meet the needs of visitors. A report conducted by ICOM -

Brasil, indicates that 30% of museum professionals suffered salary cuts and 20% were 

laid off during the pandemic. 

Changes in museum schedules also complicated the reception of visitors. In this context 

of crisis, it became more difficult for museums to reach new audiences. 

Museums cancelled research projects and exhibitions and the companies supplying 

museums could not operate normally. 

¡ War and energy crisis 

Two other issues emerge from the analysis : climate change and, in Europe, rising energy 

costs. While COVID and other factors are circumstantial, one respondent rightly pointed 

out that the energy crisis and rising energy costs in Europe are putting museum s to the 

test. 

o Climate issues : since the war in Ukraine, energy costs have risen 

considerably. It was very alarming at first, but the levels are still higher 

than before. Most museums are housed in buildings that are difficult to 

heat. I remember at the museums congress in 2022, many directors said 

that COVID had been difficult, but that energy costs were even more 

difficult to manage. On November 22nd, national elections were held. 

Quite unexpectedly, one party that has won (PVV) declares in its election 38 

programme that it wants to put an end to all subsidies to culture and art. 

I don't know how this will affect our sector in the (near) future. Nb. we 

have just recovered from the heavy budget cuts devoted to culture in 

2011 -2012. It was just a policy for a limited period of time, but it caused 

a lot of damage to the cultural infrastructure. 

¡ Climate of uncertainty - demotivation 

Some respondents highlighted a feeling of abandonment by central governments and the 

context of crisis in the museum world :

o The museum sector was very affected during this period and did not 

receive any support from governments. 

o Cultural policy does not give enough importance to museums, even if 

the ministry creates museums, it does not provide them with enough 

resources to develop and undertake activities other than exhibitions. 

o The most direct impact that has affected museums has been the 

political situation, which has affected all areas of development in the 

country. 

This context of financial crisis contributes to a feeling of uncertainty and demotivation in 

the museum community. Respondents noted that museums are acutely aware of the 

uncertainties they face. Due to the decrease in funding, demotivation affects museum 

staff. 

Repeated cuts have had an impact on outreach programs, which are becoming difficult 

to plan, undermining the confidence of museum staff :

o The National Museum was on the verge of reopening when COVID -19 

became an issue and funds were directed there, but managed to open 

with limited funds. Funds for awareness -raising programs were almost 

non -existent. Limited outreach programs have all been ca ncelled. 

o Awareness programs continue to run into the “lack of funds” syndrome. 

This discourages teams from planning any program that requires funds 

for implementation. After the opening of the National Museum in 2022, 

national patronage has increased significantly. 

o The decrease in funding, as well as the bureaucratic system that 

museums in this country create, creates a lot of uncertainty among their 

workers. There is an impact on the mental health of the staff, because it 

is not known if their salaries will decrease , and many of them are 39 

overworked, because they have to take on tasks that belong to other 

departments. 

o In almost every way imaginable. I get moved just by writing this. We 

cannot talk about growth when we are barely surviving. 

All of these impacts have clearly affected the working climate and the confidence of 

museum staff. The following noteworthy comment illustrates the reality beyond the 

statistics :

o Like what. As I write, it was only yesterday that I was paid. My last salary 

before that was in November. I received the full amount, but it still 

represents 2 full months without pay. You can't do anything. There are 

no health benefits. It's just horrible . But again, I think the central 

government is not to blame. I think that a misallocation of funds at the 

level of the Museum […] is to blame. 

¡ Opportunities and difficulties in innovating 

Several respondents pointed out that the financial crisis experienced by museums also 

offers opportunities. Of particular note is the renovation of museum infrastructure and 

the training of staff. In Greece for example, despite the fact that museums had to close 

their doors to the public, many of them emerged from the pandemic period stronger and 

more creative by focusing on their research mission or even by reorganizing and 

modernizing their infrastructure. On the other hand, one respondent took the troubl e to 

point out that it is difficult to propose “radical changes” in the way museums operate 

because of the crisis. 

¡ Other impacts 

The open -ended category of “Other” impacts received an 18% response rate. Two 

respondents indicated that there had been no impacts, with one specifying that this was 

because finding had remained stable. Respondents also noted that the drop in revenues 

has prevented museums from maintaining contingency funds that could affect their 

development over the medium and long term. 

One respondent noted that due to the pandemic, some audiences have become more 

interested in online platforms and that this trend has had an impact on museum 

attendance. 

Question : As we conclude, is there any additional information you believe would 

enhance our final report, which you haven't had the opportunity to mention 

previously or that you feel merits further discussion ?

In conclusion, we asked respondents if there was any additional information that would 

require particular attention in order to make the survey more comprehensive. More than 40 

half of respondents (58%) offered comments. A number of replies stated that there was 

no need to add anything else because the survey was sufficient in its current form. 

Respondents were also careful to specify that answers given to the previous questions 

corresponded to widely accessible national surveys and government policies. 

ICOM NC’s highlighted the limitations of the responses due to the lack of available 

information. Others pointed out that the particularities of their museum network did not 

correspond to the model favoured by ICOM and suggested communicating directly with 

them. One respondent recalled that in some economically disadvantaged countries, the 

recognition and protection of culture and heritage is not a government priority. 

¡ Fair distribution of budgets 

Other respondents pointed out that relationships with governments are not always 

transparent, and that it would be useful to carefully examine the distribution of budgets 

that do not always appear to be equitable :

o We need to shed light on the nature of the problem here. We have an 

unusual privilege that there is actually more than enough for everyone if 

the money was properly distributed. Everything needs to be restructured 

and reworked, but the people responsible f or this are the cause. There 

needs to be a major overhaul. In principle, the problem is actually 

simple to solve, provided that the powers that be see the problems as 

they are. 

Another respondent further emphasiz ed the secretive nature of public funding :

o We note that there is no democracy in the execution of museum budgets 

in our country. Budget appropriations remain secret in the hands of 

museum directors and there is no report on the museum management 

budget available in print or online. 

¡ Guaranteeing the future of financing 

We were also told that while public funding for museums has remained relatively stable 

over the past decade, it does not seem to be guaranteed for the future. This climate of 

concern leads museums to develop unwavering pleas to thwart attempts to reduce 

fu nding for museums while other sectors such as libraries have obtained an increase in 

their funding. As noted earlier, libraries have a cultural mission similar to that of 

museums and produce their own exhibitions, as well as educational and cultural 

progra ms. 

¡ Positive effects of the crisis (?) 

Respondents also highlighted positive aspects associated with the health and financial 

crisis. One of the unexpected effects of the global health crisis was to increase the 

number of local visitors during COVID -19 lockdowns. The various events and exhibiti ons, 41 

including temporary exhibitions, have enriched the list of funding agencies and their 

interest in raising awareness of museum collections and heritage. 

In terms of outreach, there has been an increase in digital exhibitions and other museum 

programs, as well as an increase in digital educational content. There has also been an 

increase in online conferences for the public and for museum professionals. 

The health crisis has led museums to reconsider their role in society and to rethink 

relations with the public :

o In some circumstances, it is necessary to broaden museum actors to a 

wider range of people than those who visit museums, and to enrich 

services by offering various online programs to those looking for various 

ways to use museums. Efforts to digitize museum materials, digital 

archiving, and their use are ongoing. 

Respondents also highlighted the solidarity evident between museum institutions during 

this period and the emergence of new links between institutions. 

¡ Searching for other models 

Answers demonstrate a consensus on the fact that the health crisis and the financial 

crisis have been an opportunity for museums to identify innovative practices, both in their 

relations with communities and citizens, and in the development of new modes of 

communication and funding. 

Survey respondents noted that the general public seems to believe that museums are 

rich, perhaps because the perceived value of collections becomes conflated with 

museums ’ financial assets, but it is perhaps not well understood that museums cannot 

monetize this heritage. This begs the question : How can we better educate the public at 

large about public funding for museums ?

There is also a consensus on the common objective of improving financial management. 

Some respondents highlighted the effects of the pandemic, at the same time recalling 

that the health, financial, ecological, and public trust crises facing the museum world 

also represent opportunities to seek other funding models in order to sustainably s upport 

the museum network. 

o The impacts of the economic downturn on museums in the Latin 

American region have been a constant, not only because of COVID -19, 

which has undoubtedly become more critical, but also because of the 

direct impact on museum professionals. Many have lost their jobs and 

this situation has not improved significantly. We think that we must look 

for other models. 42 

While several respondents agree on these findings, few innovative models were identified 

in the statistical survey. Chapter II will present these new funding models in more detail. 

SUMMARY 

The decrease in funding between 2018 and 2022 significantly impacted museums, 

leading to reduced visitor attendance, fewer outreach programs, operational 

challenges and job losses. These repercussions highlight the critical need for 

sustainable funding to maintain museum operations, retain staff, and develop 

community engagement. Financial constraints have not only affected immediate 

operations, but have also posed long -term challenges for the preservation and 

promotion of cultural heritage. Survey response s highlight the need for transparent 

budgeting, future funding guarantees and new funding models. Respondents also 

noted positive outcomes like increased local engagement and digital innovation, 

emphasizing sustainable financial management and museum adapt ation. 43 

# 1.6 Highlights 

General findings 

● The survey reveals a lack of comparable statistical dat a across different regions, 

countries and institutions .

● The vast majority of respondents confirm that they recognize the ICOM definition 

adopted in 2022 and the responsibilities specified therein. 

● The survey highlights the significant contribution of three levels of government to 

public funding , namely : central, regional and municipal governments .

● In many countries, funding is the responsibility of various line ministries (culture, 

education, science, tourism, finance, defence). 

● There are two types of public funding. The first can be described as direct in the 

case where the recognition of public museums by the state corresponds to regular 

financial support, most often indexed, although several respondents pointed out 

that this ty pe of funding is not always sufficient to support museum missions. The 

second is indirect financing, based on laws and financial policies promoting 

patronage and donations through tax credits to companies, individual patrons, 

and foundations. 

● With the exception of national museums, financial support for private museums 

is not always recurrent and is often based on special projects funded by 

governments (e.g. digitization, construction of reserves, renewal of permanent 

exhibitions, educational programs). 

● Respondents emphasized the importance of own -source revenues, which are 

increasingly important, if not indispensable .

● It seems that the world of museums is conducive to the effervescence of the 

associative sector, which plays a key role in defending public funding with the 

various levels of government. 

● Overall, respondents we re unanimous in saying and demonstrating that there are 

significant differences in public funding for museums. 

A significant trend : self -financing 

● The survey highlights a general trend that has favoured the development of own -

source revenues and the development of a corporate culture over the past two 

decades. 

● This trend towards the development of private funding contributes to 

transformation of the museum ecosystem overall through the spread of modes of 

operation previously adopted only by private museums by looking for alternative 

forms of financing. 

Hybrid financing 

● Almost two -thirds of the responding countries (63%) say they rely on both public 

and private finance. Some countries are challenging hybrid finance as a mode of 

management. On the other hand, just over a third of countries (36%) indicate that 

there is no h ybrid mode of public and private financing. 44 

● The gap is widening between museums that combine public and private funding 

and those that do not. 

Competition 

● As private museums seem to be increasingly numerous, competition seems to be 

more fierce for public museums when it comes to soliciting companies and 

sponsors. 

● Many public institutions such as libraries, archives, community centres, historic 

sites and universities perform similar functions to museums and receive public 

funding. 

Comparison of the situation for the periods 2008 -2019 and 2020 -2022 

● The portrait of public funding from 2008 to 2022 shows a general decline in public 

funding in the majority of categories. This decrease varies from one country to 

another. 

The impacts of funding variations 

● The responses clearly indicate that the most prominent impact was a drop in 

visitor numbers (63%), particularly due to COVID. The second most -reported 

impact was a decrease in outreach programs (54%). Impacts on museum 

operations were reported by 45 % of r espondents, while 34% reported job losses, 

as many museums were temporarily closed. One respondent reported that 25% 

of jobs had been lost .

New business models 

● Overall, 39 % of respondents say they have observed new business models and 

new revenues. In answers to open -ended responses, we noted the commercial 

turn of museums, increasing donations and patronage, new revenues generated 

by digital technology and crowdfunding, and the appearance of new private 

museums. 

● New partnerships with universities and research centres are being discussed. As 

well, some institutions are developing crowdfunding strategies in order to 

compensate for the drop in revenue due to the decrease in visitor numbers .

Consequences and factors not to be overlooked 

● Post -pandemic i nflation, combined with a decrease in the number of visitors, has 

created a difficult situation for museums. 

● In the case of public museums, there have not always been direct job losses, but 

there have been indirect consequences. There has been a decline in educational 

and cultural activities. 

● Museums have cancelled exhibition projects and reduced research projects. 

● Two other issues posing challenges fo r museums emerge from the analysis :

climate change and, in Europe, the rise in energy costs due to the war in Ukraine. 45 

Climate of uncertainty – demotivation 

● Some respondents highlighted a feeling of abandonment by the state and the 

context of crisis in the museum world 

● Repeated cuts have an impact on awareness programs, making it difficult to plan. 

This undermines the confidence of museum staff. 

Opportunities and difficulties in innovating 

● Several respondents point out that the financial crisis that museums are going 

through also offers opportunities. Of particular note is the renovation of museum 

infrastructure and new staff training programs. 

● One of the unexpected effects of the global health crisis was an increase in the 

number of local visitors during the COVID -19 lockdown period. 

● In terms of mediation, there has been an increase in digital exhibitions and other 

museum programs, as well as an increase in digital educational content. There is 

also an increase in online conferences for the public and for museum 

professionals. 

● There is consensus on the common objective of improv ing financial management. 

● Respondents highlighted the effects of the crisis, at the same time recalling that 

the health, financial, ecological, and public trust crises facing the museum world 

also represent opportunities to seek other funding models in order to sustainably 

support the museum network .

SUMMARY 

The survey highlights a shift towards self -financing and hybrid funding models in 

museums, driven by declining public support and increased competition. While 

funding cuts have led to reduced visitor numbers and program limitations, new 

revenue models and digital innovations present opportunities for growth. Despite 

challenges such as inflation and rising energy costs, museums are adapting and 

improving their operations. 46 

# 1.7 Conclusion 

In conclusion, this chapter presents the quantitative analysis of the results of a 

comprehensive statistical survey conducted among museums in various countries, 

illustrating the profound impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on museum operations and 

funding. The survey, which included responses from 59 countries, reveals diverse 

challenges such as varying definitions, numbers, and funding mechanisms. As well, there 

are significant disparities in museum distribution, m ost of which are concentrated in 

Western Europe and North America. The analysis underscores the critical need for 

standardized definitions and consistent data collection to support the international 

museum community more effectively. Furthermore, the chapt er highlights the increasing 

reliance on self -generated revenues and the importance of hybrid funding models 

combining public and private sources, which are essential for ensuring the sustainability 

and growth of museums worldwide. This quantitative analys is provides a crucial 

foundation for understanding the financial and operational dynamics of museums, 

paving the way for more informed strategies to address their evolving needs and 

challenges. 47 

# CHAPTER I I – QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS : 

# ANSWERS FROM MUSEUMS 

The previous chapter reported on general variations in public funding for museums, 

globally since 2008. This chapter will enable us to take a closer look at certain 

institutions, which is all the more important given the many changes and challenges 

facing museums. From Africa's post -colonial transformations and East Asia's rapid 

economic expansion, to Europe's fluctuating public funding and North America's reliance 

on diversified revenue streams, the global museum sector is marked by resilience and 

innovat ion. In Latin America and the Caribbean, economic instability and political 

changes necessitate creative funding solutions, while museums in Oceania adapt to 

declining public support through increased commercial operations and digital 

engagement. 

This chapter presents an analysis of the fluctuations in museums’ funding experiences, 

as well as of the strategies and innovative practices implemented in the face of these 

variations. It examines how these institutions strive to fulfill their cultural an d educational 

missions amidst financial and economic pressures, evolving public expectations, the 

imperative to comply with environmental and social responsibility, and the need to 

integrate digital technologies. By exploring the diverse experiences of mus eums globally, 

we gain insights into the universal and unique aspects of maintaining and growing 

cultural institutions in the 21 st century. 

The analysis presented below is based on regional reports prepared by six international 

experts, each of whom compiled data from a number of museums in a specific 

geographic region. A total of 119 museums worldwide (see Figure 2.0 for the breakdown 

by regions) were surveyed, resulting in the observations presented in this chapter. 12     

> 12 This chapter discusses museums as grouped by geographic area. For a full breakdown, see Annex III.
> Figure 2.0. -Breakdown of museums by geographical zones 48

# 2.1 Africa 

2.1.1 Overview 

Museums on the African continent have grown in various ways and with many factors, 

including geographical position. Until the end of colonialism, the few existing museums 

were designed on European models, if not directly by Europeans. These museums were 

ma de to showcase their natural resources to white elites. As such, they were rooted in 

vastly different political and cultural concepts from those of local populations. After 

gaining their independence, African countries made efforts to transform these museu ms 

into showcases of their own national prestige. In November 1963, le Centre de Formation 

de Techniciens de Musées en Afrique opened in Jos, Nigeria, establishing the foundations 

for an African museology through which to preserve and showcase the continent’s own 

heritage and stories (Effiboley 2022). Despite this, the basic set -up of African museum 

institutions was rooted in Eur opean ways of exhibiting artifacts. 

Today, contemporary museums in Africa face the challenge of being relevant to the 

communities they serve. They work to impress on visitors, both local and tourist, the 

importance of cross -cultural understanding, both on the continent and beyond (Adeyemi 

20 23). African museums preserve both tangible and intangible heritage, and work to 

promote education in their communities. Memory is often the core of museums, since 

many African artifacts were looted and are now missing or displayed elsewhere. In post -

colon ial institutions, stories must be told that reflect the culture of the people who will 

METHODOLOGY 

§ A qualitative survey was carried out among a selection of museums proposed by 

international experts, with 20 to 25 museums per geographic area (Africa, East Asia, 

Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, North America and Oceania). 

§ The aim was to identify and document new financing and management models. The survey 

was complementary to the statistical survey and covered both the pre - and post -pandemic 

periods. Museums were asked to highlight the impact of the decline in public fundin g on 

their institutions, but also the innovative and alternative ways in which they responded. 

§ Each expert collected data between August 2023 and May 2024 in order to produce a 

comprehensive regional report of their respective geographic area. A total of 119 museums 

responded to the survey.   

> §Some members of the Project Steering Committee specifically asked for the many quotations
> throughout the report to be regionally referenced in order to highlight the global impact of the
> findings. Though this was considered, the Project Team felt that the provision of respondent
> anonymity assured took specifically precedence.

49 

visit the museums, that is, of Africans. For example, South Africa is often cited as a model 

for the relevance of museums in a post -colonial and, more importantly, post -apartheid 

world (Vivan 2014). There are more than 800 museums throughout Africa (UNESCO 

2021), growing to be more socially relevant, entertaining and educational : “They are 

destined to become symbols of national pride and unity” (Abungu 2005). 

The survey sample for Africa consists of 21 museums, 13 for the most part representing 

the South and West of the continent. Contacting museums in the Maghreb proved 

difficult and while efforts were made consistently, only one museum returned a 

completed questionnaire. 

1. Phuthadikobo Museum (Botswana) 

2. The Georges OUEDRAOGO Music Museu m

(Burkina Faso) 

3. Musée de l’Eau du Burkina Faso (Burkina Faso) 

4. Musée RAYIMI (Burkina Faso) 

5. Musée Mgr Joanny Thévenoud (Burkina Faso) 

6. Musée Ethnographique et du Conservatoire 

Botanique (Burkina Faso) 

7. Musée Communal Sogossira SANON (Burkina 

Faso) 

8. Blackitude Museum (Cameroon) 

9. National Museum of Gambia (Gambia) 

10. National Museums of Kenya (Kenya) 

11. Maroc Telecom Museum (Morocco) 

12. National Museum of Namibia (Namibia) 

13. Seychelles National Museum (Seychelles) 

14. KwaZulu -Natal Museum (South Africa) 

15. La Motte Museum (South Africa) 

16. Afrikaans Language Museum and Monument 

(South Africa) 

17. Sanlam Archive and Museum (South Africa) 

18. !Khwa ttu Heritage Centre (South Africa) 

19. South African Post Office Museum (South Africa) 

20. University of Pretoria Museum (South Africa) 

21. National Museum of Tanzania (Tanzania)    

> 13 The data from these museums were collected by Catherine Snel. For a complete breakdown of the museums in
> Africa, see Annex III.
> Figure 2.1.1. -List and location of responding
> museums (Africa)

50 

2.1.2 Funding Fluctuations 

Pre -pandemic, 8 out of the 21 surveyed 

museums reported that public funding made up 

between 71% and 100% of their budget, but their 

number dropped to 6 post -pandemic (See Figure 

2.1.6.). Looking at the numbers in Figure 2.1.5., 

we can observe that more museums receive a 

smaller amount of public funding than before the 

pandemic while fewer museums receive large 

amounts. 

Public funding for museums in several of the 

surveyed African countries has notably 

decreased in recent years, even pre -pandemic in 

some cases, but most notably post -pandemic. As shown in Figure 2.1.6., 52% of 

surveyed museums reported a decrease in funding in 2020 -2021, with only 5% noting an 

increase. The situation was somewhat better in 2022 -2023, but 29% of museums still 

experience d a decrease in public funding. 

The National Museum of Gambia reported an increase in funding, both before and after 

the pandemic. For the Musée Communal Sogossira SANON, funding decreased during 

the pandemic, but increased afterwards. However, in Tanzania, the Seychelles and South 

Afric a, the post -pandemic decrease has been between 11% and 25%. Both La Motte 

Museum and Sanlam Archive and Museum did not suffer from a decrease in funding as             

> Figure 2.1.3. -Legal Status of
> Responding Museums (Africa) Figure 2.1.2. -Types in Responding
> Museums (Africa)
> Museums were asked to choose one or two types
> to describe themselves. The 21 museums in the
> sample made a total of 35 choices of type. The
> %reflects that number (35 ).
> Figure 2.1.5. –Breakdown of Public Funding
> Decrease in Responding Museums (Africa)
> To the question : Did public funding decrease?
> Figure 2.1.4. -Funding Sources of
> Responding Museums (Africa)

51 

they are funded at 100% by private 

companies. These variations in 

funding from one country to another, 

even one museum to another, poses 

significant challenges for these 

institutions (See Figure 2.1.7. for 

impacts of funding decreases). These 

cuts have severely impacted 

muse ums and hindered them in 

carrying out their crucial social role in 

preserving cultural heritage and 

providing public education. 

One of the most evident impacts is on 

everyday operations. The Seychelles National Museum reported that significant 

reductions in public funding had impacted their ability to maintain operations and 

preserve collections. This funding shortfall has necessitated the postponement of 

necessary upgrades and repairs, threatening the long -

term preservation of valuable cultural artifacts. Both the 

Blackitude Museum, and the Georges OUEDRAOGO 

Music Museum have stated that temporary exhibits were 

affected by the dec rease, forcing the museum to extend 

these exhibits beyond usual time spans. The lack of 

sufficient funding has hindered their ability to execute 

their museological duties effectively, impacting both staff 

and the quality of their programs. 

Another significant impact is the limitation on public programming and community 

engagement projects, both before and after the pandemic. Musée Communal Sogossira 

SANON has also had to limit its field trips in school, for example, which limits the 

museums’ ability to engage with the 

public and fulfill their educational 

mission. Another example is reduced 

hours of opening, like the Musée Mgr 

Joanny Thévenoud . This, coupled with 

a halt in community engagement 

programmes greatly compromises 

accessibility, as well as interfering 

with the museum’s social mission. 

A major emerging trend was the 

impact of the decreased funding on 

staff. The national museum of 

Tanzania reported laying off 20% of its 

staff as a result of decreases in funding in the pre -pandemic period. Similarly, both the 

Musée Communal Sogossira SANON and the Musée de l’Eau stated that staff had to be 

Some projects require that 

you feed the community and 

provide transport to and from 

their home. With decreased 

funding this affected 

community projects.     

> Figure 2.1.6. –Percentage of Public Funding in Responding
> Museums (Africa)
> To the question : What percentage did public funding make up
> for your museum?
> Figure 2.1.7. -Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding
> (Africa) 52

discharged due to decreases in public funding. For the 

Phuthadikobo Museum, these decreases in funding 

mean that they cannot offer attractive salaries, and 

consequently are unlikely to compete on par with 

institutions benefiting from more secure funding. 

However, during the pandemic, both the Georges 

OUEDRAOGO Music Museum and the Afrikaans 

Language Museum and Monument prioritised staff salaries within their budget. They did 

not state whether this was done at the expense of other sectors of their operations. 

Clearly, the decline in public funding has led to several operational difficulties for African 

museums, significantly impacting their ability to function effectively. Thus public funding 

has not kept pace with the growing operational needs of these institu tions, compelling 

them to seek alternative funding sources to sustain their activities. 

2.1.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 

To cope with reduced government funding, museums have had to increase their reliance 

on self -generated income to remain operational and relevant in the face of declining 

public funding. Notable strategies include the pursuit of corporate sponsorships, as well 

as revenue from ticket sales, venue hire, and donations. Although as we can see in Figure 

2.1.8., the use of these strategies has declined since the pandemic period .

Both the Seychelles National Museum and the National Museum of Tanzania have 

considered increasing entrance fees to offset the funding decrease. No indication was 

given whether those measures have been adopted. Interestingly even La Motte Museum, 

a private institution funded by a company and its owner, now relies increasingly on 

autonomous revenues, such as from fundraising and patrons. This museum is also 

shifting to online exhibition and volunteer work in case current funding proves to cover 

only operatin g costs. 

The use of public funding is a 

delicate point, complex and 

excessively long execution times 

which do not correspond to 

realities on the ground.   

> Figure 2.1.8. –Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (Africa) 53

Forming international partnerships and securing global grants are also essential 

strategies for African museums. Collaborating with international institutions provides 

additional funding and resources, as well as opportunities for joint exhibitions and 

res earch projects. The National Museum of Kenya has partnered with international 

organizations to obtain grants for conservation and educational initiatives, enhancing its 

capacity to preserve and promote cultural heritage. The National Museum of the Gambia 

has entered into a partnership with UNESCO to cope with the funding decrease. On a 

local scale, the Musée Mgr Joanny Thevenoud has established partnerships with 22 

museums throughout Burkina Faso and Mali, while the Musée de l’Eau has sought 

financial help from embassies and financial organizations. Cross -institution 

collaboration can be highly valuable for sharing expertise, as well as fostering a spirit of 

cooperation. 

Community engagement is another vital strategy for building support and ensuring 

sustainability. Strengthening relationships with local communities through outreach and 

educational programs helps museums build a loyal visitor base , attract local support and 

interest children in museums from a young age . The KwaZulu -Natal Museum in South 

Africa engages with local schools and community groups 

through educational programs and cultural events. T he 

Georges OUEDRAOGO Music Museum has init iated an 

awareness programme in schools and the media to 

promote the museum and curb decreasing visitor 

numbers. Such initiatives can foster a sense of ownership 

and pride among community members, encouraging them 

to support their local museums. 

Digital initiatives have also become a crucial component of the strategy to diversify 

income and maintain public engagement. Many museums have developed online 

platforms to showcase their collections and reach a broader audience. For instance, the 

Georges OUEDRAOGO Music Museum in Burkina Faso collaborated with the African 

Heritage School to provide virtual training for its staff with the aim of enhancing their skills 

and ensuring the continuity of its programs during the pandemic. This shift to digital 

platforms has helped maintain visitor engagement and operational continuity during 

times of restricted physical access . Thus digital initiatives ensure that museums remain 

accessible to the public. 

In summary, the decrease in funding, which is not a new phenomenon for African 

museums, has stimulated museums to reach outside their walls and towards their local 

communities in order to find support. Adapting to funding fluctuations requires outreach 

and sustained engagement strategies that can secure community support, as well as 

new methods of generating income while maintaining accessibility. 

The pandemic made the staff 

aware of emphasising on 

digitisation with regards to 

their collection but it is not 

ONLINE yet. 54 

2.1.4 Key Findings 

Museums in Africa face significant challenges due to declining public funding ever since 

the pre -pandemic period. This necessitates a shift towards diversified revenue sources 

and innovative funding models to ensure their sustainability and continued contribution 

to cultural heritage and public education. The innovative strategies and diversified 

funding approaches being a dopted offer a path forward. Building strong community 

connections and forming international partnerships, as well as persistent advocacy for 

increased government support remains essential for the long -term sustainability of 

museums. This balanced approach helps sustain cultural heritage while adapting to 

modern economic challenges and opportunities. African museums can navigate the 

current financial landscape and continue to fulfill their cultural and educational 

missions, playing a vital role in preservin g and promoting cultural heritage and public 

education. 

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES 

§ Fundraising for specific projects: Writing and submitting fundraising proposals. 

§ Forming international partnerships and securing global grants. 

§ Building support through local community engagement (community -based 

projects) and educational programs. 

§ Digital initiatives: Developing online platforms to showcase collections and 

maintain public engagement. 55 

# 2.2 East Asia 

2.2.1 Overview 

Museums in Japan, China and South Korea expanded rapidly in the last quarter of the 

20 th century and their educational function was strengthened, particularly in relation to 

national identity. 

Chinese museums are part of the socialist administrative mode and their number has 

grown exponentially since the 1980s (Bollo and Zhang 2017), 14 gradually becoming 

commercial entities within the market economy. Today, the latest statistics indicate that 

there were 6,565 museums in China in 2022, 15 90% of which were open to the public free 

of charge. 16 

There are two major categories of museum institutions in China : state -owned and non -

state -owned museums (respectively : 68% and 32% of museums). In terms of funding, 

state -owned museums are government -sponsored public institutions and are classified 

accor ding to three categories :

1. Class I : fully funded and non -profit. 

2. Class II : differential allocated and allowed to generate profits from their activities 

or programs. 

3. Class III : self -supporting public institutions, which must generate the revenues 

necessary to cover operation costs, including employee salaries and bonuses. 

Japanese museums, meanwhile, experienced strong growth from the 1970s onwards, 

supported through heavy investments by local authorities (Berthon 2020). The burst of an 

economic bubble in the early 1990s led to crises for museums and changes in cultural 

pol icies. Museums in Japan have since become communicational and commercial 

spaces (Berthon 2020) and are divided into three categories : national museums (2.7%), 

which operate under the aegis of the central administration; public museums (71.7%), 

which are e stablished by prefectures, cities, towns and villages; and private museums 

(25.6%) established by foundations, incorporated associations, companies or 

individuals. 17 

In South Korea, the growth of museums in the 1980s was linked to political 

democratization (Park and Kim 2019). They acquired the function of social spaces and 

became increasingly professionalized. Following an economic crisis in 1997, a more neo -

liberal m odel of operations took root (Park and Kim 2019). 18 According to our expert, there      

> 14 Their number tripled between 1980 and 1990 (Bollo and Zhang 2017, 28) and the growth has continued.
> 15 State Administration of Cultural Heritage, May 18th, 2023 (as per the regional report for China).
> 16 According to law (No. 11 document of Cultural Relics and Museums, 2010), local governments are mandated to
> allocate certain funds to guarantee free entrance to non -state -owned museums.
> 17 Our sample did not include prefectural museums, but due to cuts in the public sector, museums have adopted
> private sector management methods to improve efficiency (Taniguchi 2021).
> 18 South Korea’s legal framework for museums was established by the Museum Act of 1984. Notably, the subsequent
> Museum Act of 1999 implemented business rationalization in museum management (Park and Kim 2019,103).

56 

are over 500 museums in South Korea, categorized as national, municipal and private 

institutions. 

Our sample was limited to East Asia, namely China, Japan and South Korea. This 

limitation was due to the withdrawal from the project of our initial expert for Asia and the 

limited time this left to find a suitable replacement. Therefore our sample covers o nly 

East Asia and includes 16 museums :19 

1. Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum (China) 

2. Ningxia Museum (China) 

3. Shaanxi History Museum (China) 

4. Shanghai Museum (China) 

5. Xi’an Quijiang Museums of Fine Arts (China) 

6. Zhengzhou Museums (China) 

7. Idemitsu Museum of Arts (Japan) 

8. Kyoto National Museum (Japan) 

9. National Art Center (Japan) 

10. National Museum of Modern Art (Japan) 

11. Sen -oku Hakukokan Museum (Japan) 

12. Busan Museum (South Korea) 

13. National Folk Museum of Korea (South Korea )

14. National Museum of Korea (South Korea) 

15. National Museum of Korean Contemporary History (South Korea) 

16. Seoul Museum of History (South Korea)    

> 19 The data presented for these museums was collected by Prof. Yang Jin, assisted by Ma Jinwen, JiaYutong, Hou Zelin,
> Tan Zhongyan, and Liu Nianqing. For a complete breakdown of museums in Asia, see Annex III.
> Figure 2.2.1. -List and location of responding museums (Eastern Asia)

57 

2.2.2 Funding Fluctuations 

In this region, the funding situation for the surveyed museums did not undergo distinct 

change through the COVID period. Public funding remained stable (Figure 2.2.6.) and less 

than 20% of respondents reported a decrease before or during the COVID pandemic . For 

2022 -2023, that proportion rose by half (See Figure 2.2.5.), with 31% of museums 

reporting a decrease in public funding. However, generally, funding for museums in East 

Asia has stayed at a steady level in recent decades.         

> Figure 2.2.4. -Funding Sources of Responding
> Museums (Eastern Asia)
> Figure 2.2.3. -Legal Status of Responding
> Museums (Eastern Asia)
> Figure 2.2.2. -Types in Responding Museums (Eastern
> Asia)
> Museums were asked to choose one or two types to describe
> themselves. 24 types were chosen in Asia. The 16 museums in
> the sample made a total of 24 choices of type .The % reflects
> that number ( 24 ).

58 

In South Korea, museums such as the National Folk Museum of Korea and the National 

Museum of Korean Contemporary History have continued to rely heavily on government 

funding. Meanwhile the Busan Museum and the Seoul Museum of History have relied 

completely on municipal funding. While the COVID -19 pandemic caused a sharp decline 

in visitor numbers and its associated revenues, government funding remained stable, 

allowing the museums to pivot towards digital engagement. Therefore, autonomous 

revenues are not c onsidered a priority among the surveyed museums. 

The reduction in public funding is most pronounced in Japan. While there was an increase 

in funding during the pandemic, decreases both before and after left museums to their 

own devices in recouping their losses. We can posit that most museums affected by the 

decrease shown in Figure 2.2.5., are from Japan. For example, institutions such as the 

National Art Center in Tokyo have seen its operating subsidies decline by nearly two -

thirds since 2008. In fact, from the perspective of income and expenditures, i n 2018, the 

average total income of museums in Japan was ¥902,600, but the median was ¥136,000, 

equivalent to the price of a luxury imported car. This suggests that a minority of museums 

receive the majority of income, thus skewing the average, while the m edian more 

accurately reflects the actual situation of Japanese museums. 20 

This financial constraint has impacted museums in various ways. For example, The Kyoto 

National Museum struggles to maintain its collections and infrastructure due to budget 

cuts. 

Unlike Japan, China has maintained relatively stable public funding for state -owned 

museums, with strategic increases during challenging economic periods to ensure that 

institutions remain operational and accessible to the public. Non -state -owned museums 

often face more variability in public funding, relying on competitive grants and local 

government support, which can be unpredictable. The Xi’an Quijiang Museums of Fine 

Arts, a non -state museum, reported that a change in administrative measures regulating      

> 20 As per the regional report for Japan, by Prof. Yang Jin.
> Figure 2.2.5 –Breakdown of Public Funding
> Decrease in Responding Museums (Eastern Asia)
> To the question : Did public funding decrease?
> Figure 2.2.6. –Percentage of Public Funding in
> Responding Museums (Eastern Asia)
> To the question : What percentage did public funding make
> up for your museum? 59

non -state museums caused a decrease of around 20 -30% in its funding. Similarly, the 

Shanghai Museum, a public museum, reported a decrease in public funding, but said that 

autonomous revenues surpassed public funding for the first time in 2022. These 

museum s are encouraged to enhance their core competencies and operational 

efficiencies to attract more funding. Overall, a majority of public museums surveyed in 

China reported constant increases over the past ten years. 

Stable, and often increased, public funding for state -

owned museums in China has allowed operations to 

continue without significant disruptions. It has 

supported ongoing exhibitions, maintenance of 

collections, and the expansion of digital initiatives. 

Alr eady during the pandemic, Chinese museums made 

headway in developing virtual and digital programming, 

and have continued to do so since. The Ningxia Museum 

has increased its online presence through online 

exhibits, live broadcasts on social and streaming p latforms, as well as platforms to assist 

offline activities. The Shaanxi History Museum has even introduced a virtual reality (VR) 

exhibition. Similarly, investments in digital platforms to showcase collections online 

have been significant in China, partic ularly during the COVID -19 pandemic, and have 

reached a global audience. 

The situation varies between countries and between museums within each country. 

While funding remained stable in China and South Korea, Japan was hit hard by the 

decrease in funding. Government responses impact museum management and 

influence the direction s they take in terms of alternative funding practices. 

2.2.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuation 

Even in cases where there has been no perceived decline in public funding, museums in 

South Korea, Japan, and China are increasingly relying on a mix of revenue sources, 

including ticket sales, private donations, sponsorships and commercial activities (Fig ure 

2.2.7.). 

In South Korea, the turn towards digital and virtual tools had begun before the pandemic 

and surveyed museums all supplemented their digital programs through various funding 

schemes during the COVID crisis. The National Folk Museum of Korea has expanded it s

virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) exhibitions with government support to attract 

more visitors and has maintained its existing digital programming and virtual media 

initiatives. The National Museum of Korea has enhanced digital engagement through 

vir tual exhibitions and online educational programs, diversifying its income sources with 

an increased focus on online visitor engagement. Thanks to these initiatives facilitating 

public access, the museum reported an increase in financial income and visitor numbers 

for 2022. Even post -pandemic, almost all programs and events taking place at this 

museum have been replaced by online offerings. 

There is a need for museums to 

improve the quality of their 

exhibitions, to participate actively 

in various project competitions 

and to increase their 

competitiveness, thereby 

attracting more public funding. 60 

A significant in -person initiative was nonetheless implemented by the Museum of Korean 

Contemporary History, which opened its doors to visitors at night in an effort to increase 

accessibility. This initiative not only maintained visitor engagement but also attracted 

new audiences, such as professionals seeking cultural experiences outside regular 

hours through night tours. 

In Japan, museums have diversified their revenue sources 

within various approaches. The National Museum of Modern 

Art in Tokyo, and the Kyoto National Museum are boosting 

revenues through ticket sales, grants and donations. The 

National Art Center in Tokyo , despite a decline in operating 

subsidies by nearly two -thirds since 2008, has initiated digital 

programs such as online exhibitions and virtual tours. The Sen -

oku Hakukokan Museum in Kyoto receives 99% of its total 

donation income solely from Sumitomo G roup companies and 

the Nippon Steel Corporation. Despite this diversified range of 

financing, public funding remains crucial, accounting for 

between 50% and 100% of public museum budgets. 

Other initiatives include various forms of partnerships. The Idemitsu Museum of Arts 

collaborates with other museums to organize sponsored cooperative exhibitions. The 

National Art Center in Tokyo has partnered with two other art museums to offer reduced 

entry prices; the scheme aims to attract more visitors and increase revenue by 

encouraging cross -visitation between participating museums. This type of collaboration 

is crucial for developing the museum network and functions as an effective promotional 

stra tegy. At an international level, the National Museum of Modern Art and the Kyoto 

National Museum have collaborated with Google Art to launch an online platform through 

which visitors can remotely browse the museums’ exhibits. The National Art Center in 

Tok yo increased its admission fee revenue by expanding its public exhibitions and 

embracing entrusted income. While they saw a significant decrease in public funding 

Improving the efficiency of 

business operations, 

providing exhibition 

venues, securing and 

increasing own income, 

and providing a 

comfortable viewing 

environment.   

> Figure 2.2.7. –Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) 61

during the pandemic, Japanese museums managed to offset the shortfall through 

innovative digital initiatives and partnerships 

In China, state -owned museums use stable funding to maintain free entry, ensuring 

steady visitor numbers and public engagement. However, since public funding is so 

robust, there does not appear to be the same urgency as 

elsewhere to develop autonomous revenue, although they 

are encouraged to do so. 

Nonetheless, non -state -owned museums in China have 

had to innovate and find alternative revenue streams to 

supplement less predictable public funding. The Xi’an 

Quijiang Museums of Fine Arts actively seeks private and 

corporate donations, competes for cult ural grants, and 

has increased its commercial activities in the form of 

museum shops, cafes, and event hosting. The state -owned Shanghai Museum has 

secured numerous corporate sponsorships for exhibitions and educational programs. 

The need for museums to generate autonomous revenues varies between countries. The 

quality of government funding greatly impacts museums’ drive to implement such 

practices. While it seems that government bodies encourage museums to secure 

autonomous income irrespective of the level of their public funding, it appears that most 

institutions become proactive in this respect only when public funding becomes scarce. 

2.2.4 Key Findings 

Japan has seen a significant decline in public funding for museums over the past decade, 

significantly impacting their operational capabilities. Transformation has become a 

critical strategy, with museums developing online platforms to maintain and expand their 

audience outreach, ensuring continued engagement and financial stability despite 

funding cuts. In South Korea, stable government support has been crucial for museums, 

allowing them to implement significant digital initiatives and community engagement 

programs. This has enabled museums to demonstrate resilience, adapting through 

diversified funding strategies that include both public and privat e sources. By contrast, 

China's approach to museum funding represents a unique model. State -owned 

Museums should be 

prepared, proactive for the 

uncertain future either by 

downsizing consumption or 

broadening sources of 

income and reduced 

expenditure. However, every 

move is quite challenging. 

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES 

§ Mix of revenue sources: private donations, corporate sponsorships, and 

commercial activities. 

§ Domestic and international collaborations and partnerships. 

§ Digital and virtual initiatives: Developing digital tools, online exhibitions and 

virtual tours. 

§ Efficiency and proactive planning for the future: Improving business operations, 

prioritization, reducing expenditures. 62 

museums benefit from relatively stable public funding, with strategic increases during 

economic downturns to ensure operational stability. This sustained support has enabled 

Chinese museums to maintain activities without significant disruptions. However, n on -

state -owned museums in China face more variability in public funding and must rely on 

competitive grants, private donations and self -generated income. 

In summary, while Japanese museums grapple with reduced public funding and turn to 

innovative revenue models, South Korean and Chinese institutions benefit from stable 

government support, leveraging digital transformation and community engagement to 

sustai n operations and uphold their cultural missions. 63 

# 2.3 Europe 

2.3.1 Overview 

Two thirds of European museums are 

public, according to the European 

Group on Museum Statistics 

(EGMUS), although this statistic does 

not take into account all European 

countries. 21 Public museums are 

predominantly funded by local or 

regional administrations, while a

smaller portion is state -owned (14%). 

According to Xavier Roigé, author of 

the regional report for Europe, 

although there is a wide variety of 

public policy on museums across 

Europe, most European museums are 

publicly funded. Indeed, based on 

EGMUS data, museum funding 

originates mainly from public funds 

(61.8%), other unspecified sources 

(28.8%) and receipts (9.6%). 

However, as the European Museum 

Academy points out, there is a great 

diver sity of structures and types of 

museums in Europe, making it difficult to synthesize representative data (European 

Museum Academy 2023, 3). 

1. Musées Royaux des Beaux -Arts de Belgique 

(Belgium) 

2. University of Tartu, Museum of Natural History 

and Botanical Garden (Estonia) 

3. Musée de la Romanité (France) 

4. Institut du Monde Arabe (France) 

5. Museo Nazionale del Cinema (Italy) 

6. Museo Nazionale dell'Automobile (Italy) 

7. Van Gogh Museum (Netherlands) 

8. Casa -Museu Abel Salazar (Portugal) 

9. Museu Municipal de Tavira (Portugal) 

10. Casa Batlló (Spain) 

11. Casa Museo Pau Casals (Spain) 

12. Ecomuseo La Ponte (Spain) 

13. Ecomuseu de les Valls d'Àneu (Spain) 

14. Fundació Miró (Spain) 

15. Museo Arqueológico de Córdoba (Spain) 

16. Museo Arqueológico Provincial (Spain) 

17. Museo de la Evolución Humana (Spain) 

18. Museo Guggenheim Bilbao (Spain) 

19. Museo Nacional de Antropología (Spain) 

20. Museu Cultures del Món (Spain) 

21. Museu de l'Exili (Spain) 

22. Museu del Ferrocarril (Spain) 

23. Museu del Montseny (Spain) 

24. Museu del Pueblu Asturiano (Spain) 

25. Museu del Ter (Spain) 

26. Musèu dera Val d'Aran (Spain) 

27. Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya (MNAC) 

(Spain) 

28. Museu Nacio nal de la Ciència i la Tècnica (Spain) 

29. The Vasa Museum (Sweden) 

30. Black Country Living Museum (United Kingdom) 

31. Natural History Museum (United Kingdom)  

> 21

Statistics available on the EGMUS website (EGMUS, n.d.). 

Figure 2.3.1. - List and location of responding museums 

(Europe) 64 

Let us note from the outset that the European sample in the survey shows an 

overrepresentation of institutions in Spain because the author of the regional report is 

based at a Spanish university and is particularly well informed on the country’s museum 

net work. Overall, the European sample includes 31 museums, a relatively high number, 

but it is almost exclusively representative of Western Europe :22 

2.3.2. Funding Fluctuations 23 

The successive crises of the past decade have led 

to substantial cuts in public funding for museums 

across Europe. Continuing the trends of the late 

20 th century, there was generally a period of 

growth and expansion of museums. During this 

period, there were two types of museums : larger 

museums (Bilbao and the Louvre expansion) and 

local museums. The latter had fewer community 

ties, and were less prepared to withstand the 

impact of the 2007 -2008 crisis. 

The 2007 -2008 economic crisis occasioned a 

substantial decrease in public and private funding. The effects varied widely between 

different countries, depending on the management models and the types of museums,           

> 22 The data for the regional report for Europe was prepared by Xavier Roigé, with the collaboration of Alejandra Canals
> Ossul. For a full breakdown of the responding museums, see Annex III.
> 23 The chronological presentation of museum funding fluctuations in Europe is taken from the regional report prepared
> by Xavier Roigé.
> Figure 2.3.4. -Funding Sources of Responding
> Museums (Europe)
> Figure 2.3.3. -Legal Status of Responding Museums
> (Europe)
> Figure 2.3.2. -Types in Responding Museums
> (Europe)
> Museums were asked to choose one or two types to
> describe themselves. The 31 museums in the sample
> made a total of 24 choices of type. The % reflects that
> number ( 24 ).

65 

as well as the extent of significant cutback policies. Countries like Greece and Spain 

experienced severe reductions in cultural budgets. 

The museums benefiting from the best conditions to withstand the crisis were large 

institutions with substantial tourism revenues and small museums with limited 

resources but with strong community ties. The conditions were harsher for many local 

museums. A lthough budget reductions affected all museums, the crisis revealed that 

some institutions were more important than others for society at large, likely due to their 

substantive quality and ability to engage the public. Private funds were generally 

consider ed to represent complementary financing, not as a way to rescue public 

institutions. 

However, from 2010 to 2020, museums 

began a slow recovery, with a gradual 

return of public investment and 

exploration of alternative funding 

sources, such as tourism and marketing. 

As we can see in Figure 2.3.5., the 

decrease in public funding was less 

imp ortant going forward. More visitors, 

whether new or returning, meant more 

revenue. For several countries, the trend 

was toward low or reduced growth in 

public funding. In some cases, funding 

was concentrated on state museums, 

with greater budget restricti ons on 

regional and local museums. 

The COVID -19 pandemic (2020 -2022) 

brought another major challenge. 

Museums closed their doors and faced 

drastically reducing income. With a 6% 

decrease in tourism, museums located in 

tourist areas were hit harder than those 

elsewhere. The EU mobilized a variety of 

funds and programs for ec onomic 

recovery. However, the reaction of public 

administrations was very different than it 

had been to the 2007 -2008 crisis. In 

general, governments maintained and 

even increased their funding of 

museums. As evident in F igure 2.3.6., 

funding before and after the pandemic 

remained highly consistent. 

In 2024, museums are still struggling to return to pre -pandemic visitor numbers and face 

additional financial pressures from inflation and high energy costs. Beginning in 2023,     

> Figure 2.3.5. –Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in
> Responding Museums (Europe)
> To the question : Did public funding decrease?
> Figure 2.3.6. –Percentage of Public Funding in
> Responding Museums (Europe) 66

despite higher revenues from a relative increase of visitors, inflation and high energy 

costs posed a tough challenge for many museums, which in many cases could not 

compensate for the increase in operating costs. In some cases, these challenges have 

had a greater impact than did COVID. Many museums have had to take radical measures, 

such as closing for days at a time, to save money and offset the increase in energy costs. 

While some countries have managed to stabilize or slightly increase funding, many 

mus eums face ongoing financial constraints. 

2.3.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 

At the beginning of the COVID crisis, the memory of the 2007 -2008 crisis was still vivid for 

European museums, which generated much fear, if not of the pandemic as such, 

certainly of its long term impacts. Yet, unlike in 2007, public administrations respon ded 

not with cuts, but instead with compensation measures. Public funds did not decrease, 

according to most museums, while some indicate 

that they even increased. Despite this, there was an 

imbalance in how the decrease was perceived as 

private museums w ere affected more than public 

museums (this explains the numbers shown in Figure 

2.3.5., since private museums experienced more 

pronounced decreases). In the opinion of the 

museums surveyed, authorities implemented 

measures to compensate for the reduction of their 

own income, which allowed museums to cope with 

these losses with greater guarantees. Moreover, 

most of the surveyed museums (70%) estimated that 

observed decreases did not imply changes in 

management models, although a few signaled significant imp acts on exhibitions, 

publications and events. Museums still faced operational challenges, including staff 

reductions, fewer exhibitions and deferred maintenance (Figure 2.3.7.), most notably in 

the post -pandemic period. However, respondents stated that des pite these reductions, 

they were able to continue their activities. 

The museums surveyed indicate 

that in the years immediately after 

the 2007 -2008 crisis there were 

cuts to temporary staff, but that 

overall staff numbers remained the 

same. Similarly, during the COVID 

crisis, there were few decreases in 

overall staffing, a s this was one of 

the financing priorities. The most 

severe impact for museums were 

decreases in exhibitions, activities 

and visitor numbers (Figure 2.3.7.). 

With museum closures lasting 

Museums, whether publicly or 

privately owned, must have a 

vocation for public services and 

commitment to the community. 

The support of public 

administrations should be greater. 

At the same time, it is necessary to 

improve the regulatory framework 

with laws that encourage 

sponsorship and patronage.   

> Figure 2.3.7. -Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding
> (Europe) 67

many weeks and subsequent restrictions on visitor numbers once they reopened, 

activities were often transposed online, postponed, or simply cancelled. The 

acceleration of the ongoing process of digitization and diversified use of digital 

communication also represent enduring consequences of the COVID crisis. 

Most museums consider that income lost due to the reduction in public funding has not 

been compensated through other sources of income or, where such was the case, the 

compensation has been only partial. Despite this, there are no major innovations in term s

of funding, as reported by museums in the European sample. The majority of respondents 

tend to agree that the pandemic was a parenthesis and that its effects on their operations 

have not been long -term (with the exception of digitalization, teleworking a nd ongoing 

reflections about museums’ role in society). This view appears to have stalled further 

reflection on diversifying, expanding or restructuring museums’ sources of income. 

Overall, very few museums have sought new sources of income (Figure 2.3.8.) , with the 

notable exception of special projects and operational funding. Crowdfunding is the least 

used external source of income. 

Continuous efforts to advocate for increased and sustained government support are 

essential and often happen through collective actions by cultural institutions and 

associations. The Network of European Museum Organizations (NEMO) advocates for 

better fund ing and policies to support museums across Europe. Similarly, the Swedish 

and Danish museums associations are very proactive in lobbying their governments for 

better funding for museums (Ardelius 2022; Rasmussen 2022a). 

In summary, funding in Europe has 

fluctuated wildly in recent decades. It 

appears that the latest crisis will not 

cause broad changes in the financial 

models of European museums. It has, 

however, resulted in a reflection on the 

place and importance of muse ums within 

their communities.   

> Figure 2.3.8. –Alternative Source of Funding (Europe) 68

2.3.4 Key Findings 

Museums in Europe have traditionally relied heavily on public funding. Until 2007, the 

sector experienced growth with increasing public budgets and significant investments in 

infrastructure projects , such as the Guggenheim in Bilbao (Chong 2019). However, the 

2007 -2008 financial crisis caused severe cuts in government funding , leading to the 

closure of some museums and reduced services in others, with particularly severe 

impacts for local museums. Despite a degree of recovery after the COVID -19 pandemic, 

European museums continue to face funding instability, prompting them to explore 

diversified revenue sources and innovative funding models. 

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES  

> §

Mix revenue sources: Combining government support with private donations and 

corporate sponsorships.  

> §

Leverage ticket sales and retail operations.  

> §

Actions and initiatives that increase museums’ presence on social networks 

(creation of mobile experiences).  

> §

Digital and virtual initiatives: Developing digital tools, online exhibitions and virtual 

tours.  

> §

Community engagement: Strengthening ties with local communities through 

outreach and educational programs and building a loyal visitor base, attracting 

local support through community -focused initiatives.  

> §

Operational adaptations and resilience: Optimization and prioritizing staff 

retention. 69 

# 2.4 Latin America and the Caribbean 

2.4.1. Overview 

In Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), the new and social museologies strongly 

shape museum practices. The UNESCO Round Table of Santiago de Chile in 1972 

introduced the concept of the Integral Museum as a space for a new type of action 

designed to prov ide communities with an overview of their material and cultural 

environment. The concept of the Integral Museum became the basis for the international 

movement of La Nouvelle Muséologie (Varine 2000). The revolutionary context in which 

these innovative exp eriences emerged led to considerable transformations in the 

museum field. Several of the principles of the New Museology can be found today in 

Sociomuseology or, as preferred in Brazil, Social Museology, “as a new paradigm that 

promotes an epistemological rupture, implying a change in the conception of the world” 

(Britto 2019, 102). Several museum models coexist in the LAC territory, but all are 

strongly engaged in social responsibility and ethical commitment to diversity, which 

explains the presence of man y community museums. 24 

The sample is weighted towards Brazilian museums since the expert report’s author is 

based in Brazil and is especially familiar with its museum network. The sample for Latin 

America and the Caribbean includes a total of 23 museums :25 

1. Museo Histórico Sarmiento (Argentina) 

2. Museo Nacional Casa del Acuerdo (Argentina) 

3. Casa Geyer (Brazil) 

4. Casa Museu Ema Klabin (Brazil) 

5. Instituto Ricardo Brennand (Brazil) 

6. Museu das Comunicações e Humanidades 

(MUSEHUM) (Brazil) 

7. Museu da Memória e Patrimônio da UNIFAL -MG 

(Brazil) 

8. Museu da Vida Fiocruz (Brazil) 

9. Museu das Remoções (Brazil) 

10. Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia da UFPR (Brazil) 

11. Museu de Arte de Belém (Brazil) 

12. Museu de Favela (Brazil) 

13. Museu de Imagens do Inconsciente (Brazil) 

14. Museu do Homem do Nordeste (Brazil) 

15. Museu Histórico do Tocantins (Brazil) 

16. Museu Nacional do Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) 

17. Museu Victor Meirelles (Brazil) 

18. Parque por la Paz Villa Grimaldi (Chile) 

19. Museo de la Identidad y el Orgullo (Costa Rica) 

20. Museo Nacional de la Medicina Veterinaria (Cuba) 

21. Museo Antropológico y de Arte Contemporáneo 

(Ecuador) 

22. Memorial del 68 y Movimientos Sociales (Mexico) 

23. Museo Soumaya - Fundación Carlos Slim (Mexico)  

> 24

As per the regional report for Latin America and the Caribbean, by Luciana Menezes de Carvalho.  

> 25

Data for the Latin America and the Caribbean regional report was collected by Luciana Menezes de Carvalho, assisted by Lucien e

Pereira da Veiga Givisiez and Luiza Henriques Costa Pereira. For the full breakdown of museums in the region, see Annex III. 

Figure 2.4.1. - List and Location of Responding 

Museums (Latin America and the Caribbean [LAC]) 70 

2.4.2. Funding Fluctuations 

Public funding has decreased since 2018 for institutions that received less than 50% of 

their funding from public sources, while those who obtained between 70% and 100% of 

their revenue from public funding seemed to fare better. Compared with other 

geograp hical areas, the institutions in the LAC sample show two extremes in terms of 

public funding. In 2022 -2023, 14 were predominantly publicly funded, while 5 received 

no public funding at all (Figure 2.4.5.). 

Figure 2.4.5. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding 

Museums (LAC) 

To the question : What percentage did public funding make up for your 

museum? 

Figure 2.4.4. - Funding Sources of Responding 

Museums (LAC) 

Figure 2.4.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums 

(LAC )

Figure 2.4.2. - Types in Responding Museums (LAC) 

Museums were asked to choose one or two types to describe 

themselves. The 23 museums in the sample made a total of 

31 choices of type. The % reflects that number (31 ).71 

Before and during the pandemic nearly half of the responding museums noted a decrease 

in public funding, with only 25% noting an increase. The number of recorded decreases 

goes down after the pandemic, but this may be due to punctual and one -off funding, m ore 

so than a real prolonged increase in funding (Figure 2.4.6.). 

In several countries, museums have experienced substantial 

reductions in government funding due to economic crises and shifting 

political priorities. Museums in Brazil and Argentina, for example, have 

faced severe budget cuts as governments reprioritize sp ending amidst 

economic challenges. Both the Museo Histórico Sarmiento and the 

Museo Nacional Casa del Acuerdo confirm this by stating that 

fluctuations on funding depend on who is in government at a given 

time. 

Similarly, the institutions’ status plays 

a role in their access to funding. In 

2019, the Museu de Arqueologia e 

Etnologia da UFPR (Federal University 

of Paraná) saw its funding decrease by 

25%, due to cuts in funding for federal 

universities. This situati on was not 

remedied until 2023, when a budget 

with no cut was presented, meaning a 

50% increase. Even the Museu 

Nacional do Rio de Janeiro has 

struggled to maintain basic operations 

following significant budget 

reductions and a devastating fire in 

2018. 

At the other end of the spectrum, the Museo Soumaya, in Mexico, is a private institution 

and does not get any public funding. The Museu das Remoções, a community museum, 

has never received public or private funding, as its status bars it from meeting the 

conditions to participate in public calls. This is further impacted by the fact that they are 

still undergoing an institutionalization process. The Museu de Arte de Belém further 

exemplifies the importance of specific classifications since, as a municipal museum, 

they suffer from the absence of cul tural policies from certain federal administrations. 

Thus, public funding can vary tremendously depending on individual museums’ 

characteristics. 

The Museu Histórico do Tocantins offers another example. From 2008 to 2015, they were 

part of the Cultural Foundation of the State of Tocantins (FUNCULT) . Through this 

organisation, the museum could access various resources to support its operations. 

However, after the organization folded, the situation did not improve until 2019. This 

example stresses the importance of a strong network of museums, both in terms of 

funding and expertise sharing. 

Since the changes 

of government with 

different political 

colors, the modes 

of surrender have 

been modified    

> Figure 2.4.6. –Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease
> in Responding Museums (LAC)
> To the question : Did public funding decrease? 72

During COVID, funding was available to ensure the safety of staff (e.g. masks, hand 

sanitizer) but no additional funding was reported by the surveyed museums. There was 

an intensification of digital programming in order to maintain contact with communities ,

but the Museu da Memória e Patrimônio da UNIFAL -MG saw a decrease in voluntary 

participation and community engagement. 

This variation in public funding 

has led to operational 

challenges, including reduced 

staff, limited exhibition 

schedules, and deferred 

maintenance. The impact 

started before the pandemic, 

but respondents pointed out 

that the decrease in funding 

started we ll before the 2020 

crisis (Figure 2.4.7.). 

Exhibitions were severely 

impacted even before the 

pandemic, by lack of resources 

(mentioned by the Museu de 

Favela and the Museo 

Antropológico y de Arte Contemporáneo). The Museu da Memória e Patrimônio da 

UNIFAL -MG listed loss of staff as one of the most felt impacts, with museologists having 

to take on more administrative duties to fill the gaps. The Museo Histórico Sarmiento 

note d a reduction in education and mediation programs, as did the Museu das 

Comunicações e Humanidades. For the Museu Histórico do Tocantins , priority was 

accorded to basic operational needs, for example paying water and energy bills, security 

and cleaning, and maintenance services. Essentially, museums have had to prioritize 

essential services and core activities, often at the expense of the development of 

educational programs and special exhibitions. This has led to a decrease in the quality of 

the services museums can offer to the public.   

> Figure 2.4.7. -Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding
> (LAC)

73 

2.4.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuations 

Museums in the LAC region are increasingly exploring alternative revenue sources, such 

as private donations, corporate sponsorships, ticket sales, and foundations or friends of 

museums (Figure 2.4.8.). Other ways of funding included grants and endowment funds, 

as well as government or other subsidies, or even stand -alone revenue. 

Innovative approaches include charging only tourists for entry, as in the case of Museu 

de Favela, or fundraising, as with Instituto Ricardo Brennand. The Museo Nacional Casa 

del Acuerdo applied and won a prize from the Fundacion Williams’ Ensayar Museos 

program. The funding gained helped the museum implement a community outreach 

project. 

Reliance on museum associations, foundations or friends of museums was also 

reported. Both Casa Geyer and the Museo Nacional de la Medicina Veterinaria can count 

on active associations to raise a significant part of their funding. The Museu de Arte de 

Bele m once had a very active association of friends employing various fundraising 

methods, which was unfortunately deactivated in 2017. When developing a new hybrid 

funding model, the Museo Nacional Casa del Acuerdo created a friends association to 

help genera te private contributions. 

In Brazil, many of the surveyed museums referred to a law on tax incentives for donations 

as having offset decreases in funding. 26 Both the Museu das Comunicações e

Humanidades and Casa Geyer stated that this law has changed the financial structure of 

their institutions. The Museu da Vida Fiocruz stated that public funding increased by 25% 

due to incentives during the 2008 -2018 period, but did not specify whether any specific 

la w caused this increase.    

> 26 The Rouanet Law (Lei Rouanet) established the National Programme to Support Culture (Pronac) in Brazil, instituting
> a tax incentive policy that enables legal entities to deduct a portion of income tax for cultural activities (Fleming 2018).
> Figure 2.4.8. –Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (LAC) 74

Seeking support from private entities and corporations has become a 

vital strategy for financial stability. After a major fire in 2018, the 

Museum Nacional do Rio de Janeiro developed a new financing 

scheme, under which contributions to its finances now co me not only 

from the Brazilian government, but also the private sector and foreign 

governments, such as those of Germany and Portugal. The Museu de Favela has 

partnered with universities to develop public outreach programs, helping to develop its 

network a nd paving the way for future collaborations. 

Finally, the push towards digital engagement has been accelerated, with many museums 

developing online platforms to reach broader audiences. For instance, the Museo 

Nacional Casa del Acuerdo hired an expert to develop online content, activities and 

program ming, which various publics could access from home during the pandemic and 

which continue to be available today. Both the Museu das Comunicações e

Humanidades and the Museu do Homem do Nordeste have implemented the digitisation 

of their collections in orde r to make them more accessible. A different example of digital 

engagement comes from the Museo de la Identidad y el Orgullo, in Costa Rica. Launched 

as an exclusively virtual museum, its online activities were well -suited to the pandemic 

context. Today, this museum organizes some in -person activities, but operates largely 

online, without a physical location. Its operational model as a private institution is 

financed entirely through private donations. 

The surveyed LAC museums are highly proactive in finding alternative sources of funding, 

perhaps because the social environment and economic instability of the region compels 

them to be more self -reliant than museums in other regions. 

We could carry out 

more activities if we 

received some kind 

of funding. 75 

2.4.4 Key Findings 

Museums in Latin America and the Caribbean operate within a diverse and complex 

funding landscape. Public funding for museums in this region has been unstable, with 

significant reductions in some countries due to economic constraints and political shifts. 

This has necessitated innovative approaches to maintain operations and public 

engagement. Museums diversify their revenue sources through private donations, 

corporate sponsorships, ticket sales and merchandising. There is a strong emphasis on 

digital trans formation, with museums developing online platforms to maintain and 

expand their audience outreach. Building strong community connections and securing 

corporate sponsorships is crucial for financial sustainability amidst declining public 

funding. Continuou s efforts to advocate for increased and sustained government support 

are essential and are often carried out through collective actions by cultural institutions 

and associations. 

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES  

> §

International and cross -sector partnerships: Local and foreign governments, 

private sector, and universities.  

> §

Private and corporate donations and applying for grants and endowment funds.  

> §

Leveraging ticket sales (dynamic pricing) and retail operations.  

> §

Government subsidies and tax incentives for cultural activities and donations.  

> §

Fundraising through museum associations and friends of museums.  

> §

Digital and online platforms: Developing digital tools, online exhibitions and virtual 

tours.  

> §

Community engagement: Building a loyal visitor base with free admission and 

attracting local support through community -focused initiatives.  

> §

Resilience and self -reliance: Optimization and proactivity in finding alternative 

funding. 76 

# 2.5 North America 

2.5.1 Overview 

The North American museum network was established at the beginning of the 19 th 

century. The first museums in the United States and Canada were inspired by the 

Philadelphia Museum, created by Charles Willson Peale in 1786 in the wake of American 

independence (Alexander et al. 2017). Peale wanted to make his museum the first 

national museum, but it remained a private, self -financing institution operating without 

government support. Peale's business model has since been adopted by most North 

American museums, which operate as non -profit organizations generating independent 

revenue to fi nance their programming (Schwarzer 2020). Often created by collectors and 

local historical societies, museums remain responsive to the needs of citizens. They are 

administered by boards of directors who maintain close ties with collectors and patrons. 

Only a few national museums are funded by the Canadian and American governments. 

In short, the majority of North American museums are managed as businesses that must 

generate sufficient revenue to ensure their cultural and social missions (Selbach 2024). 

In order to promote the development of the museum network, governments have 

adopted legislation that encourages patronage by offering tax incentives to individuals 

and companies who financially support museums. This economic model for museums, 

also adopted by national museums, has historically favored the development of 

practices that favour the quality of the museum experience for visitors, who are 

approached as customers. In this context, it is perhaps unsurprising that associative 

links are central to No rth American museum culture. For example, the American 

Association of Museums (AAM) brings together nearly 3,000 institutions. In Canada, 

several national associations represent the museum sector, including the Canadian 

Museums Association. 

Due to difficulties in establishing contact with museums in the United States, Canada is 

overrepresented. This is also due to the fact that the expert author of the regional report 

for North America was based in Canada and had far more ready access to info rmation on 

Canadian institutions. Overall the North American sample includes 13 museums :27  

> 27 Data for the regional report for North American Regional report was collected by Marc Lajoie, assisted by Lisette
> Carine Pedraza -Cala. For a full breakdown of the museums, see Annex III.

77 

1. Aga Khan Museum (Canada) 

2. Art Gallery of Ontario (Canada) 

3. Baile nan Gàidheal Highland Village 

(Canada) 

4. Bata Shoe Museum (Canada) 

5. Canadian Museum for Human Rights 

(Canada) 

6. Espace pour la vie (Canada) 

7. Monastère des Augustines (Canada) 

8. Musée d'art de Joliette (Canada) 

9. Musée des cultures du monde (Canada) 

10. Musée McCord Stewart (Canada) 

11. Musée national des beaux -arts du 

Québec (Canada) 

12. Museum of Anthropology at the 

University of British Columbia (Canada) 

13. Cleveland Museum of Art (United States 

of America)                  

> Figure 2.5.1. -List and Location of Responding Museums (North America)
> Figure 2.5.3. -Legal Status of Responding Museums
> (North America)
> Figure 2.5.2. -Types in Responding Museums
> (North America)
> Museums were asked to choose one or two types to
> describe themselves. The 13 museums in the sample made
> atotal of 31 choices of type. The % reflects that
> number (31 ).

78 

2.5.2 Funding Fluctuations 

In North America, the level of public funding for museums has experienced considerable 

fluctuations, leading to significant operational challenges. For instance, the Cleveland 

Museum of Art faced a 35% reduction in county funds between 2008 and 2018, forci ng it 

to seek alternative funding sources. However, they stated that by 2019 autonomous 

revenues had contributed to offset this decrease. However, very few museums reported 

real decreases over the last decade. Public funding increased in 2020 -2021, but ret urned 

to pre -pandemic levels through 2022 -2023 (Figure 2.5.5.). 

In Canada, the funding landscape for museums is complex. The Musée national des 

beaux -arts du Québec and the Canadian Museum for Human Rights illustrate the existing 

diversity of funding sources, both institutions blending government subsidies with 

autonom ous revenues such as donations and ticket sales. For instance, the Canadian 

Museum for Human Rights, one of Canada's nine National Museums, raises significant 

funds through its foundation, notably with an annual gala. This example showcases the 

importance of foundation in organizing fundraising. Federal support has remained 

relatively stable, but several museums, like the Museum of Anthropology and the Art 

Gallery of Ontario have stated that funding has not kept pace with inflation. Meanwhile, 

provincial an d municipal funding has fluctuated significantly, creating financial 

instability. For example, the Baile nan Gàidheal Highland Village has had its first increase 

in provincial support for its operational funding since 2008.      

> Figure 2.5.5. –Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease
> in Responding Museums (North America)
> To the question : Did public funding decrease?
> Figure 2.5.4. -Funding Sources of Responding
> Museums (North America) 79

Moreover, national museums 

in Canada must cope with 

new operational demands, 

such as cybersecurity 

requirements and 

compensation for board 

members, without additional 

funds. This situation forces 

museums to address 

financial pressures within 

their existing budgets, 

without adjustments for 

salary indexation, inflation or other operational cost increases. These added financial 

pressures have led to various operational challenges for museums, including staff 

reductions, fewer exhibitions (before and after the pandemic), and reduced community 

engagement projects (Figure 2.5.6.). This has compelled museums to boost self -

generated income through ticket sales, memberships, merchandising and event hosting 

(Figure 2.5.7.). For instance, the Art Gallery of Ontario ha s significantly enhanced its 

revenue through dynamic membership programs, retail operations, and space rentals; 

already before the pandemic, the institution had had to increase its fundraising efforts. 

Similarly, the Baile nan Gàidheal Highland Village inc reased its independent revenues 

between 2008 and 2019, largely offsetting the drop in government funding. 

In Canada, the federal government enacted a series of financial measures during the 

pandemic that benefitted many museums. Two main such measures in particular 

allowed Canadian museums to weather the pandemic : an emergency benefit for 

temporarily laid -off workers (Canada Emergency Response Benefit [CERB]) and an 

emergency wage subsidy for employers (Canada emergency wage subsidy [CEWS]). The 

latter, especially, helped employers pay their employees, even when revenues dropped. 

The McCord Stewart Museum, a private institution, and the Baile nan Gàidheal Highland 

Village, a public institution, both benefited from these measures. However, these 

programs and funding left a gap that has been difficult to address. As mentioned by the     

> Figure 2.5.6. -Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (North
> America)
> Figure 2.5.7. –Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (North America)

During the pandemic we were 

lucky in Canada that the 

government provided additional 

funding to arts organizations. 

Interestingly, the most money we 

received was not through 

traditional arts funders, but 

through tourism funding. [...] 

Almost 10 times what w e received 

from the arts funders 80 

Canadian Museum for Human Rights, although the survey did not cover the current fiscal 

year, the federal government’s 2023 budget directed federal crown corporations, 

including museums, to reduce their operating budgets by roughly three percent. 

It should also be noted that funding can come from a variety of sources, and not only the 

ministry responsible for culture. The Museum of Anthropology noted that, during COVID, 

the provincial ministry for tourism was the highest funder, underlining the imp ortance of 

museums as tourist attractions. In addition, the Museums of Anthropology is a branch of 

the University of British Columbia, which provides 35% of the museum’s operating 

budget. 

2.5.3 Adapting To Funding Challenges 

Museums across North America are increasingly diversifying their revenue streams to 

ensure financial stability. This strategy includes seeking private donations, corporate 

sponsorships, ticket sales, and commercial activities (Figure 2.5.7.). The Bata Shoe 

Museum in Toronto illustrates how museums are leveraging their unique attributes to 

generate income : the museum leverages ticket sales, space rentals, and a strong e -

commerce presence in addition to donations, with 20% of its budget coming from 

ticketing and another 17% from donations. Other examples include the Musée national 

des beaux -arts du Québec and the Cleveland Art Museum, which host paid educational 

activities and hold investment portfolios to generate income. 

A unique example is the Monastère des Augustines , which generates independent 

income through a hotel attached to the museum. All the income is reinvested in the 

museum and its archives center, all operating within the same non -profit organisation. 

This is an innovative business model with links to the s ocial economy ecosystem, and 

demonstrates that nonprofits are not overwhelmingly subsidized organizations : 80% of 

its budget comes from own -source revenues, and only 15% from public funds, mostly for 

specific projects. The Monastère des Augustines has car ved out a place for itself in the 

niche of wellness tourism by offering visitors a relaxing experience . In addition, it offers 

special rates for caregivers. By reflecting about the monastery’s place in society and what 

they could offer as a museum, the institution has succeeded in creating a highly 

innovative model (Bérubé 2023). 

Some museums use crowdfunding to finance specific projects, like the Aga Khan 

Museum, helping to increase community engagement. The McCord Stewart Museum 

notes that all mediation programs and community projects are specifically funded and 

are therefore less impacted by the decrease in funding. 

This structure demonstrates the importance of 

community outreach for museums which develop 

efforts to foster partnerships with local businesses, 

schools, and cultural organizations, in order to build a

robust support network. Both Espace pour la vie and 

the Canadian Museum for Human Rights highlighted 

the importance of engaging communities through 

Attention to others, which was 

already very great for our 

institution, has become essential 

and primordial, making humans, 

their needs and their vulnerability 

even more precious. 81 

various projects, with the latter even organizing field trips throughout Canada to meet 

with the public. 

Digital initiatives have also become a critical focus, with 

museums developing online platforms to disseminate 

educational content, showcase their collections and 

engage with global audiences. During the pandemic, both 

the federal and provincial levels of government developed 

ad hoc funding programs for new digital initiatives, both to 

develop cultural content and to optimize management processes and systems. While 

this funding is no longer available, its 

impact has been lasting, with many 

surveyed museums now developing their 

online presence. The Aga Khan Museum has 

even created a new strategic plan that firmly 

entrenches digital offerings in its program. 

The Musée d’art de Joliette initiated an 

innovative project, Quarantined Museum 

(Musée en quarantaine ), an online space for 

remote audience engagement and virtual 

exhibitions, receiving very positive 

responses from communities within 

Quebec, Canada, and beyond, in addition 

to garnering significant media attention. 

Although they have not faced significant decreases in funding overall, museums in North 

America have developed a varied range of innovative approaches to generate 

autonomous revenues. Even when it is not essential to cover operating budgets, 

autonomous rev enue (Figure 2.5.8.) gives museums more freedom to implement 

programs that help to foster community engagement. 

Massive increase in 

digital offerings, scaled 

and newly implemented 

during the pandemic   

> Figure 2.5.8. –Alternative Sources of Funding (North
> America) 82

2.5.4 Key Findings 

Museums in North America face significant fluctuations in public funding. To navigate 

this challenging landscape, museums are emphasizing the diversification of their 

revenue sources through private donations, corporate sponsorships, ticket sales, and 

comm ercial activities. Additionally, they are increasing their investments in digital 

platforms to expand audience outreach, enhance engagement and grow revenue 

potential. Building strong community connections and securing corporate sponsorships 

is also crucia l for financial sustainability amidst funding fluctuations. 

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES 

§ Private and corporate donations. 

§ Leveraging ticket sales and commercial activities: Ticketing, space rentals, e -

commerce and paid educational activities. 

§ Alternative business models: Attached hotel, wellbeing tourism, special rate 

offers and investment portfolios. 

§ Crowdfunding and community projects through specific grants. 

§ Partnerships with local entities (local businesses, schools and cultural 

organizations). 

§ Digital and online initiatives: Developing digital tools, online exhibitions and virtual 

tours. Massive increase in offerings during the pandemic. 

§ Creating autonomous revenue. 

§ Resilience: Optimization, proactivity in finding alternative funding, and self -

reliance. 83 

# 2.6 Oceania 

2.6.1 Overview 

Museums and galleries in Oceania were first established in the 19 th and early 20 th 

centuries in accordance with British and European models. They developed in more 

distinctive ways in the late 20 th century due to various factors such as isolation, social 

decolonisation movements and nationalism, economic independence, technological 

innovation, and engagement with indigenous populations. Museums in Oceania, 

particularly in Australia and New Zealand, face significant challenges due to declining 

public funding. After economic rationalization from the 1980s onward, there have been 

drastic cu ts in the public funding of culture in general. These shifts were apparent 

throughout the British Commonwealth, but were perhaps most radical in New Zealand's 

restructuring of the public sector, encapsulated in the “user pays” mantra. 

1. Australian Museum (Australia) 

2. Flagstaff Hill Maritime Museum and 

Village (Australia) 

3. Museum of Old and New Art (Australia) 

4. National Museum of Australia (Australia) 

5. Powerhouse Museum (Australia) 

6. Christchurch Art Gallery Te Puna o 

Waiwhetū (New -Zealand) 

7. Experience Wellington | Wellington 

Museums Trust (New -Zealand) 

8. Kauri Museum (New -Zealand) 

9. Museum of New Zealand Te Papa 

Tongarewa (New -Zealand) 

10. New Zealand Cricket Museum (New -

Zealand) 

11. Waitaki Museum and Archive Oamaru 

(New -Zealand) 

12. Whanganui Regional Museum (New -

Zealand) 

13. Whirinaki Whare Taonga (New Zealand) 

14. EFKS Fine Arts Museum (Samoa) 

15. Falemata’aga/Museum of Samoa (Samoa)   

> Figure 2.6.1. -List and location of responding museums
> (Oceania)

84 

There are a very high number of museums per capita (over 500 in New Zealand for a 

population of only 5 million), but the majority are very small community facilities with few 

or no professional staff. There are a wide variety of governance and management 

structures ranging from Crown (government) entities to charitable trusts, incorporated 

societies, and private companies, among others. Māori communities, through marae and 

whānau, also operate their own museums and cultural centre s. In New Zealand, there is 

only one government -funded national museum (Te Papa), a handful of metropolitan 

galleries and museums, as well as a large number of small and micro museums. 28 

Overall, public funding has unquestionably declined. Funding designated to “arts, 

culture and heritage” has fallen from 81% in 2007 to 71% in 2021 (Sohanpal 2023). Island 

nations face formidable challenges of maintaining collections in tropical climates an d

with the impacts of accelerating climate change. 

The survey sample for Oceania includes 15 museums, with a good balance between 

Australia and New Zealand. The presence of two museums from Samoa is a welcome 

addition, giving the Pacific Islands a level of representation within the study :29          

> 28 As per the regional report for Oceania, by Conal McCarthy.
> 29 Data for the Oceania regional report was collected by Conal McCarthy, assisted by Anna Abernethy. For a breakdown
> of the museums, see Annex III.
> Figure 2.6.4. -Funding Sources of Responding
> Museums (Oceania)
> Figure 2.6.3. -Legal Status of Responding
> Museums (Oceania) Figure 2.6.2. -Types in Responding Museums
> (Oceania)
> Museums were asked to choose one or two types to
> describe themselves. 21 types were chosen in Oceania.
> The 15 museums in the sample made a total of 21 choices
> of type. The % reflects that number (21 ).85

2.6.2 Funding Fluctuations 

In Australia, public funding 

increases have been minimal over 

the past decade, less than 10%, 

and funding has decreased in 

some cases. The decline has been 

more pronounced in federal and 

state government contributions, 

affecting various aspects of 

museum operations, although 

private museums noted that the 

decrease in funding affects them 

just the same. Federal funding 

provides a portion of the budget 

for museums, with nine national institutions receiving 71 -100% of their direct funding 

from the federal gove rnment (Figure 2.6.5.). However, this federal support accounts for 

less than 10% of the total museum funding. State governments also contribute through 

grants supporting local priorities, but the decentralized nature of this funding model 

creates challenge s for financial stability and planning, as there is no reliable central data 

on public funding from state or local governments. 

In New Zealand, the impact of public funding cuts has been severe. While funding 

reductions have been less severe compared to Australia, the impact on smaller regional 

museums has been significant. There were regional museums fund grants under the 

previous government, but they have been discontinued. Only Te Papa, the national 

museum, still receives direct central government 

funding and has managed to maintain relatively stable 

government support, yet still faces pressures to 

diversify its funding sources. Other museums 

primarily rely on local government and private 

sources. Most museums are managed by city and 

regional councils, but public funding has significantly 

declined in recent years. Museums can apply for 

lottery funds administered by the Department of Internal Affairs, but these funds are 

highly competitive, unstable, and often insufficient to ensure stable operations. 

Responding museums noted that autonomous revenues, more than government grants, 

are used to offset the decrease in public funding. I t should be noted that, as mentioned 

by the Falemata’aga/Museum of Samoa, even when there was no decrease, the museum 

still had problems meeting its annual budget. 

The funding cuts have led to operational challenges across Oceania, including staff 

reductions, limited public programming, and deferred maintenance of collections (Figure 

2.6.6.). Cuts have mostly affected collections, exhibitions, public programs, and 

ou treach initiatives. 

Our organisation has been 

underfunded for years. We don’t 

have enough funds to deliver what 

we are charged to deliver on 

behalf of council   

> Figure 2.6.5. –Percentage of Public Funding in Responding
> Museums (Oceania) 86

Decreased funding especially 

impacts public outreach 

programs, which play a crucial 

role in engaging diverse 

audiences, fostering community 

connections and promoting 

cultural understanding. Less 

funding may hinder the 

museum's ability to fulfill its 

educat ional and community -

oriented mission, as stated by 

the EFKS Fine Arts Museum. 

Finally, natural disasters and 

climate change further strain 

financial resources, requiring investments in earthquake strengthening and insurance, 

which are often not funded by the government. 

During the COVID -19 pandemic, temporary increases 

in funding were observed, but these were not 

sustained, leading to ongoing financial crises post -

pandemic. Many museums have faced staff cuts, 

impacting their ability to maintain services and pursue 

funding opportunities, but a majority of the responding 

museums stressed the importance of retaining their 

staff during the crisis. Currently, public funding in Oceania prioritizes exhibitions, 

collections storage, and building maintenance, among other elements, since in many 

cases the COVID -19 crisis exposed shortcomings in these areas. 

2.6.3 Adapting To Funding Fluctuations 

This decline in public funding has forced museums to explore alternative revenue 

sources, such as retail, sponsorship, and venue hire, but these measures have not fully 

compensated for the loss in government support, leading to ongoing financial 

challenges . As such, museums in Oceania are increasingly relying on a mix of revenue 

sources, including commercial activities, private donations, sponsorships, and 

membership programs in order to offset the decrease in public funding (Figure 2.6.7.). 

Museums often m ust raise up to 50% of their income through autonomous revenue. 

Many museums actively seek partnerships with private and corporate entities to support 

exhibitions and special projects. Both the National Museum of Australia and 

Falemata’aga/Museum of Samoa stated that they rely on partnerships, the latter 

specifying par tnerships with museums worldwide. Reliance on philanthropy and 

corporate sponsorship has increased, although this model has its challenges due to the 

local context’s lack of a strong tradition of philanthropy. However, the EFKS noted that 

donations at the door exceeded expectations when put in place. 

Collecting was impacted by 

inadequate storage conditions and 

availability of storage as a result of 

lack of funding. Permanent gallery 

redevelopments were delayed.     

> Figure 2.6.6. -Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding
> (Oceania)
> Figure 2.6.7. –Alternative Sources of Funding (Oceania) 87

During the COVID -19 crisis, digital tools and web -based development were encouraged 

and implemented by many responding museums. For example, The Powerhouse 

Museum in Sydney has had to scale back some of its programs and exhibitions due to 

reduced funding, while simultaneously increasing its digital content offerings. Similarly, 

the Whanganui Regional Museum has implemented and maintains a digital offering 

through its YouTube account. Finally, institutions such as Te Papa in New Zealand have 

successfully uti lized digital education programs as revenue streams. They offer virtual 

explorer live -feed programs, enhancing both educational outreach and financial 

sustainability. Emerging trends in Oceania include Non -Fungible Tokens (NFTs) 30 and 

virtual gallery tours, which open new revenue streams, although these strategies require 

significant initial investments and technological infrastructure. Digital initiatives have 

become a priority, with museums developing robust online platforms to s howcase their 

collections and engage with a global audience. However, limited funding is available to 

support e -commerce and digital projects. 

Other examples of innovative approaches to creating autonomous revenue include 

dynamic pricing models, like Whirinaki Whare Taonga’s pay -by -donation model for 

exhibitions, which has proven successful in surpassing visitor number projections and 

increasing funds. Te Papa has also considered entrance fees for international travellers. 

Strengthening ties with local communities through outreach programs and partnerships 

with local organizations helps museums garner support and increase visitation. The 

National Museum of Australia engages with indigenous communities and local schools 

to create inclusive educational programs. 

Despite innovative work in this space, the private Kauri Museum has had to sell assets 

(house and land) to pay for an operational funding shortfall, but warned that this solution 

was a one -off measure, offering only a temporary boost. Another notable use of 

commercial development is the Museum of Old and New Art’s winery and the Australian 

National Museum research institute.  

> 30 For more information on NFTs in museums, see: Valeonti et al. 2021.

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES 

§ Local and international partnerships and increased reliance on philanthropy. 

§ Dynamic pricing models: Pay -by -donation and pay -as -you -go. 

§ Community engagement: Inclusive and educational programs and partnering with 

local organizations. 

§ Digital and online initiatives: Developing digital platforms, online exhibitions virtual 

tours, e -commerce and digital educational programs. 

§ Commercial development: Unique commercial ventures, research institutes, winery. 

§ Asset liquidation: Cover funding shortfalls. 88 

2.6.4 Key Findings 

Museums in Oceania, particularly in Australia and New Zealand, have experienced 

significant challenges with regards to public funding. The trend shows a decline in 

government support, pushing museums to explore diversified revenue sources and 

innovative fu nding models to maintain their operations and public engagement and 

continue to fulfill their role. 

Museums have responded by diversifying their income through commercial activities, 

digital engagement, private sponsorships and community partnerships. The shift towards 

digital platforms has been significant, allowing museums to reach a broader audience 

and maintain engagement despite physical constraints. Building strong community 

connections and securing corporate sponsorships are essential strategies for 

sustainability in the face of declining public funds. In fact, despite changes in the last few 

years , responding museums did not report transformations in the financing models of the 

institutions. 

Continuous advocacy for increased government support remains a critical strategy, with 

museums lobbying for more stable and long -term funding commitments. The Museums 

and Galleries Association of Australia (MGAA) advocates for better funding and policies 

to support the sector. 

# 2.7. Conclusion 

The financial landscape of museums varies significantly across regions, reflecting local 

economic conditions, cultural priorities, and governmental policies. In Japan, museums 

face reductions in public funding, while China maintains stable support enabling digital 

expansion. African museums encounter severe financial challenges, relying on self -

generated revenues and private donations. In North America, museums adapt to the 

variability of public funds through the diversification of income sources. Instituti ons in 

Australia and New Zealand focus on expanding commercial activities and digital 

initiatives to offset budget cuts. Museums in Latin America and the Caribbean face 

economic instability and shifting political priorities. 

While Chapter I offers a global quantitative perspective on museum funding, highlighting 

trends such as the decline in public subsidies and the adoption of hybrid models, 

Chapter II takes a more qualitative approach by focusing on the specific responses of 

museums across different regions of the world. 

Chapter I identifies the key factors driving funding decreases, such as economic crises, 

shifts in governmental priorities, and increased competition for limited public resources. 

It establishes that large, well -established institutions with diversified fu nding models 

tend to be more resilient to financial challenges than smaller, regional museums. In 

contrast, Chapter II illustrates how these general trends manifest concretely, 

showcasing examples of innovative strategies like digital transformation, commu nity 

engagement, and the diversification of revenue sources. This qualitative analysis 89 

complements and nuances the quantitative data by demonstrating how museums are 

locally adapting to economic and cultural realities. Thus, the two chapters are 

complementary: the first provides an overarching view of global financial challenges, 

while the second illuminates the practical responses and strategies museums 

implement to address them. 

The combined analyses of Chapters I and II underscore the need for museums to adopt 

sustainable economic models and innovative strategies to overcome financial 

challenges. Digital transformation, the development of strategic partnerships, and 

community eng agement are key levers to strengthen the financial resilience of museums 

and help them fulfill their cultural and educational missions (Frey & Meier 2006; Finnis et 

al. 2011; Woodward 2012). Persistent advocacy for increased government support 

remains cruc ial. Cultural institutions must collectively emphasize the value of museums 

to secure necessary funding, while exploring new revenue sources and strengthening 

digital engagement will be essential to ensure long -term sustainability (Alexander 2018). 

However, while some data indicate that funding has not decreased in certain areas, 

operational costs have increased while budgets, in many cases, remain unchanged. 

Beyond inflation, costs related to areas such as insurance, compliance with 

cybersecurity standards, and sustainability have become critical issues. Museums mus t

therefore adapt to new financial parameters while continuing to fulfill their missions. This 

financial fragility underscores the importance of robust and innovative funding 

strategies, including diversifying revenue sources through private donations, cor porate 

sponsorships, ticket sales, and commercial activities. 

Museums that integrate diversified funding models, embrace digital transformation, and 

strengthen community engagement are better positioned to navigate these challenges 

and thrive. By understanding and adapting to global trends, museums can ensure their 

continued relevance and impact in the preservation of cultural heritage and educational 

contribution to society. 90 

# CHAPTER III - LOOKING AHEAD :

# MUSEUMS’ CHALLENGES 

As guardians of cultural heritage, museums have been undergoing a period of intense 

transformation over the past few decades. As demonstrated in the preceding chapters, 

various factors influence these changes, ranging from financial, environmental and 

soci al sustainability to increased ethical and social responsibilities. Museums play a 

crucial role in preserving and showcasing the cultural and historical narratives of 

societies. However, the dynamic landscape of the 21 st century demands that these 

institut ions adapt to evolving societal expectations, technological advancements and 

global challenges. 

In fact, while the ideal goal of museum management is to continuously expand the scope 

of activities, in reality, difficult choices must be made in allocating limited resources to 

achieve certain objectives effectively, at the expense of others (Feldstein 1991). This 

crucial need to arbitrate between different goals stems from the scarcity, and therefore 

the relative cost, of available resources. This scarcity leads to the necessity of forgoing 

some potentially conflicting objectives in favor of others. Fur thermore, competition has 

intensified with the expansion of heritage to tangible, intangible, and natural elements, 

along with a rise in museums founded by patrons and corporations. These new museums 

compete directly with the public museum network. Based o n the analysis of data 

provided by 59 ICOM National Committees, as well as the 119 selected museums around 

the world, this chapter explores the main challenges and resulting impacts facing 

museums today. 

# 3.1 Financial Sustainability 

Museums are facing broad challenges in ensuring their financial sustainability in an 

uncertain funding landscape. While each region, country, administrative area, and city 

are subject to various trials, and museums therein are subject to significant dispar ities, 

there are common themes that emerge from their struggles. 

Traditional funding sources, such as public grants and private donations, are becoming 

increasingly unpredictable due to global economic fluctuations and shifting government 

budget priorities (CMA 2022). Furthermore, geopolitical instability exacerbates th ese 

difficulties. International tensions, economic sanctions, and diplomatic crises can 

directly impact museum funding, especially for those located in politically sensitive 

regions or reliant on foreign donors. The energy crisis, particularly in Europe, i s a recent 

example of financial pressure on museums. This can have an impact on day -to -day 

operations, and some museums are forced to reduce their opening hours or modify 91 

climate control in their storage facilities, although this is representative only of a minority 

(Ramskjær 2020; Rasmussen 2022b; Ardelius 2022). 

3.1.1 Alternative sources of funding 

Funding will continue to be reduced because the museum is expected to 

generate its own revenue for both operations and projects in the next decade 

or so. (Museum) 

In response to declining public and private funding, museums must innovate and 

diversify their revenue streams. This includes enhancing financial stability and 

engagement by expanding and diversifying their membership programs, diversifying 

revenue streams by utilizing crowdfunding (Prokůpek and Ballarini 2022), monetizing 

digitized collections through NFTs and Art Security Tokens (Valeonti et al. 2021; Prokůpek 

and Ballarini 2022), leveraging museum spaces and brand, employing dynamic pricing 

(Merritt 2020 ), as well as developing corporate partnerships and philanthropy through 

collaborations, sponsorships, grants, and planned giving programs. Some museums 

capitalize on intellectual property by creating innovative products and partnerships, 

enhancing visitor engagement. Licensing and product development with tech companies 

and commercial partners for educational content and merchandise expand reach and 

secure income, while producing educational content and media productions in 

partnership with media companies helps monetize knowledge and fulfill educational 

missions. 

In addition, digital initiatives offer new revenue streams but also present a budgetary 

challenge. Museums can leverage technology to create virtual tours, online exhibitions 

and educational content, attracting a global audience and generating income throu gh 

digital ticket sales and online donations. Notable examples include the British Museum's 

“Museum of the World” interactive online experience and the Smithsonian Institution's 

variety of virtual tours and educational resources. 

However, implementing these digital projects requires significant investment in 

technology and expertise, making it a feasible option primarily for museums with 

substantial financial resources. For smaller institutions, balancing the cost of digital 

innova tion with their limited budgets remains a significant hurdle. Despite being well -

documented and publicized in the media, these alternative funding forms are not 

uniformly developed worldwide or across all museums. 31 Disparities exist between small 

and large museums, as they do not have the same means to accomplish their missions, 

ensure financial stability and boost engagement. 

One notable exception to this trend is China, as shown in the Chinese regional report, 

above, where the government provides generous funding to museums. This financial    

> 31 See Chapter II -Qualitative Analysis, for a detailed discussion. 92

support allows Chinese museums to plan and undertake expansive projects with greater 

confidence. However, reliance on government funding introduces another set of 

challenges : a recessive conservationism prevails. There is a reluctance to be creative in 

th e fast -changing social context. In summary, museums should not be overly reliant on 

the public funding they receive and should be prepared in case government 

disengagement were to occur. 

3.1.2 . Short -Term Budgeting 

A lot of things the museum was preparing to prioritise but funding is always 

the problem (Museum) 

Museums often find themselves operating within the constraints of short -term budgets, 

which impedes their ability to plan and execute ambitious, long -term projects. This 

situation is compounded by the uncertainty surrounding public funding, which varies 

gr eatly depending on political climates and economic conditions. Without assured 

public funding guarantees, museums struggle to commit to long -term initiatives that 

would have the potential to significantly enhance their collections, exhibitions and 

educatio nal programs. In short, there is a certain imbalance between short -term 

investments, emergency funds, boosts for specific initiatives and sustainable funding 

with strategic planning. This includes optimizing existing resources to meet increased 

responsibil ities. Museums are encouraged to streamline operations, implement cost -

effective technologies, and improve energy efficiency to reduce operational costs. 

Ideally, these savings would then be redirected towards core missions such as 

addressing social issues , enhancing community engagement and expanding educational 

programs. In reality, however, cost -saving measures are often only enough to cover the 

basics, leaving little room for additional initiatives. 

In China, there is a very short deadline between fiscal years, which encourages museums 

to budget only for the short term. Another problem facing Chinese museums is the 

narrower scope of themes and subjects that they can address, potentially limiting the 

diversity and inclusivity of exhibitions and programming. Although specific, this situation 

highlights the delicate balance between financial security and creative freedom that 

museums worldwide must navigate. 

3.1.3. Project -Specific Funding 

All areas across the Museum that did not have significant attendance and / 

or performance were reduced in down cycles to balance the budget. 

(Museum) 

Many donors prefer to allocate their contributions to specific projects rather than to the 

general operating budget of museums, such as to improve their digital presence 

(Simmons 2021; City of Pickering 2024) or to protect their collection (Art Africa 2021 ), for 

example. While these project -specific funds are crucial for launching new exhibitions, 

educational programs, and conservation efforts, they present a challenge for long -term 93 

financial planning. Museums can find it difficult to manage their overall financial health 

when much of their funding is tied to specific, often short -term projects rather than 

ongoing operational needs. However, museums can access tools with which to navi gate 

their funding search (Musée et Société en Wallonie 2022). Based on the survey results, 

we can also assume that the rise in the number of private museums over the last two 

decades could make it more difficult for public museums to find private funding, further 

increasing competition between institutions. 

To better anticipate and manage future financial needs, it is crucial to clearly distinguish 

between recurring operating budgets and project -specific budgets. Operating budgets 

cover essential, ongoing expenses, such as staff salaries, utilities, and maint enance, 

while project -specific funds are allocated for defined initiatives. Making this distinction 

helps museums to develop more accurate financial forecasts and ensures that they do 

not overextend themselves on new projects at the expense of their core o perations. 

3.1.4 Professionals and Volunteers 

The funding decrease, along with the bureaucratic system that the museums 

in our country are tied to, has created a lot of uncertainty amongst their 

workers. (National Committee) 

Volunteers play a crucial role in daily operations, from guiding tours and managing visitor 

services to assisting with collections management and educational programs. This is 

neither new nor unique. In the 19 th century, museums in the English -speaking world were 

born out of volunteerism and the associative sphere. However, the same paradigm does 

not fully apply in countries with a Latin tradition, where the model of volunteers as 

partners works well in the case of community museums inspired by the new muse ology 

movement, but creates a dependence which raises questions about the financial viability 

of museums. 

There are also human costs, felt by both paid staff and by volunteers. While many 

volunteers are passionate and dedicated, they are not immune to the stresses and 

demands of their roles. Without proper training and support, volunteers may find their 

work c hallenging, which can affect their effectiveness and satisfaction. Additionally, 

overreliance on volunteers can perpetuate inequities, as only those who can afford to 

work without pay can contribute, potentially limiting the diversity of perspectives and 

experiences within the museum workforce. Finally, managing volunteers can be very 

stressful for museum staff, as they are often full of goodwill, but may not be familiar with 

the demands of museums or the public. This raises the issue of coexistence between 

trained professionals and well -intentioned individuals who may not fully grasp the ethical 

standards of professional practice. 

Furthermore, certain categories of museums operate primarily through the dedication of 

volunteers, creating a unique challenge when seeking additional funding. Justifying the 

need for financial support can be difficult when an institution appears to operat e94 

effectively without a paid staff. So, while they provide essential support, volunteers’ 

involvement often highlights underlying financial struggles facing museums. Reliance on 

unpaid labor to maintain services can mask the true cost of operating these cult ural 

hubs. This reliance can lead to instability, as the availability of volunteers may fluctuate, 

and often means that museums cannot offer consistent, professional -level services 

without adequate funding. As well, it can be difficult to retain profession al staff when 

more attractive salaries are available in the private sector. There is sometimes talk of a 

“museum exodus,” which accelerated after the pandemic, primarily in the United States 

(Halperin 2023). 

3.1.5 Advocacy 

The museums have been doing a lot of lobby to try to have more equal 

amounts and more justice between different museums. (National 

Committee) 

Advocacy is essential for museums in order to enhance their resilience and long -term 

sustainability. By lobbying for public funding, highlighting their cultural, educational, and 

economic benefits with compelling data and success stories, museums can ensur e

continued growth. Building partnerships with educational institutions, corporate entities, 

and community organizations can attract new funding, broaden networks, and address 

local needs (Gilis 2022). Inclusive, participatory community engagement programs and 

public awareness campaigns that emphasize museums' role in preserving cultural 

heritage and addressing contemporary issues can further strengthen public support and 

engagement. 

# 3.2 More with less 

3.2.1 Increased Responsibilities 

We don’t have enough funds to deliver what we are charged to deliver 

(Museum) 

Even when their budget appears stable, museums often face new financial obligations 

such as data security, digital transformation, updated environmental standards and, in 

some cases, compensating board members, while also needing to adapt to new 

imperative s, such as decolonization. All of these additional responsibilities must be met 

without any increase in funding, further straining museums’ financial resources. 32 

This places significant pressure on museum professionals. With limited budgets, 

museum management and staff are frequently required to make difficult choices in  

> 32 As made clear in answers to the quantitative survey; see sections 1.2 and 1.4, above.

95 

allocating resources (Johansson 2020; Puffett 2024). 33 They must prioritize essential 

functions, often at the expense of staff salaries, professional development and long -term 

planning. This can lead to burnout among museum professionals, as they are expected 

to do more with less, which can impact the quality of visitor experiences and educational 

programs. 

The ongoing decolonization movement is also set to profoundly reshape museums by 

challenging their traditional narratives and practices. Museums are increasingly working 

to reframe their narratives to include multiple perspectives, particularly those of 

hi storically marginalized groups. This involves not only changing exhibits but also 

rethinking programming, educational efforts, and community engagement. As calls for 

more representation gain momentum, museums face increased scrutiny for their roles in 

perp etuating colonial histories and practices (Smart 2020; Premium Official News 2021). 

However, pursuing this inclusive approach comes with significant financial challenges 

and additional time demands. 

On the African continent, museums such as the Phuthadikobo Museum in Botswana and 

the National Museum of Tanzania, discussed in the regional report for Africa, strive to 

ensure they are relevant to their communities by fostering cross -cultural understandin g

and promoting both tangible and intangible heritage. These institutions aim to include 

diverse perspectives and engage their communities more effectively. Governments are 

also increasingly investing in restitution projects (Egypt Today 2022; CICG 2023; El Watan 

2024). However, they face significant challenges, such as reduced government funding, 

low visitor numbers, and stagnant programming, making it difficult for African museums 

to sustain their operations and expand their outreach initiatives. 

Decolonization is an inevitable and transformative force for museums in the coming 

decades, with both diplomatic and economic consequences. The movement affects 

international and national relations, particularly when it involves returning collections to 

in digenous communities. This re -evaluation is essential not only for correcting past 

wrongs but also for ensuring that museums remain relevant and respected institutions in 

a more equitable and just society. This process is complex and requires careful 

negot iation and collaboration to ensure that it is conducted respectfully and effectively. 

By embracing decolonization, museums can redefine their roles, fostering a deeper 

understanding and appreciation of diverse cultures and histories.   

> 33 A survey conducted by the Swedish Museum Association among 91 museum directors revealed that 43 of them were
> worried about the future and that many testified to tensions between the social potential of museums and the limited
> resources they must cope with (Sveriges Museer 2021). 96

3.2.2 Museums as third spaces 

There was also the project to strengthen the capacities of museums with a 

view to combating insecurities. (Museum) 

As cultural institutions, museums are increasingly expected to address a wide range of 

social issues, including promoting diversity and inclusion, supporting community 

engagement, and providing educational programs that go beyond traditional exhibits. 

Thes e new and expanded roles require significant resources, staff training, and strategic 

planning. Many museums, already struggling with financial constraints and operational 

challenges, may find it difficult to meet these growing expectations effectively. Th e ability 

of museums to adapt to these new demands while maintaining their core mission of 

preserving and presenting cultural heritage remains a critical question for the sector. The 

model of cultural institutions as mixed -facility sites, with onsite cafes , commercial areas 

and place for socializing, aligns well with the concept of a museum as a “third space” 

(Bloom et al. 2013), with growing numbers of institutions becoming third spaces for their 

communities. 

These third spaces are social environments where people gather and interact outside of 

both home and work. Institutions like the Australian Museum and the National Museum 

of Australia have embraced this role, offering a variety of community and educational 

programs. New Zealand museums such as Te Papa have integrated third space into 

exhibition development. For example, the Te Whare Rākau section within the Te Taiao | 

Nature exhibition offers a low -sensory reading nook where visitors can connect with each 

other and talk over their attitudes and perspectives of nature. In Latin America, the Museu 

de Imagens do Inconsciente has a library and offers therapeutic workshops. 

The idea of the social role of the museum is a transcontinental movement whose 

epicenters have been marked by certain currents, such as Nouvelle Muséologie in Europe 

and in Quebec (Desvallées 1992; Brulon Soares 2015), Sociomuseology in Latin America 

(Brulon Soares 2022), and New Museology in the Commonwealth (Vergo 1989; McCarthy 

2022). These movements fed off each other both in theory and in practice, and shared 

certain values that served to inform the new ICOM museum definition of 2022. However, 

these in itiatives often rely on short -term project -specific funding or require reallocating 

budgets by cutting costs elsewhere, leading to difficult decisions in order to stay aligned 

with their mission. 

We must ask what the long -term impact of adopting this vision and this position has for 

museums within their communities. Will increasing social and educational responsibility 

sustain greater engagement from communities ? Can this in turn strengthen the vi ability 

of museums as public forums ? While it is too early to answer such questions, we must 

think about the funds invested in these initiatives as an investment in the future of 

museums. What kinds of responsibilities and commitments will museums need to take 

on in the future ?97 

3.2.3 Environmental Sustainability 

Museums are very much aware of the uncertainties they are facing. This 

awareness has become much stronger due to COVID, but (… ) other issues 

are also bothering us: climate issues (National Committee) 

A key issue facing museums today is whether their ecological initiatives are sufficient to 

meet the demands of sustainability. As institutions dedicated to preserving cultural 

heritage, museums are under increasing pressure to adopt sustainable practices. This 

includes efforts to reduce their carbon footprint, implement energy -efficient systems, 

and promote environmentally friendly exhibitions and programs. However, the adequacy 

of these efforts in addressing broader sustainability requirements remains a si gnificant 

concern (Janes 2024). 

Many museums are still in the early stages of integrating comprehensive ecological 

strategies. This nascent phase of development raises questions about their ability to fully 

meet necessary sustainability standards, particularly without a dedicated budget for 

such initiatives (Rasmussen 2022a; Lemon 2024; Lovely 2024). Environmental 

sustainability has become a priority for many museums, prompting various eco -friendly 

practices, and adding to their already growing responsibilities. For instance, the 

Canadian Museum of Nature has adopted energy -efficient lighting and waste reduction 

programs, which not only lessen the museum's environmental footprint but also appeal 

to environmentally conscious visitors and donors (Canadian Museum of Nature 2024). 

Furthermore, ICOM's Action Plan for 2030 mandates that museums incorporate 

comprehensive sustainability practices encompassing environmental, social, and 

governance (ESG) aspects. The plan emphasizes the need for governance structures 

based on best practic es to support these initiatives but also represents a financial 

challenge for museums to comply with these requirements. The plan advocates for cost -

effective and flexible strategies, respect for human rights and cultural contexts, and 

recognition of socia l sustainability dimensions such as community engagement and 

equity. Integration with international agreements and a gender -conscious and 

intergenerational approach ensures inclusivity and long -term impact. Phased 

implementation facilitates gradual adaptat ion and resource acquisition, while 

partnerships foster interdisciplinary strategies. Continuous evaluation and adaptation 

are essential to meet evolving standards, balancing museums' cultural missions with 

ESG responsibilities. 

However, experts emphasize that these policies and guidelines are often more 

programmatic than substantive, and their real impact remains to be seen. There are 

ongoing debates about the need to revise exhibition policies to cut costs, the viability of 

main taining a large number of museums, and the feasibility of adopting lower -cost 

collections. These discussions highlight the complexities and challenges museums face 

in their pursuit of sustainability. 98 

# 3.3 Ethical Considerations 

A significant challenge for museums may lie in combining their financial activities with 

their ethical values. As museums increasingly rely on external funding, they must ensure 

that these financial relationships do not compromise their integrity or mission, balancing 

financial necessity with ethical considerations requires careful thoughts, namely on 

selection of partners and transparent practices to maintain public trust and uphold the 

museum's core values. To achieve this, museums should put in place strict guidelines in 

the form of ethical rules. Codes of Ethics are essential (Prokůpek 2025) to deal with 

fundraising policy, acceptance policy, donation, and all financial activities involving 

private and even public partners. 

Ethical guidelines should address three key issues : 1. What kind of businesses and 

industries will a museum seek funding from, and what types will it avoid or reject ? 2. 

What limitations or conditions, if any, will the museum accept from the potential sp onsor 

or donor ? 3. How does the museum plan to assess its business partners and private 

donors ? (Cohen R. [2002], as quoted in : Prokůpek 2025). 

3.3.1 Partnerships 

The most successful museums are funded by external associations. They 

have financial partners such as banks and large corporations, and 

sometimes they are funded by cooperation services. (National Committee) 

Museums must navigate complex ethical choices regarding their financial partnerships. 

They also face challenges in obtaining mutually beneficial partnerships with 

corporations, given their responsibility to their communities, stakeholders, and the 

public t o remain unbiased and independent from external and internal censorship which 

is often associated with the for -profit sector (Proteau 2018). 

Many examples of unacceptable partnerships could be cited. While European museums 

are increasingly pressured to become financially independent, this often comes at a cost, 

as institutions face intense scrutiny from activists and the public regarding their funding 

sources (Jardonnet 2019). For instance, the British Museum has faced protests for its 

sponsorship deals with oil companies, highlighting the ongoing tension between financial 

necessity and ethical standards (Polonsky 2022). Critics argue that such partnerships 

can create a conflict of interest, especially if the sponsor's business practices are at odds 

with the museum's mission or values. These situations underscore the need for 

museums to carefully vet their financial partners and to consider the l ong -term 

implications of these relationships on their public image and ethical standing (Prokůpek 

and Ballarini 2022). 99 

3.3.2 Philanthropy and Donations 

Most museums are under the ministry of culture who has a rather small 

portion of the national budget. They therefore struggle to find finances and 

sometimes rely on external donors (National Committee) 

While philanthropic support can provide crucial funding, it too can occasion ethical 

challenges (Mateos -Rusillo 2019; Merritt 2019). Donations from controversial donors or 

organizations can lead to public backlash and damage a museum’s reputation. For 

inst ance, the Sackler family, associated with opioids and the subsequent crisis (AFP 

2019), has made significant donations to various cultural institutions, resulting in intense 

public scrutiny and calls for museums to sever ties with the family. This situatio n

illustrates the delicate balance museums must maintain between accepting necessary 

funds and upholding ethical standards. 

3.3.3 Accessibility 

Other financial resources necessary for museum operations include 

admission fee income, income from museum shops, and donations from 

private companies. (National Committee) 

Raising admission costs may pose ethical challenges for museums (Althaus et al. 2024). 

While higher admission fees can help generate much -needed revenue, they can also limit 

access for lower -income visitors, contradicting the inclusive mission many museums 

strive to uphold (Stephens 2024). This tension between generating revenue and ensuring 

accessibility reflects a broader clash of values within the museum sector. The 

implementation of variable or dynamic pricing strategies for admission fees has been 

iden tified as a developing trend in museums (Mairesse 2005; Mairesse 2007). 

Museums must find a balance that allows them to sustain their operations while 

remaining accessible to the public. There are examples of free -entry museums, such as 

the well -known Smithsonian Institution (Smithsonian Institution, n.d.), but mixed models 

ar e emerging wherein museums charge some entry fees to remain financially viable, 

while attempting to stay inclusive (Stephens 2024). This can involve offering free general 

admission but charging for certain exhibitions or events. Some museums have tried oth er 

strategies, such as offering free admission days, discounted tickets, or tiered pricing 

based on income (Taylor 2020). In Canada, particularly in Quebec, museum entry is free 

on the first Sunday of each month. The Louvre in Paris offers free admission o n certain 

days or for specific demographics, such as young people and educators (Musée du 

Louvre, n.d.). However, the dissensions that followed the increase in the general tariff in 

this museum clearly show how sensitive is the issue of admission fees (Rad io France 

2024). 

The pay -as -you -stay model has been proposed as an alternative solution (Frey and 

Steiner 2012). The Weserburg Museum of Modern Art, which implemented such a model, 

saw their number of visits increase by 42% compared with the same period the previous 100 

year (Merritt 2020). In Brazil, as shown in the regional report, some community museums 

offer free admission to local residents while charging admission fees to tourists. Charging 

international visitors is a well -researched field in New Zealand museums (Da vidson and 

McCarthy 2018). But as the Oceania report points out “It is, at this point, difficult to 

ascertain whether changes in the operating environment for New -Zealand museums 

would make pricing for international visitors a viable source of revenue.” Fu rthermore, 

the report for Oceania discusses the impacts of such measures on local people, for 

example, the implications of tiered pricing on the relationship of museums with local iwi 

(indigenous Māori communities). Māori often reside outside of their trad itional rohe 

(homeland) and the proposed pricing policy could see iwi pay to visit taonga (their own 

cultural treasures). This is likely to be highly controversial, since most New Zealand 

museums acknowledge that they do not own taonga, but are preserving them on behalf 

of tribes. 

Another form of admission fee revenue comes from annual memberships, which allow 

visitors an unlimited number of visits. While common in some countries, this is not the 

most developed form of alternative funding in the world. 34 This appears to be a 

sustainable model which generally increases visitor satisfaction (Rushton 2017). In 

addition, annual membership revenues can be used to maintain general admission 

prices for day visitors. Partnerships can also make it possible to offe r free entry to 

underprivileged demographics. The Charles Dickens Museum in London has a

partnership -linked free -entry policy in association with charities and community groups 

(Stephens 2024). 

Although museums are innovating their entrance fee strategies, it is difficult to predict 

their future effectiveness. Questions remain : Will they prove sufficient for museums to 

be inclusive and to maintain financial sustainability ? Does increasing admis sion fees 

have a significant impact on revenues ? Might these strategies seriously harm the 

democratization and accessibility of museums ? At present, we lack the necessary data 

to understand the real impacts of increasing admission fees. Furthermore, whil e some 

institutions have implemented dynamic paying models, it is difficult to evaluate their 

impacts over the long -term. 

3.3.4 Governance 

Notifications of budgetary credits remain a secret in the hands of museum 

directors and no report accessible in print or online on the budgetary 

management of museums. (National Committee) 

Effective governance provides strategic direction and oversight, with well -structured and 

diversified boards playing a crucial role. A board composed of members with varied 

expertise can help set long -term goals and priorities, offering comprehensive 

persp ectives and innovative solutions. Strategic directions align museums’ resources   

> 34 See Chapter II, all figures pertaining to Autonomous Revenue for more information on how this is used by museums. 101

and efforts with their mission and vision, enabling the efficient achievement of 

objectives. Ensuring the transparency of funding sources and sponsorships is crucial for 

maintaining public trust. Museums should regularly report on the sources and uses of 

their funds through publicly accessible financial statements and annual reports. 

Transparency helps to build public trust and demonstrates museums’ commitment to 

ethical practices. Additionally, establishing an accountability framework, such as an 

ethics co mmittee, can help ensure oversight of funding practices and adherence to 

ethical guidelines. 

# 3.4 Conclusion 

Museums face a pivotal moment, in which financial sustainability, environmental 

responsibilities, ethical considerations and decolonization imperatives pose critical 

challenges. Innovative funding strategies, such as digital initiatives and corporate 

partn erships, are crucial for navigating financial uncertainties. ICOM’s Action Plan for 

2030 provides a framework for environmental sustainability, yet continuous evaluation is 

necessary. 

Balancing ethical integrity with financial needs, managing volunteer reliance, and 

meeting increased social responsibilities require sustainable operational models. The 

journey towards sustainability is ongoing, demanding reassessment and strategic 

plannin g. The next chapter will propose specific calls for action to further these efforts 

and ensure that museums fulfill their cultural missions while adapting to contemporary 

challenges. Through strategic advocacy, innovative practices, and community 

engagemen t, museums can enhance their resilience and societal role. 102 

# CHAPTER IV – PROPOSED CALLS FOR ACTION 

The analysis and findings of the previous chapters shed light on the significant financial 

challenges confronting museums worldwide. With public funding in decline, rising 

operational costs, and increasing responsibilities, museums are at a pivotal moment. In 

response to these issues, IRAPFM has outlined a series of calls for action aimed at key 

stakeholders, including museums, ICOM National Committees, ICOM International, 

governments, and civil society. These actions are intended to support financial 

sustainability, enhance governance, and ensure that museums can remain resilient and 

continue fulfilling their cultural and educational missions despite the evolving pressures 

they face. 

# 4.1 To Museums Throughout the World 

In light of the critical financial challenges facing museums globally, this section aims to 

offer concrete proposed calls for action to support the sustainability and long -term 

viability of these cultural institutions. Museums, now more than ever, must evo lve in how 

they plan strategically, secure funding, and maintain public trust. 

The following proposed actions encourage museums worldwide to not only adapt to 

financial pressures but also take proactive steps aligned with their missions and 

mandates, within the limits of their resources. Museums can draw inspiration from real -

world strategies already implemented in various regions. For instance, the National 

Museum of Kenya has collaborated with international organizations to secure grants for 

conservation and educational initiatives, which has strengthened its ability to preserve 

and promote cultural heritage. Similarly, museums in Brazil have actively engaged with 

local communities to co -create programs, a strategy that has enhanced both funding 

opportunities and public participation. 

In North America, many museums are increasingly diversifying their revenue streams to 

ensure financial stability. A notable example is the Monastère des Augustines, which 

generates independent income through an attached hotel, providing a sustainable 

sourc e of funding. These examples demonstrate that creative and tailored approaches 

can help museums remain resilient and thrive as essential pillars of cultural heritage, 

education, and community engagement. Therefore, IRAPFM proposed the following calls 

for a ction, to the extent of museums’ means: 

4.1.1 That museums should implement and maintain ongoing and clear strategic 

planning, regularly reviewed and amended to remain aligned with their mission ,103 

and that they conduct annual evaluat ions of new financial approaches to 

establish sustainable and long -term mechanisms that ensure financial stability. 

4.1.2 That museums should continue to explore and implement alternative financing 

strategies to ensure their financial sustainability , critically assess the methods in 

place, adapting them to their specific contexts , and innovate with new funding 

methods rather than relying on traditional approaches. 

4.1.3 That museums should adopt governance guidelines in order to promote 

accountability and transparency. 

4.1.4 That museums should implement clear ethical guidelines for donations and 

partnerships in order to maintain public trust and ensure that that all sources of 

funding are in conformity with museums ’ mission and mandate without real or 

presumed conflicts of interest. 

4.1.5 That museums should adopt advocacy strategies to secure government support .

4.1.6 That museums should establish strategic partnerships. 

4.1.7 That museums , in their annual reports, should describe accurately the complete 

range of functions they fulfill when addressing their financial requests. 

# 4.2 To ICOM National Committees and Museums’ Associations 

In response to the ongoing financial and operational challenges faced by museums, the 

following proposed calls for action are aimed at ICOM National Committees and Museum 

Associations. These initiatives are designed to strengthen their support for museums as 

they adapt to changing financial lands capes and sustainability goals. For example, many 

institutions are in the early stages of integrating ecological strategies, such as the 

Canadian Museum of Nature, which has implemented energy -efficient lighting and waste 

reduction programs, aligning with ICOM ’s sustainability objectives. Advocacy remains 

critical, as illustrated by the Museums and Galleries Association of Australia (MGAA), 

which lobbies for more substantial public funding amidst shrinking government support. 104 

By focusing on the dissemination of key information, advocating for increased 

government funding, and providing essential tools and training, ICOM National 

Committees and Museum Associations can ensure museums are better equipped to 

navigate current and fu ture challenges while remaining aligned with their core missions. 

Therefore, IRAPFM proposed the following calls for action: 

4.2.1 That ICOM National Committees should ensure the disseminati on of all 

information pertaining to new funding approaches. 

4.2.2 That ICOM National Committees should support museums in implementing 

sustainability guidelines. 

4.2.3 That ICOM National Committees should advocate for higher government funding 

for museums. 

4.2.4. That ICOM National Committees should put in place tools and training (accessible 

online) on critical topics (e.g. funding, governance, ethics, partnerships) in order 

to better support museums ’ strategies and sustainability. 

# 4.3 To ICOM 

As outlined in the previous chapters, given the ongoing challenges and opportunities 

museums are facing worldwide, the following proposed calls for action focus on ICOM. 

These initiatives aim to enhance ICOM’s support for museums by fostering innovative 

fundi ng strategies, promoting sustainable practices, and refining ethical guidelines. For 

example, museums often confront complex ethical dilemmas, particularly when 

collaborating with external organizations. A notable instance is the criticism directed at 

the British Museum over sponsorship agreements with controversial industries, 

underscoring the importance of ICOM’s guidelines in upholding transparency and public 

trust. 

By ensuring the dissemination of key reports, regularly monitoring trends, and fostering 

collaboration among National Committees, ICOM can help museums stay adaptable, 

informed, and aligned with best practices. These efforts will better equip museums to 

ad dress both present and future challenges while continuing to fulfill their essential 

cultural missions. Therefore, IRAPFM proposed the following calls for action: 

4.3.1 That ICOM should ensure the dissemination of the IRAPFM Report, including 

through webinars and conferences, in order to publicize all innovative approaches 

taken by museums throughout the world in relation to alternative funding 

strategies. 105 

4.3.2 That ICOM should explore ways to support museums in implementing 

sustainability guidelines. 

4.3.3 That ICOM should ensure that all National Committees maintain accessible 

websites. 

4.3.4 That ICOM should assist museums in keeping abreast of emerging trends and 

models by regularly monitoring trends and disseminating up -to -date information 

to museums. 

4.3.5 That ICOM ’s Ethics Committee should propose, either in the new Code of Ethics 

or in revised guidelines on fundraising, specific directions for museums ’

partnerships, donations, etc. 

4.3.6 That ICOM should monitor emerging trends and models in museum management 

and sustainability in order for museums to remain updated and agile. 

4.3.7 That ICOM should gather and publish, with the support of National Committees, 

statistics on the number and types of museums in each member country. 

4.3.8 That ICOM should allocate budgets for further research on museum funding. 

# 4.4 To All Levels of Government 

Building on the insights and challenges highlighted in previous chapters, the following 

proposed calls for action are directed at all levels of government. Museums play an 

essential role in preserving cultural heritage and fostering community engagement, yet 

they face mounting financial and operational pressures. It is imperative for governments 

to provide sustained, transparent, and equitable support to ensu re these institutions ’

long -term sustainability. For instance, museums across all regions analyzed have 

embraced digital transformation, using virtual exhibitions and online educational 

programs to enhance financial sustainability. This highlights the impo rtance of 

government support for such initiatives. Furthermore, the experiences from the COVID -

19 pandemic —where governments like those in Canada and Europe provided 

operational grants to cover essential costs during closures —underscore the necessity of 

in dexed funding that accounts for economic shifts. 

By implementing multi -year grants, indexing funding to economic changes, and fostering 

digital transformation, governments can empower museums to thrive and continue 

fulfilling their vital missions. These actions will help museums navigate the complexities 

of today’s financial landscape while remaining resilient and responsive to future 

challenges. Therefore, IRAPFM proposed the following calls for action: 106 

4.4.1 That governments should put i n place multi -year grants allowing museums to plan 

more effectively for the long term. 

4.4.2 That governments should index museum funding to inflation and econom ic 

fluctuations, as well as provide accessible tracking and predictive tools enabling 

more efficient planning .

4.4.3 That governments should provide governance guidelines and financial support 

that will enable museums of all sizes to appoint administrative boards that can 

guide their strategies through varied expertise and skills. 

4.4.4 That governments should provide the necessary resources for museums to meet 

current standards and ensuing increased responsibilities while maintaining their 

achievements and missions. 

4.4.5 That governments should allocate recurrent budgets for ongoing digital 

transformation in order to help museums reach new audiences and enhance their 

online presence and services. 

4.4.6 That governments should encourage museum volunteering and memberships 

through special programs. 

4.4.7 That governments should ensure a balanced diversity of museum types by 

directing s upervisory ministries to prevent the multiplication of museums with 

similar mandates within the same territories and communities. 

4.4.8 That governments should ensure equitable financing for museums, regardless of 

their status, and that this financing be endowed with maximum transparency in 

order to guard against discrepancies. 

# 4.5. To Civil Society 

Considering the crucial role museums play in preserving culture, fostering education, 

and engaging communities, the involvement of civil society is essential to their 

sustainability. The following proposed calls for action emphasize the importance of 

colle ctive responsibility in supporting museums. Civil society must take an active role in 

advocating for museums, contributing to their financial and operational health, and 

participating in their activities. Institutions like Casa Geyer and the Museo Nacional de la 

Medicina Veterinaria demonstrate how active associations can play a pivotal role in 

securing substantial funding, underscoring the importance of community engagement in 

sustaining museums. The Art Gallery of Ontario has significantly increased its r evenue 

through dynamic membership programs, while the Museo Nacional Casa del Acuerdo, 

adopting a hybrid funding model, established a friends' association to attract private 107 

contributions. Similarly, the Museu de Favela partnered with universities to develop 

public outreach programs, expanding its network and paving the way for future 

collaborations. 

By strengthening ties with museum organizations and actively engaging with these 

institutions, civil society can help ensure that museums continue to thrive and fulfill their 

vital missions for generations to come. Therefore, IRAPFM proposed the following calls 

for action: 

4.5.1 That civil society should fulfill its duty by actively protecting and advocating for 

museums in the media and at all levels of government. 

4.5.2 That civil society should support ICOM National Committees and Museum 

Associations through membership, participation and resource mobilization when 

possible. 

4.5.3 That individuals should become members of Friends of Museums in order to 

promote and sustain museum institutions. 

4.5.4 That civil society participate in museum activities to support their educational and 

cultural missions. 

# Conclusion 

The proposed calls for action outlined in this chapter are crucial steps toward ensuring 

the long -term financial stability, governance, and sustainability of museums worldwide. 

As outlined in the preceding sections, the financial pressures museums face are 

immense, and addressing these challenges requires coordinated efforts from multiple 

stakeholders, including museums themselves, ICOM, governments, and civil society. 

Each of these groups has a critical role to play in fostering the resilience and dynamism 

of museums. 

Museums must innovate, refine their governance models, and adopt new strategies for 

financial sustainability, while ICOM and its National Committees need to provide strong 

leadership and support through advocacy, training, and information dissemination. 

Go vernments, meanwhile, must recognize the essential role museums play in cultural 

preservation and community engagement, ensuring they receive adequate, transparent, 

and equitable funding. Finally, civil society has a key responsibility to actively support 

museums through participation, advocacy, and resource mobilization. 108 

These proposed calls for action, if fully embraced, have the potential to create a stronger, 

more adaptable museum sector, capable of navigating the challenges of today’s 

economic landscape and ensuring its continued relevance and impact in the future. 

Thr ough collaboration and shared commitment, the diverse stakeholders can help 

museums fulfill their cultural, educational, and social missions for generations to come. 

The future of museums depends on collective action, and the time to act is now. 109 

# CONCLUSION 

This report on museum funding around the world demonstrates that these institutions 

are at a critical crossroads, facing unprecedented financial, ethical and operational 

challenges that threaten their sustainability and ability to fulfill their cultural and 

educational missions. Based on quantitative and qualitative data collected from 

museums across five continents, this report highlights the crucial issues and innovative 

strategies shaping the future of these essential institutions. 

More specifically, this research project aimed to explore and report on four key issues :

the global understanding of the term “public funding”, whether the decline in public 

funding for museums is a global phenomenon, the extent and impact of these declines 

and, finally, how museums are responding, particularly in terms of developing 

sustainable new business models. 

To answer these questions, a mixed methodological approach was selected, combining 

both quantitative and qualitative surveys. The quantitative survey targeted ICOM National 

Committees in order to gather statistical data on the current state and recent evol ution 

of public funding and other museum funding sources. The qualitative survey, conducted 

by international experts, explored possible solutions and innovative approaches to the 

decline in public funding. This methodology provided a comprehensive and nuan ced 

understanding of the challenges and opportunities in museum funding worldwide. 

However, there are some limitations to this research, which include the variability of 

responses and the representativeness of the collected data. On the one hand, National 

Committees may not always have access to periodic statistical data to capture the 

evolution of the financial situation of museums. On the other hand, it was difficult, if not 

impossible, to identify and obtain answers from the many diverse government m inistries 

responsible for museums. Therefore, ministerial data was not compiled. 

Since the 2008 financial crisis, public funding for museums has declined steadily, a 

situation further aggravated by the COVID -19 pandemic. This decline has been uneven 

across regions, creating significant global disparities in museum funding. Traditional 

funding sources, such as government grants and private donations, are becoming 

increa singly unpredictable due to economic fluctuations and changing government 

budget priorities. This instability underscores the necessity for museums to diversify their 

revenue streams and develop innovative funding models. Additionally, museums are 

facing i ncreased responsibilities that extend beyond exhibition and conservation. They 

now also contend with competition, greater social responsibility and the need to engage 

in community outreach, education and innovation to remain relevant and sustainable. 110 

In response to these financial pressures, museums have demonstrated remarkable 

resilience and adaptability. Digital transformation has emerged as a crucial strategy, 

enabling museums to reach a broader audience and generate revenue through online 

platforms , virtual tours and digital exhibitions. Strengthening community engagement 

through outreach and educational programs has helped to build a loyal visitor base and 

to attract local support. Museums also leverage commercial activities, such as ticket 

sales, retail operations, and unique ventures, including adjacent hotels and research 

institutes, to increase their revenue. Additionally, seeking private and corporate 

donations has become an essential part of the funding mix. 

As museums increasingly rely on external funding, they must navigate complex ethical 

issues to maintain public trust and uphold their mission. Establishing strict guidelines for 

accepting donations and ensuring transparency in all financial transactions ar e essential 

means to avoid conflicts of interest and maintain credibility. Museums must balance 

financial necessity with ethical considerations, selecting partners and sponsors that 

align with their core values. 

To secure their future, IRAPFM has proposed calls for museums and other stakeholders, 

such as ICOM and its Committees, governments, and civil society, in order to enhance 

and safeguard museum funding. Among the propositions are such avenues as 

diversifying revenue streams by expanding membership programs, utilizing 

crowdfunding, monetizing digitized collections, and developing corporate partnerships. 

Other vital approaches include securing government support through advocacy for multi -

year grants, budget adjustments for inflation, and re sources for digital transformation, as 

well as encouraging volunteerism and memberships through special programs. 

Maintaining ethical governance by establishing guidelines for donations and ensuring 

transparency in all funding sources and sponsorship deals is essential for public trust. 

Finally, enhancing advocacy and community engagement through lobbying for better 

government support, highlighting cultural, educational and economic benefits, and 

building strong community connections through inclusive and p articipatory programs 

will further contribute to strengthen museums. 

In summary, museums are at a crucial moment as they struggle with financial 

sustainability, environmental responsibilities, ethical considerations and 

decolonization. By adopting innovative funding strategies, strengthening community and 

government engagem ent, and maintaining ethical integrity museums can navigate 

financial uncertainties and continue to enrich communities globally. Continuous 

reassessment, strategic planning and global collaboration are essential to ensure the 

resilience and sustainability of museums. Through collective efforts and innovative 

practices, museums can overcome, adapt and thrive in the face of financial challenges, 

continuing to play a vital role in preserving cultural heritage and promoting social growth. 111 

SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 

Based on the analysis presented in this report, the IRAPFM suggests the following 

lines of inquiry for future research with a view to further strengthening museums' 

resilience:  

> §

Disparities in funding among different types of museums and the relation 

between resources and expenditures.  

> §

Impacts of alternative funding, particularly digital initiatives and entrance 

fees.  

> §

Exploration and comparison of museums’ financial management and 

governance models.  

> §

Volunteers in museums: their role, their significance and their impact on 

museum budgets.  

> §

Funding and the new mandates of museums, namely environmental 

concerns, decolonization and the museum as a third space.  

> §

New funding models for museums.  

> §

Partnerships between civil society and museums. 112 

# BIBLIOGRAPHY 

AAM. N.d. “American Alliance of Museums.” American Alliance of Museums. Accessed August 

2, 2024. https ://www.aam -us.org/. 

Abungu, Lorna. 2005. “Museums and Communities in Africa : Facing the New Challenges.” 

Public Archaeology 4 (2) : 151 –54. https ://doi.org/10.1179/146551805793156293. 

Adeyemi, Abigail. 2023. “African Museums Power : Promoting Cultural Heritage and Unity in 

Africa.” MoMAA | Affordable Art Gallery & Lifestyle (blog). July 24, 2023. 

https ://momaa.org/ 112 anada 112 -museums -power/. 

AFP. 2019. “Au Louvre, manifestation contre le financement du musée par l’argent des 

opiacés.” Le Point, July 1, 2019. https://www.lepoint.fr/societe/au -louvre -

manifestation -contre -le -financement -du -musee -par -l-argent -des -opiaces -01 -07 -2019 -

2322025_23.php 

Alexander, Edward P., Mary Alexander, and Juilee Decker. 2017. Museums in Motion : An 

Introduction to the History and Functions of Museums . Third edition. American 

Association for State And Local History Book Series. Lanham, Maryland : Rowman; 

Littlefield. 

Alexander, Victoria. 2018. “Enterprise Culture and the Arts : Neoliberal Values and British Art 

Institutions.” In Art and the Challenge of Markets Volume 1 : National Cultural Politics 

and the Challenges of Marketization and Globalization , edited by Victoria Alexander, 

Samuli Hägg, Simo Häyrynen, and Erkki Sevänen, 1 st edition, 67 –93. Sociology of the 

Arts. New York, NY : Nature America Ltd. 

Althaus, Maike, Stefanie J. M. Mueller, and Dennis Kundisch. 2024. “What Price Culture ? – A

Taxonomy of the Admission Pricing Policy at Museums.” International Journal of Cultural 

Policy 30 (3) : 392 –407. https ://doi.org/10.1080/10286632.2023.2217198. 

American Alliance of Museums. 2017. “Museums as Economic Engines : A National Report.” 

https ://www.aam -us.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/04/American -Alliance -of -

Museums -web.pdf 

Araújo Santos, Angelo Oswaldo. 2012. “Museums in the Process of Social Change : The Role of 

IBRAM.” Museum International 64 (1 –4) : 13 –17. https ://doi.org/10.1111/muse.12022. 

Ardelius, Gunnar. 2022. “Gunnar Ardelius : Dags att satsa på Länsmuseerna och hela Sverige.” 

Sveriges Museer. August 12, 2022. https ://sverigesmuseer.se/debatt/gunnar -ardelius -

dags -att -satsa -pa -lansmuseerna -och -hela -sverige/. 

Arpin, Roland. 2002. Territoires culturels . Montréal : Bellarmin. 

Art Africa. 2021. “National Museums of Kenya Receives Grant from Bank of America Art 

Conservation Project.” August 13, 2021. https ://artafricamagazine.org/national -

museums -of -kenya -receives -grant -from -bank -of -america -art -conservation -project/. 

Bergeron, Yves. 2009 -2010. “Museums and the Crisis. Tendancias en los museos 

norteamericanos.” Museos.es , Ministry of Culture ( France ), no 5 -6, 58 -67. 

Berthon, Alice. 2020. “Comment l’histoire Peut -Elle Devenir Un Objet de Consommation Dans 

Les Musées Japonais ?” Extrême -Orient, Extrême -Occident , no. 44 (December) : 119 –

48. https://doi.org/10.4000/extremeorient.1821. 

Bérubé, Stéphanie. 2023. “Gérer comme une augustine.” La Presse , December 29, 2023. 

https://www.lapresse.ca/affaires/2023 -12 -29/monastere -des -augustines/gerer -

comme -une -augustine.php 113 

Blais, Christine. 2023. “The market as a medium Artistic practices and institutions on the 

blockchain, between 2011 and 2021 / Le marché comme medium Les pratiques 

artistiques et les institutions sur la blockchain, entre 2011 et 2021.” PhD diss., 

Université de Montréal. https://papyrus .bib.umontreal.ca/xmlui/handle/1866/32772 

Bloom, David, Ruth Cuadra, Johanna Fassbender, Elizabeth Welden -Smith, and Shelby 

Graham. 2013. “Foresight Research Report : Museums as Third Place.” 

https ://art.ucsc.edu/sites/default/files/CAMLF_Third_Place_Baseline_Final.pdf. 

Bollo, Sofia, and Yu Zhang. 2017. “Policy and Impact of Public Museums in China : Exploring 

New Trends and Challenges.” Museum International 69 (3 –4) : 26 –37. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/muse.12170. 

Britto, Clovis. 2019. “ ‘Nossa Maçã é Que Come Eva’ : A Poética de Manoel de Barros e Os 

Lugares Epistêmicos Das Museologias Indisciplinadas No Brasil.” PhD diss., 

Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias. 

Brulon Soares, Bruno. 2015. “L’invention et La Réinvention de La Nouvelle Muséologie.” 

ICOFOM Study Series , no. 43a (June) : 57 –72. https ://doi.org/10.4000/iss.563. 

——— . 2022. “Sociomuséologie.” In Dictionnaire de Muséologie , edited by François Mairesse, 

603 –4. Paris : ICOM; Armand Colin. 

Canadian Heritage. 2019. “Government of Canada Survey of Heritage Institutions : 2019.” 

https ://www.canada.ca/en/ 113 anada 113 t-heritage/corporate/publications/general -

publications/about -survey -heritage -institutions/2019 -report.html 

Canadian Museum of Nature. 2024. “2022 -2023 Annual Report.” 

Chong, Derrick. 2019. “Art, Finance, Politics, and the Art Museum as a Public Institution.” In 

Museum Marketization edited by Karin Ekström, 98 -114. Abingdon : Routledge. 

CICG, Centre d ’Information et de Communication gouvernementale, Côte d ’Ivoire 

. 2023. “Préservation des mosquées de style soudanais du nord ivoirien, patrimoine mondial de 

l’UNESCO : un protocole d’accord signé entre la Côte d’Ivoire et les États -Unis.” 

GOUV.CI. December 1, 2023. http ://www.gouv.ci/_actualite -

article.php ?recordID=16053. 

City of Pickering. 2024. “Pickering Museum Village Launches New Virtual Blacksmithing 

Exhibit.” City of Pickering. March 15, 2024. 

https ://www.pickering.ca//Modules/News/index.aspx ?newsId=a3d48e13 -bd2f -437d -

aa69 -89c059dedede&lang=en. 

CMA, Canadian Museums Association. 2022. “Le Conflit Ukrainien, La Crise Du Logement et 

l’incertitude Fiscale Définissent Le Budget Fédéral.” Canadian Museums Association. 

April 11, 2022. 

https ://museums.ca/site/aboutthecma/newsandannouncements/april112022 ?langua 

ge=fr_FR&. 

Davidson, Lee, and Conal McCarthy. 2018. “Lies, Damn Lies and Statistics : A History of 

Museum Visits in Australasia.” Current Trends 28 (1) : 36 –55. 

Desvallées, André. 1992. “Présentation.” In Vagues : Une Anthologie de La Nouvelle 

Muséologie , Vol. 1, edited by André Desvallées, 15 -40. Lyon : Presses Universitaires de 

Lyon. 

Effiboley , Emery Patrick. 2022. “Les Musées Africains de La Fin Du XIXe Siècle à Nos Jours : Des 

Apparats de La Modernité Occidentale.” Afrika Zamani, no. 22 –23 (January) : 19 –40. 

https ://doi.org/10.57054/az.vi22 -23.1802. 

Egypt Today. 2022. “Egypt Offers Assistance to Nigeria in Preserving Smuggled Benin Artifacts.” 

EgyptToday , January 27, 2022. https ://www.egypttoday.com/Article/4/112291/Egypt -

offers -assistance -to -Nigeria -in -preserving -smuggled -Benin -artifacts. 114 

Ekström, Karin M., ed. 2020. Museum Marketization : Cultural Institutions in the Neoliberal Era. 

First published. Mastering Management in the Creative and Cultural Industries. London; 

New York : Routledge. 

El Watan . 2024. “74 Millions de Dinars Pour La Valorisation Du Site Archéologique de Timgad,” 

January 14, 2024. https://elwatan -dz.com/74 -millions -de -dinars -pour -la -valorisation -

du -site -archeologique -de -timgad .

European Group on Museum Statistics. N. d. “Statistics.” European Group on Museum 

Statistics. Accessed April 15, 2024. https ://www.egmus.eu/en/statistics/ 

European Museum Academy. 2023. “National Museum Reports 2023.” 

https ://europeanmuseumacademy.eu/how -were -museums -doing -in -europe -in -2023 -

ema -national -reports/ 

Feldstein, Martin S., ed. 1991. The Risk of Economic Crisis. A National Bureau of Economic 

Research Conference Report . Chicago : University of Chicago Press. 

Finnis, Jane, Seb Chan, and Rachel Clements. 2011. “How to Evaluate Online Success ? :

Report from the Culture24 Action Research Project.” 

Fleming, Tom. 2018. “Brazilian Creative Economy.” 

https ://www.britishcouncil.org.br/sites/default/files/ 114 anada 114 te _creative_econom 

y_online_sem4_new -fg.pdf 

Frey, Bruno S., and Stephan Meier. 2006. “Cultural Economics.” In A Companion to Museum 

Studies , edited by Sharon Macdonald, 398 –414. Blackwell Companions in Cultural 

Studies 12. Malden, MA : Blackwell Pub. 

Frey, Bruno S., and Lasse Steiner. 2012. “Pay as You Go : A New Proposal for Museum Pricing.” 

Museum Management and Curatorship 27 (3) : 223 –35. 

https ://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2012.701994. 

Gilis, A., Moriarty, L., Prokůpek, M., Scott, C.A., van de Bunte, H. (2022) Museum Leadership –

Taking the Pulse 2021. INTERCOM. https://intercom .mini.icom.museum/wp -

content/uploads/sites/62/2022/04/PULSE -2021 -ENG_compressed_compressed -

compressed.pdf 

Ginsburgh, Victor, and Yann Nicolas. 2022. “Économie Muséale.” In Dictionnaire de 

Muséologie , edited by François Mairesse, 230 –35. Paris : ICOM; Armand Colin. 

Greffe, Xavier, Anne Krebs, and Sylvie Pflieger. 2017. “The Future of the Museum in the Twenty -

First Century : Recent Clues from France.” Museum Management and Curatorship 32 

(4) : 319 –34. https ://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2017.1313126. 

Guiragossian , Olivia. 2024. “Representing the museum phenomenon and its evolution 

Statistical and comprehensive approach to the notion of museum.” PhD. Diss., 

University of Paris 3 Sorbonne Nouvelle. 

Halperin, Julia. 2023. “There Is No End to the Museum Exodus.” The Art Newspaper , 2023, 

December 28. https ://www.theartnewspaper.com/2023/12/28/there -is -no -end -to -the -

museum -exodus 

Hervé, Fabrice, Rémi Mencarelli, and Mathilde Pulh. 2011. “L’évolution de La Structure de 

Financement Des Organisations Muséales : Éclairage Sur Le Rôle Des Endowment 

Funds.” Management International 15 (3) : 45 –55. https ://doi.org/10.7202/1005432ar. 

Hickey, G. 2019. “The Glenbow Museum’s Controversial Partnership with BP Oil.” Museum 

Ethics Journal 12 (4) : 102 –17. 

ICOM. 2020. « Musées, professionnels des musées et COVID -19 ». https://icom .museum/wp -

content/uploads/2020/05/Rapport -mus%C3%A9es -et -COVID -19 -1.pdf 

ICOM. 2022. “Museum Definition.” International Council of Museums .

https ://icom.museum/en/resources/standards -guidelines/museum -definition/. 

ICOM -IMREC. N.d. “ICOM -IMREC.” International Council of Museums. Accessed July 11, 2024. 

https ://icom.museum/en/research/icom -imrec/ .115 

Institut de la statistique du Québec, Observatoire de la Culture. 2007. “État des lieux du 

patrimoine, des institutions muséales et des archives. Cahier 3 Les institutions 

muséales du Québec, redécouverte d ’une réalité complexe .” 

Janes, Robert R. 2024. Museums and Societal Collapse : The Museum as Lifeboat . New York, 

NY : Routledge. 

Jardonnet, Emmanuelle. 2019. “Du British Museum au MoMA, les actions se multiplient contre 

le « blanchiment par l’art ».” Le Monde , November 23, 2019. 

https://www.lemonde.fr/culture/article/2019/11/23/du -british -museum -au -moma -les -

actions -se -multiplient -contre -blanchiment -par -l-art_6020252_3246.html. 

Johansson, Mikael. 2020. “Chefen på Länsmuseet : ”Svårt att leva upp till kraven med de pengar 

vi har”.” S VT Nyheter , February 17, 2020, sec. Gävleborg. 

https ://www.svt.se/nyheter/lokalt/gavleborg/det -ar -svart -att -leva -upp -till -kraven -med -

de -pengar -vi -har 

Lee, Young -Joo, and Jongmin Shon. 2018. “What Affects the Strategic Priority of Fundraising ? A

Longitudinal Study of Art, Culture and Humanity Organizations’ Fundraising Expenses in 

the USA.” VOLUNTAS : International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 29 

(5) : 951 –61. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s11266 -018 -9982 -1. 

Lemon, Jane. 2022. “Funding Win for £6m Scheme to Cut Carbon Emissions from Buildings 

Including the National Football Museum.” Manchester City Council. May 30,2022. 

https ://www.manchester.gov.uk/news/article/9030/funding_win_for_6m_scheme_to_c 

ut_carbon_em issions_from_buildings_including_the_national_football_museum. 

Lindqvist, Katja. 2012. “Museum Finances : Challenges beyond Economic Crises.” Museum 

Management and Curatorship 27 (1) : 1 –15. 

https ://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2012.644693. 

Lovely, Hayley. 2024. “South Shields Museum & Art Gallery Makes Sustainable Upgrades 

Thanks £540k Funding.” Shields Gazette , April 9, 2024. 

https ://www.shieldsgazette.com/news/south -shields -museum -art -gallery -makes -

sustainable -upgrades -thanks -to -ps540k -funding -grant -4584564. 

Mairesse, François. 2005. Le droit d’entrer au musée. Bruxelles : Labor. 

——— . 2007. “Le droit d’entrée dans la perspective du don. ” La Lettre de l’OCIM , no 111 (Mai -

Juin) : 23 -30. https://journals.openedition.org/ocim/761 

——— . 2022. “Financement.” In Dictionnaire de Muséologie , edited by François Mairesse, 278. 

Paris : ICOM; Armand Colin. 

——— , and UNESCO. 2019. “Report on the implementation of the UNESCO 2015 

Recommendation on Museums & Collections” 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371549 

Mark -FitzGerald, Emily. 2016. “Irish Museum Survey 2016.” Dublin : Irish Museums Association. 

https ://irishmuseums.org/uploads/downloads/IMS -2016 -DocsinglePrint.pdf 

Mateos -Rusillo, Santos -M. 2019. “The Use of the Museum as a Public Relations Agency by 

Sponsors : The Role of the Media.” Communication & Society 32 (3) : 51 –66. 

https ://doi.org/10.15581/003.32.34368. 

Mathieu, Chris, and Valerie Visanich, eds. 2022. Accomplishing Cultural Policy in Europe :

Financing, Governance and Responsiveness . Abingdon; Oxon : Routledge. 

McCarthy, Conal. 2022. “New Museology.” In Dictionnaire de Muséologie , edited by François 

Mairesse, 457 –62. Paris : ICOM; Armand Colin. 

Merritt, Elizabeth. 2019. “Toxic Philanthropy.” American Alliance of Museums (blog). December 

11, 2019. https ://www.aam -us.org/2019/12/11/toxic -philanthropy/. 

——— . 2020. “‘Pay As You Stay’ – an Alternative Pricing Model for Museums ?” American 

Alliance of Museums (blog). July 15, 2020. https ://www.aam -us.org/2020/07/15/pay -as -

you -stay -an -alternative -pricing -model -for -museums/. 116 

Musée et Société en Wallonie. 2022. “Prométhéa Lance Un Nouvel Outil Pour Révolutionner 

Votre Recherche de Financements ! – Musées et Société En Wallonie.” December 20, 

2022. http ://msw.be/2022/12/20/promethea -lance -un -nouvel -outil -pour -revolutionner -

votre -recherche -de -financements/. 

Murzyn -Kupisz, Monika, Dominika Hołuj, Jarosław Działek , and Katarzyna Gorczyca. 2019. 

“Museums and Local Governments in Poland : Partners in Local Development ?” 

Museum International 71 (3 –4) : 28 –45. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/13500775.2019.1706944. 

Musée du Louvre. N.d. “Horaires & tarifs – Planifiez et réservez votre visite.” Le Louvre. 

Accessed July 17, 2024. https://www.louvre.fr/visiter/horaires -tarifs#tarifs. 

Myndigheten för kulturanalys. 2022. “Museer 2021.” Kulturfacta 2022 :2. Göteborg :

Myndigheten för kulturanalys. 

National Committees of European Countries. 2013. “Support Culture and Museums to Face the 

Global Crisis and Build the Future.” Lisbon. https://icom.museum/wp -

content/uploads/2018/07/Lisbon_Declaration_ENG.pdf 

Office fédéral de la statistique (OFS). 2021. “Paysage Muséal et Public Des Musées En Suisse :

Situation En 2019 et Évolution Sur Cinq Ans.” Neuchâtel : Office fédéral de la 

statistique. https://www.bfs.admin.ch/asset/fr/16764716 

Park, Sohyun, and Hang Kim. 2019. “Democratization and Museum Policy in South Korea.” 

International Journal of Cultural Policy 25 (1) : 93 –109. 

https ://doi.org/10.1080/10286632.2018.1557650. 

Polonsky, Naomi. 2022. “Hundreds Storm British Museum to Protest Fossil Fuel Sponsorship.” 

Hyperallergic , April 25, 2022. https ://hyperallergic.com/727204/british -museum -

protest -fossil -fuel -sponsorship/. 

Premium Official News . 2021. “Australian Trade and Investment Commission (Austrade) 

Granted (AUD) $100,000.00 for The Funding Will Support the Museum to Facilitate the 

Repatriation of Ancestral Remains and Secret Sacred Objects (GA201299),” November 

9, 2021. 

Prokůpek, Marek. 2025. “Legal and Ethical Considerations.” In Financial Management in 

Museums : Theory, Practice, and Context , edited by Yuha Jung, Rachel Shane, and 

Jaleesa Renee Wells., 165 -179, Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY : Routledge. 

Prokůpek, Marek, and Marie Ballarini. 2022. “Comparative Study of European Policies for Ethical 

Museum Fundraising and Philanthropy.” In Accomplishing Cultural Policy in Europe :

Financing, Governance and Responsiveness , edited by Chris Mathieu and Valerie 

Visanich, 123 –40. The Sociology and Management of the Arts. Abingdon, Oxon; New 

York, NY : Routledge. 

Prokůpek, Marek, Ellen Loots, and Diana Betzler. 2023. “Emergency or Emerging Financing 

Strategies of Art Museums in the Context of a Pandemic ?” Museum Management and 

Curatorship 38 (5) : 530 –47. https ://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2022.2111327. 

Proteau, Jasmine. 2018. “Reducing Risky Relationships : Criteria for Forming Positive Museum -

Corporate Sponsorships.” Museum Management and Curatorship 33 (3) : 235 –42. 

https ://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2018.1467274. 

Puffett, Neil. 2024. “Financial Pressure Taking ‘physical and Mental’ Toll on Museum Leaders.” 

ArtsProfessional. July 25, 2024. https ://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/financial -

pressure -taking -physical -and -mental -toll -museum -leaders. 

Radio -France . 2024. “Crise des musées : faut -il changer de modèle ?” France Culture. January 

4, 2024. https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/ France -culture -va -plus -

loin -l-invite -e-des -matins/crise -des -musees -faut -il -changer -de -modele -9250308. 

Ramskjær, Liv. 2020. “Museene må hjelpe seg selv!” Norges museumsforbund (blog). May 13, 

2020. https ://museumsforbundet.no/museene -ma -hjelpe -seg -selv/. 117 

Rasmussen, Dorthe Hammerich. 2022a. “5,76 mio. Kr. Fra fond : ‘En kæmpe 

saltvandsindsprøjtning til grøn omstilling af danske museer.’” Organisationen Danske 

Museer – ODM (blog). June 29, 2022. https ://www.dkmuseer.dk/nyheder/kaempe -

saltvandsindsproejtning -til -groen -omstilling -af -danske -museer/. 

——— . 2022b. “Halvdelen af museerne imødeser problemer med stærkt stigende eludgifter.” 

Organisationen Danske Museer – ODM (blog). September 29, 2022. 

https ://www.dkmuseer.dk/nyheder/halvdelen -af -museerne -imoedeser -problemer -

med -staerkt -stigende -eludgifter/. 

Rentschler, Ruth, and Anne -Marie Hede, eds. 2007. Museum Marketing : Competing in the 

Global Marketplace . Amsterdam; Boston : Butterworth -Heinemann. 

Riksantikvarieämbetet. 2021. “Arbetslivsmuseernas villkor och möjligheter – ideella krafter och 

117 anada engagemang.” https ://raa.diva -

portal.org/smash/get/diva2 :1591701/FULLTEXT01.pdf 

Romolini, Alberto, Silvia Fissi, Elena Gori, and Marco Contri. 2020. “Financing Museums :

Towards Alternative Solutions ? Evidence from Italy.” In Management, Participation and 

Entrepreneurship in the Cultural and Creative Sector , edited by Martin Piber, 11 –32. 

Cham : Springer International Publishing. https ://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -46796 -

8_2. 

Rushton, M. 2017. “Should Public and Nonprofit Museums Have Free Admission ? A Defense of 

the Membership Model.” Museum Management and Curatorship 32 (3) : 200 –209. 

Schwarzer, Marjorie. 2020. Riches, Rivals, and Radicals : A History of Museums in the United 

States . Third edition. Lanham Boulder; New York; London : Rowman & Littlefield. 

Selbach, Gérard. 2024. “Esquisse d’une Histoire Des Musées Américains : Naissance, 

Croissance, Missions et Politique Fédérale et Locale.” Revue LISA / LISA e -Journal 5 (1), 

58 –91. https://doi.org/10.4000/lisa.1593. 

Simmons, Galen. 2021. “Stratford Perth Museum Collection Going Digital Thanks in Part to 

Government Grant.” The Stratford Beacon Herald , March 12, 2021. 

https ://www.stratfordbeaconherald.com/news/local -news/stratford -perth -museum -

collection -going -digital -thanks -in -part -to -government -grant. 

Smart, Amy. 2020. “Indigenous Repatriation Projects Get New Funding from B.C. Government.” 

CBC News , June 21, 2020. https ://www.cbc.ca/news/ 117 anada /british -

columbia/indigenous -repatriation -projects -get -new -funding -from -b-c-government -

1.5621152. 

Smithsonian Institution. N.d. “Entry and Visitor Guidelines.” Smithsonian Institution. Accessed 

July 17, 2024. https ://www.si.edu/visit/tips. 

Sohanpal, Nihal. 2023. “Government Expenditure to the Arts and Cultural Sectors.” Research 

Note. Te Whatu Rarau. 

Stephens, Simons. 2024. “By Their Own Admission.” Museum Journal, June, 4 –5. 

Styx, Lauren. 2022. “Museums And The Art Of Environmental Sustainability.” MuseumNext. 

August 4, 2022. https ://www.museumnext.com/article/museums -and -the -art -of -

environmental -sustainability/. 

Sveriges Museer. 2021. “Museer under Press 2021 : Läget i Landet Enligt 91 Museichefer.” 

Karlskrona : Sveriges Museer. https ://sverigesmuseer.se/wp -

content/uploads/2021/02/Museer -under -press_layoutad_slutversion.pdf 

Taniguchi, Miyuki. 2021. “Impact of New Public Management on the Efficiency of Japanese 

Museums”. Asian Economic Journal 35 (1) : 76 -95. https ://doi.org/10.1111/asej.12226 .

Taylor, K. 2020. “The Cost of Culture : Accessibility and Admission Fees in Museums.” Cultural 

Policy Review 8 (1) : 145 –60. 

Tobelem, Jean -Michel. 2023. Politique et gestion de la culture : publics, financement, territoire, 

stratégie . Fourth edition. Collection U. Malakoff : Armand Colin. 118 

UNESCO. 2020. “Les Musées Dans Le Monde : Face à La Pandémie de COVID -19.” 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373530_fre 

——— . 2021. “Museums around the World : In the Face of COVID -19.” 

https ://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark :/48223/pf0000376729_eng 

Valeonti, Foteini, Antonis Bikakis, Melissa Terras, Chris Speed, Andrew Hudson -Smith, and 

Konstantinos Chalkias. 2021. “Crypto Collectibles, Museum Funding and OpenGLAM :

Challenges, Opportunities and the Potential of Non -Fungible Tokens (NFTs).” Applied 

Sciences 11 (21) : 9931. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11219931. 

Varine, Hugues De. 2000. “Autour de la table ronde de Santiago.” Publics et Musées 17 (1) :

180 –83. https://doi.org/10.3406/pumus.2000.1325. 

Vergo, Peter, ed. 1989. The New Museology . London : Reaktion Books. 

Vivan, Itala. 2014. “What Museum for Africa ?” In The Postcolonial Museum : The Arts of Memory 

and the Pressures of History , edited by Iain Chambers and Alessandra De Angelis, 195 –

207. London; New York : Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 

Woodward, Simon. 2012. “Funding Museum Agendas : Challenges and Opportunities.” 

Managing Leisure 17 (1) : 14 –28. https ://doi.org/10.1080/13606719.2011.638202. 119 

# LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure 1.1. - The Responding Countries ................................ ................................ .................... 8

Figure 1.2. - Breakdown of responding ICOM National Committees by geographical area .......... 8

Figure 1.3. – Distribution of Museums Across Responding Countries ................................ ........ 9

Figure 1.4. – Presence of Museum’s Associations in Responding Countries ............................. 12 

Figure 1.5.1. - Percentage of Museums Receiving Public Funds in Responding Countries ......... 14 

Figure 1.5.2. – Breakdown by geographical zone ................................ ................................ ..... 15 

Figure 1.6. – Level of government that funds museum in responding countries ........................ 15 

Figure 1.7.1. - Presence of Indirect Financing Measures ................................ ......................... 16 

Figure 1.7.2. - Presence of Indirect Financing Measures (Breakdown by region) ....................... 17 

Figure 1.8. - Proportion of Museums Receiving the Majority of Their Funding From Private Sources 

................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 19 

Figure 1.9. - Museums Receiving Public and Private Funding ................................ ................... 19 

Figure 1.10.1. - Funding Fluctuations between 2008 and 2019 ................................ ................ 22 

Figure 1.10.2. - Breakdown of Funding Fluctuations Between 2008 and 2019 ........................... 22 

Figure 1.11. - Percentage of Public Funding in Museums’ Annual Budgets for 2018 -2019 ......... 23 

Figure 1.12.1. - Alternative Sources of Funding, 2008 -2019 ................................ ..................... 24 

Figure 1.12.2. - Breakdown of Alternative Sources of Funding Between 2008 and 2019 ............ 26 

Figure 1.13. - Changes in Public Funding Between 2018 and 2022 ................................ ........... 30 

Figure 1.14. - Central Government Funding Between 2018 and 2022 ................................ ....... 30 

Figure 1.15.1 - Alternative Sources of Funding Between 2018 and 2022 ................................ ... 32 

Figure 1.15.2. - Breakdown of Alternative Sources of Funding Between 2018 and 2022 ............ 32 

Figure 1.15.3. - Alternative Sources of Funding Between 2018 and 2022, breakdown of use by 

region. ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 33 

Figure 1.16. - Emergence of New Business Models Between 2018 and 2022 ............................ 34 

Figure 1.17. - Impact of Funding Decrease Between 2018 and 2022 ................................ ........ 36 

Figure 2.0. - Breakdown of museums by geographical zones ................................ ................... 47 

Figure 2.1.1. - List and location of responding museums (Africa) ................................ ............. 49 

Figure 2.1.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (Africa) ................................ .................. 50 

Figure 2.1.2. - Types in Responding Museums (Africa) ................................ ............................ 50 

Figure 2.1.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (Africa) ................................ ............ 50 

Figure 2.1.5. – Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in Responding Museums (Africa) .......... 50 

Figure 2.1.6. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding Museums (Africa) ......................... 51 

Figure 2.1.7. - Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (Africa) ................................ ...... 51 

Figure 2.1.8. – Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (Africa) ........... 52 

Figure 2.2.1. - List and location of responding museums (Eastern Asia) ................................ ... 56 

Figure 2.2.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) ................................ ......... 57 

Figure 2.2.2. - Types in Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) ................................ ................... 57 

Figure 2.2.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) ................................ .. 57 

Figure 2.2.6. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) ............... 58 

Figure 2.2.5 – Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) . 58 

Figure 2.2.7. – Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (Eastern Asia) . 60 

Figure 2.3.1. - List and location of responding museums (Europe) ................................ ........... 63 

Figure 2.3.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (Europe) ................................ ................ 64 

Figure 2.3.2. - Types in Responding Museums (Europe) ................................ .......................... 64 120 

Figure 2.3.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (Europe) ................................ .......... 64 

Figure 2.3.5. – Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in Responding Museums (Europe) ........ 65 

Figure 2.3.6. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding Museums (Europe) ....................... 65 

Figure 2.3.7. - Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (Europe) ................................ .... 66 

Figure 2.3.8. – Alternative Source of Funding (Europe) ................................ ............................ 67 

Figure 2.4.1. - List and Location of Responding Museums (Latin America and the Caribbean [LAC]) 

................................ ................................ ................................ ........ Erreur! Signet non défini. 

Figure 2.4.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (LAC) ................................ ..................... 70 

Figure 2.4.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (LAC) ................................ .............. 70 

Figure 2.4.2. - Types in Responding Museums (LAC) ................................ ............................... 70 

Figure 2.4.5. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding Museums (LAC) ........................... 70 

Figure 2.4.6. – Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in Responding Museums (LAC) ............ 71 

Figure 2.4.7. - Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (LAC) ................................ ......... 72 

Figure 2.4.8. – Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (LAC) ............. 73 

Figure 2.5.1. - List and Location of Responding Museums (North America) .............................. 77 

Figure 2.5.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (North America) ................................ ..... 77 

Figure 2.5.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (North America) ............................... 78 

Figure 2.5.2. - Types in Responding Museums (North America) ................................ ............... 77 

Figure 2.5.5. – Breakdown of Public Funding Decrease in Responding Museums (North America) 

................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 78 

Figure 2.5.6. - Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (North America) ......................... 79 

Figure 2.5.7. – Autonomous Revenues Generated by the Responding Museums (North America) 

................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 79 

Figure 2.5.8. – Alternative Sources of Funding (North America) ................................ ............... 81 

Figure 2.6.1. - List and location of responding museums (Oceania) ................................ ......... 83 

Figure 2.6.3. - Legal Status of Responding Museums (Oceania) ................................ ............... 84 

Figure 2.6.4. - Funding Sources of Responding Museums (Oceania) ................................ ........ 84 

Figure 2.6.2. - Types in Responding Museums (Oceania) ................................ ......................... 84 

Figure 2.6.5. – Percentage of Public Funding in Responding Museums (Oceania) ..................... 85 

Figure 2.6.6. - Aspects Impacted by the Decrease in Funding (Oceania) ................................ .. 86 

Figure 2.6.7. – Alternative Sources of Funding (Oceania) ................................ ......................... 86 ANNEXES I - Quantitative Survey 

> I

# Consent Form 

Consent form : Please read carefully the following statement. If you do not accept these 

terms, we will be unable to use your answer in out final report. 

Title of the research project : Museums and public funding 

Lead by : Chaire de recherche sur la gouvernance des musées et le droit de la culture 

(UQAM), under the direction of Pr. Yves Bergeron 

Funded by : ICOM -IMREC, a partnership between ICOM and Shanghai University to 

establish the International Museum Research and Exchange Centre (IMREC). 

Invitation to participate 

You are being asked to participate in a survey on the state of public funding for museums 

around the world. 

Purpose of this research 

• Get an accurate portrait of public funding in museums around the world; 

• Better understand if and how this funding is decreasing and its impact on the 

institutions; 

• Look at innovative and exemplary ways of generating income. 

What you will be asked to do 

We ask that you complete an online questionnaire. It will take approximately 30 minutes. 

The questions are related to public funding, variations in funding, and innovative 

practices. 

Your participation is voluntary. 

You are free to answer as many questions as you like. However, the research team will be 

able to include your answers only if 70% of the questions are answered. 

Your involvement is anonymous. It will not be possible to know the identity of the person 

who has filled the questionnaire. 

You are answering this questionnaire on behalf of the organization to which it was sent. 

Questions and queries 

If you have any questions, you can contact the research team at 514 -987 -3000 poste 

2909 or by e -mail à museums.funding@gmail.com 

Inquiries on your rights 

If you have any questions about your rights, you may contact the Comité institutionnel 

d’éthique de la recherche avec des êtres humains at (514) 987 -3000 ext. 7753 or by e -

mail at: ciereh@uqam.ca .I - Quantitative Survey 

> II

# Presentation of the survey 

Why a survey? 

Since 2018, reductions in public funding for museums have consistently been highlighted 

by ICOM committees as the foremost concern impacting the sector's long -term viability. 

ICOM -IMREC (The International Museum Research and Exchange Centre) has 

commissioned an international consortium led by the University of Quebec at Montreal 

(UQAM) to research this problem. This survey will collec t essential data for a deeper 

comprehension of the situation, facilitate meaningful comparisons, and establish 

conclusions based on empirical evidence. 

This research aims to answer the following questions: 

(1) What does “government funding” mean and how is it understood/used around the 

world? 

(2) Is the decrease in government funding a global phenomenon? 

(3) Where, how and under what circumstances does this decrease occur? What are 

its impacts? 

(4) If a decrease occurs, how do museums cope? Can we see new museums’ 

business models emerge as a result? 

Your input is critical in providing a well -rounded perspective. By participating, you will 

contribute to a worldwide pool of data. 

Should you have any questions or concerns regarding the survey or the research process, 

please do not hesitate to reach out at museums.funding@gmail.com . Your cooperation is 

highly valued, and we look forward to your active participation in this comparative survey. 

Best regards, 

The Lead Partners of the International Research Alliance on Public Funding for Museums 

(IRAPFM) 

Yves Bergeron, General Director (UQAM) 

Michèle Rivet, Scientific and executive director (Independent) 

Lisa Bergeron, Financial and administrative director (UQAM) 

Camille Labadie, Project coordinator 

Heidi Weber, quantitative study coordinator 

Léa Le Calvé, research assistant 

# Methodology 

This study is based on a comparative analysis approach. To grasp the changes in public 

funding for museums, we will establish a pre -VOCID baseline and compare it with the 

circumstances post -COVID. I - Quantitative Survey 

> III

To do so, the survey is divided in four sections: 

1- General overview : This section will provide us with a general understanding of the 

funding framework for museums in your country. 

2- Situation pre -pandemic 2008/09 -2018/19 : The objective of these questions is to 

offer an overview of how museums received funding prior to the onset of the 

COVID crisis. 

3- Situation post -pandemic 2021 -2022 : The purpose of these questions is to offer 

insights into the funding of museums in the aftermath of the COVID Crisis. The 

inquiries in this section have a similar structure to those in section 2 for the sake 

of making meaningful comparisons. 

4- The impacts of variations in funding : The final section consists of open -ended 

questions, providing you with the opportunity to share your insights about the 

situation in your country and any critical aspects you believe should be highlighted 

or clarified. 

The survey will take approximately 30 minutes to complete. We appreciate your time 

and effort in providing thoughtful responses. 

At any time, you can click on “resume later” on the right of the screen to pause your 

completion and save your progress. Please note that, if you do not save your progress, 

you will have to start over when you open the survey again. 

# Definitions 

The subsequent definitions pertain to the terminology employed in the survey, facilitating 

a common understanding of the questions. If you find that these definitions do not 

accurately represent the situation in your country, please feel free to offer an e xplanation 

in your responses. 

PUBLIC FUNDING : Public funds or resources provided by the State or various levels of 

government, i.e. central, state, local, etc. Government funding is either direct or indirect 

(parapublic). 

It is direct when government pledges to finance museums through agreements and 

policies. It is indirect when it is distributed as non -financial resources through different 

levels of government in the form of various programs (culture, tourism, infrastructu re, 

etc.). 

MUSEUM (PUBLIC/PRIVATE) (fr. Musée public/ Musée privé, sp. Museo público/ 

Museo privado) : The opposition between public/private, when referring to a museum, 

refers to how the institution is funded: whether by public funds or by an association, or 

company ,individual or private foundation […] It can also refer to its status (whether a 

museum is dependent on a municipality or other public body or one dependent on an 

association or foundation.) (Dico de muséo 2022) ("Museum" in MAIRESSE, François, and 

Intern ational Council of Museums, éd. ICOM Dictionary of museology. Abingdon, Oxon ; 

New York, NY: Routledge, 2023.) I - Quantitative Survey 

IV 

# SECTION 1: GENERAL OVERVIEW 

The primary objective of this initial section is to provide us with a comprehensive view of 

the museum sector in your country. 

What country are you filling this survey for? 

What is a museum in your country? How is it define? 

On estimate, how many museums are there in your country? 

- 0-100 

- 101 -250 

- 251 -500 

- 501 -1000 

- 1001 -1500 

- 1501 and more 

If possible, please tell us the exact number of museums in your country: 

Are any of these museums officially recognized or accredited by the government? 

- Yes 

- No 

How does this affect their funding? Please elaborate. 

Do other institutions, such as libraries, community centers, historical sites, etc., receive 

similar consideration and public funding in your country? Please comment on your 

answer. 

Are there museum associations in your country ?

- Yes 

- No. 

- If yes, please list them below 

On estimate, how many museums, or what percentage of museums, receive public 

funds? 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25% 

- 26 -50% 

- 51 -75% 

- 76 -100% I - Quantitative Survey 

> V

Are the following levels of government responsible for funding museums? 

- Central government: - Yes - no 

- Regional or state level: - Yes - no 

- Municipal level : - Yes - no 

- Others: _________________ 

Please list any and all other level of government that are responsible for funding 

museums. 

What proportion of museums in your country receive the majority of their funding from 

private sources? (Ex.: Non -profit organization, company museums, foundation, etc.) 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25% 

- 26 -50% 

- 51 -75% 

- 76 -100% 

Are there museums which operate with a combination of private and public funding? 

- Yes 

- No 

If yes, how are they classified and could you explain their funding model, when they are 

neither private or public?? 

Has the government implemented indirect financing measures for museums (such as tax 

deductions for acquisitions, tax credits, fundings for special projects, etc.)? Please 

comment on your answer. I - Quantitative Survey 

VI 

# SECTION 2: FUNDING PRE -PANDEMIC (2008/09 -

# 2018/19) 

This set of questions examines the state of museum funding before the COVID -19 crisis 

between 2008/09 and 2018/19. 

In the last ten years (between 2008/09 and 2018/19), how did public funding change? 

- Increased 

- Decreased 

- Remain stable (including increases following inflation) 

On estimate, by how much did it increase or decrease? 

- 0-9 % 

- 10 -25 % 

- 26 -35 % 

- 36 and more % 

- Does not apply (funding remained stable) 

In the last ten years (between 2008/09 and 2018/19), did the following entities decrease 

their funding? 

- Central government: - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Regional or state level: - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Municipal level : - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Others (please specify): _________________ 

In the last ten years (between 2008/09 and 2018/19), did museums explore alternative 

sources of revenue? 

- Yes 

- No 

If you answered “yes” to the previous question, what sources provided income? (Select 

all that apply) 

- Government grants or other subsidies 

- Patronage/Sponsorship 

- Friends and volunteer associations 

- Independent income 

- Crowdfunding 

- Investments 

- Donation 

- Brand commercialization/Retail 

- Other (Please specify) : _________________ I - Quantitative Survey 

> VII

Did you see any new business models emerge in museums between 2008/09 and 

2018/19? 

- Yes 

- No 

- If yes, please elaborate. 

In 2018 -2019 what percentage of the total public budget was allocated for museum 

funding? 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25 % 

- 26 -50 % 

- 51 -70 % 

- 71 -100 % 

In 2018 -2019 for museums that receive public funding, approximately what percentage 

did this funding represent in their annual budget? 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25% 

- 26 -50% 

- 51 -70%  

> -

71 -100% 

Did all museums receive similar amounts or are there significative difference between 

museums? I - Quantitative Survey 

VIII 

# SECTION 3: FUNDING POST -PANDEMIC (2021 -2022) 

This third group looks at the situation in museums after the COVID -19 crisis (2021 -2022). 

Were there any public financing measures put in place for museums during COVID -19? 

- Yes 

- No 

- If yes, please elaborate. 

Are these measures still in place? 

- Yes 

- No 

- If yes, please elaborate. 

Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, how did public funding overall change? 

- Increased 

- Decreased 

- Remain stable (including any increase following inflation) 

On estimate, by how much did it increase or decrease? 

- 0-9 % 

- 10 -25 % 

- 26 -35 % 

- 36 and more % 

- Does not apply (funding remained stable) 

Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, did the following entities decrease their funding? 

- Central government: - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Regional or state level: - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Municipal level : - Yes - no -does not apply 

- Others (please specify): _________________ 

Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, did museums explore alternative sources of revenue? 

- Yes 

- No 

If you answered “yes” to the previous question, what sources provided income? (Select 

all that apply) 

- Government grants or other subsidies 

- Patronage/Sponsorship 

- Friends and volunteer associations 

- Independent income 

- Crowdfunding 

- Investments 

- Donation 

- Brand commercialization/Retail I - Quantitative Survey 

> IX

- Other (Please specify) : _________________ 

In 2021 -2022 what percentage of the total public budget was allocated for museum 

funding? 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25 % 

- 26 -50 % 

- 51 - 70 % 

- 71 -100 % 

In 2021 -2022 for museums that receive public funding, approximately what percentage 

did this funding represent in their annual budget? 

- 0-9% 

- 10 -25% 

- 26 -50% 

- 51 -70% 

- 71 -100% 

Do all museums receive similar amounts or are there significative difference between 

museums? 

Did you see any new business models emerge in museums between 2018/19 and 

2021/22? 

- Yes 

- No  

> -

If yes, please elaborate. I - Quantitative Survey 

X

# SECTION 4: IMPACTS OF VARIATIONS IN FUNDING 

The aim of this survey is to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the financial 

circumstances of museums worldwide. We are interested in learning about the 

challenges they have encountered, the measures they have implemented, and any 

innovations or i nitiatives they have explored over recent years in response to various 

crises. 

Between 2018/19 and 2021/22, what were the impacts of the funding decrease in your 

country? (Select all that apply) 

- Job loss 

- Museum closure 

- Less visitors 

- Less outreach programs 

- Other (Please specify) : _________________ 

Please elaborate on what other impacts occured due to the funding decrease in your 

country. 

As we conclude, is there any additional information you believe would enhance our final 

report, which you haven't had the opportunity to mention previously or that you feel 

merits further discussion? 

# Ending 

We sincerely appreciate your active participation in this survey. Your valuable insights 

and feedback are essential for gaining a deeper understanding of museum funding 

around the world and how recent years have reshaped our perception of it. 

The data gathered will undergo thorough analysis and be compiled into a comprehensive 

report. This report will encompass a detailed examination of museum funding on a global 

scale, including insightful case studies. It is anticipated to be accessible throu gh ICOM 

by September 2024. 

In the interim, if you have any additional insights or information to share about museum 

funding, such as changes in public financing, innovative funding methods, or any related 

resources such as reports, articles, or papers, please don't hesitate to reach out to us at 

museums.funding@gmail.com. Your continued input is greatly appreciated. 

Thank you once again for taking the time to answer the survey. 

Heidi Weber 

Quantitative study coordinator II - Qualitative Survey 

> XI

# SECTION 1 – General information 

Name of the museum: ________________ 

Aims of the survey 

This research aims to answer these four main questions: 

1) What does “government funding” mean and how is it understood/used around the 

world? 

2) Is the decrease in government funding a global phenomenon? 

3) Where, how and under what circumstances does this decrease occur ?

o What is its impact? 

4) When a decrease occurs, how do museums cope? 

o Can we see new economic models? 

Globally, we want to know what you have done in the face of decreasing funding or various 

budget crises to develop new financial tools in your institution. 

Definition of public funding 

Government funding for museums are public funds or resources given by the State or 

various levels/parties of government, i.e. central, state, local, ministry etc. 

Government funding is either direct or indirect (parapublic). It is direct when government 

pledges to finance museums through agreements, policies or programs toward specific 

goals. It is indirect when it is distributed as non -financial resources (such as tax cuts) and 

directed through different levels of government in the form of various programs (culture, 

tourism, infrastructure etc.). 

The questionnaire is divided in five sections: 

Group 1 : Your museum 

Group 2 : Funding pre -pandemic (2018 -2019 as baseline years) 

Group 3 : Funding during the pandemic (2020 -2021 as baseline years) 

Group 4 : Funding Post -pandemic (2022 -2023 as baseline years) 

Group 5 : Funding 

Group 6 : Open -ended question II - Qualitative Survey 

XII 

# SECTION 2 : Survey 

# Group 1 : Your museum 

G1 -Q1 What is the name of your museum? 

G1 -Q2 : What kind or type of museum is it? Select all that applies 

- Art 

- History 

- Science and technology 

- Archeology 

- Anthropology and Society Museums 

- Memory Museums 

- Other (specify) 

G1 -Q3 : Is it a private, public, or another type of museum? 

G1 -Q4 : What are the different departments inside your museum? (collection, education, 

etc.) 

Q4.1 Were any of these department downsized due to funding cuts in the last 5 

years? 

G1 -Q5. Do you have volunteers in your organisation? 

Q.5.1 What do they do? 

Q.5.2 How many are there? 

G1 -Q6. How many full -time employees are there in the museum (all departments)? How 

many part -time employees are there in the museum (all departments)? 

G1 -Q7. Do you use any other type of worker? (Independent, contractual, external, free -

lancer, etc.) If yes, how? Is it for specific projects or expertise? II - Qualitative Survey 

XIII 

# Group 2 : Funding pre -pandemic (2018 and 2019 as 

# baseline years) 

G2 -Q1. In 2018 -2019 what percentage did government funding make up for your 

museum? 

- 0 – 9 % 

- 10 - 25 % 

- 26 - 50 % 

- 51 - 70 % 

- 71 - 100 % 

G2 -Q2. Was the government funding divided between various government levels? 

- Yes 

- No 

G2 -Q2.1 If you answered YES, did the following levels fund museums? 

- Central government: - Yes - no % 

- Regional or state level: - Yes - no % 

- Municipal or city level : - Yes - no % 

- Others: _________________ 

G2 -Q3. In the last ten years (between 2008 -2009 and 2018 -2019), did government funding 

decrease? 

- No 

- Yes 

G2 -Q3. If YES, by how much? 

- 0 - 10 % 

- 11 - 25 % 

- 26 % and more 

o specify : _____________ 

G2 -Q4. Has this decrease been offset by other sources of income? 

- No 

- Yes 

o Totally 

o Partially 

G2 -Q4.1 How? 

- Autonomous revenue 

- government grants or other subsidies 

- Other: ______________________ 

o Please explain II - Qualitative Survey 

> XIV

G2 -Q5 . Were the following impacted by the decrease in funding (in the last ten years)? 

G2 -Q5.1. Visitor numbers 

- No 

- Yes 

o How much did visitor numbers decrease? 

§ 1 à 10 % 

§ 11 à 20 % 

§ 21% and more 

• Comments : _____ 

G2 -Q5.2. Exhibits 

- No 

- Yes 

o Less temporary exhibits 

o Longer exhibits 

o Others 

§ Comments : _____ 

G2 -Q5.3. Decreased Public outreach programs (education, cultural, mediation) 

- No 

- Yes 

o Comments: _____ 

G2 -Q5.4. Laying off of staff 

- No 

- Yes 

o Permanent 

o temporary 

§ Comments : _____ 

G2 -Q5.5. Percentage of job loss 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify % : _________ 

o Where? 

§ Collection/conservation 

§ Exposition/exhibits 

§ Education/mediation/Public programmes 

§ Public service 

§ Administration/Management 

§ Acquisitions and collection management 

§ Others 

• Comments : _____ II - Qualitative Survey 

> XV

G2 -Q5.6 Decrease in acquisitions and collecting 

- Purchase 

o No 

o Yes 

§ decreased by __________ 

- Donations 

o No 

o Yes 

§ decreased by __________ 

• Comments : _____ 

G2 -Q5.7 Fewer community engagement projects 

- No 

- Yes 

o Examples : 

§ Comments : _____ 

G2 -Q5.8. Others. Please let us know any other areas where the funding was 

decreased. 

G2 -Q6. Does your museum generate autonomous revenue/independent income? 

- No 

- Yes 

G2 -Q6.1 In 2018 -2019, what % do did ticket sales currently represent in your 

annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q6.2 In 2018 -2019, What % did renting of space (exhibits, rooms, other) 

represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q6.3 In 2018 -2019, What % did donations represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q6.4 What % did sponsorship represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q6.5 In 2018 -2019, What % did the foundation or friends organisation 

contribute to your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q6.6 In 2018 -2019, What % did paying membership contribute to your annual 

budget? 

- Specify____ II - Qualitative Survey 

XVI 

G2 -Q6.7 In 2018 -2019, What % did the gift shop, restaurant, etc. contribute to 

your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G2 -Q7. Did the financial model or structure changed between 2008 and 2018? 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify 

G2 -Q8. Did you see any new financial models in other museums during this period? 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify 

G2 -Q9. During that period, where any particular aspects prioritised in terms of funding? 

# Group 3 : Funding during the pandemic (2020 -2021 as 

# baseline years) 

This section looks at the situation in museums during the COVID -19 crisis and the various 

measure that were put in places to alleviate the problems. 

G3 -Q1. During that period (2020 -2021), did the government funding 

- Increase 

o If so, by how much 

- Decrease 

o If so by how much 

G3 -Q2. What measure were put in place during the COVID crises to help museums? 

(Financial or otherwise)? Did your museums put in place special measure during that 

time, excluding ones put forward by governement? 

G3 -Q3. During that period were there certain aspects that were prioritised in terms of 

funding? (Departments, aspects of museum practice, building or programmes, capital or 

operating costs, staffing etc.) 

G3 -Q4: In 2020 -2021, what role did the digital/virtual take inside your museums? If there 

already were digital programming, virtual media, activities, etc., before the pandemic, 

how was is continued during the pandemic? If not, were you encouraged to devel op this 

aspect inside your institution? II - Qualitative Survey 

XVII 

# Group 4 : Funding Post -pandemic (2022 -2023 as 

# baseline years) 

G4 -Q1. In 2018 -2019 what percentage did government funding make up for your 

museum? 

- 0 – 9 % 

- 10 - 25 % 

- 26 - 50 % 

- 51 - 70 % 

- 71 - 100 % 

G4 -Q2. Was the government funding divided between various government levels? 

- Yes 

- No 

G2 -Q2.1 If you answered YES, did the following levels fund museums? 

- Central government: - Yes - no % 

- Regional or state level: - Yes - no % 

- Municipal or city level : - Yes - no % 

- Others: _________________ 

G4 -Q3. Between 2020 -2021 and 2022 -2023, did government funding decrease? 

- No 

- Yes 

G4 -Q1. If YES, by how much? 

- 0 - 10 % 

- 11 - 25 % 

- 26 % and more 

o specify : _____________ 

G4 -Q4. Has this decrease been offset by other sources of income? 

- No 

- Yes 

o Totally 

o Partially 

G4 -Q4.1 How? 

- Autonomous revenue 

- government grants or other subsidies 

- Other: ______________________ II - Qualitative Survey 

> XVIII

o Please explain 

G4 -Q5 . Were the following impacted by the decrease in funding between 2020 -2021 and 

2022 -2023? 

G4 -Q5.1. Visitor numbers 

- No 

- Yes 

o How much did visitor numbers decrease? 

§ 1 à 10 % 

§ 11 à 20 % 

§ 21% and more 

• Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.2. Exhibits 

- No 

- Yes 

o Less temporary exhibits 

o Longer exhibits 

o Others 

§ Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.3. Decreased Public outreach programs (education, cultural, mediation) 

- No 

- Yes 

o Comments: _____ 

G4 -Q5.4. Laying off of staff 

- No 

- Yes 

o Permanent 

o temporary 

§ Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.5. Percentage of job loss 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify % : _________ 

o Where? 

§ Collection/conservation 

§ Exposition/exhibits 

§ Education/mediation/Public programmes 

§ Public service 

§ Administration/Management 

§ Acquisitions and collection management II - Qualitative Survey 

> XIX

§ Others 

• Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.6 Decrease in acquisitions and collecting 

- Purchase 

o No 

o Yes 

§ decreased by __________ 

- Donations 

o No 

o Yes 

§ decreased by __________ 

• Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.7 Fewer community engagement projects 

- No 

- Yes 

o Examples : 

§ Comments : _____ 

G4 -Q5.8. Others. Please let us know any other areas where the funding was 

decreased. 

G4 -Q6. Does your museum generate autonomous revenue/independent income? 

- No 

- Yes 

G4 -Q6.1 In 2022 -2023, what % do did ticket sales currently represent in your 

annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q6.2 In 2022 -2023, What % did renting of space (exhibits, rooms, other) 

represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q6.3 In 2022 -2023, What % did donations represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q6.4 In 2022 -2023 what % did sponsorship represent in your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q6.5 In 2022 -2023, What % did the foundation or friends organisation 

contribute to your annual budget? 

- Specify____ II - Qualitative Survey 

> XX

G4 -Q6.6 In 2022 -2023, What % did paying membership contribute to your annual 

budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q6.7 In 2022 -2023, What % did the gift shop, restaurant, etc. contribute to 

your annual budget? 

- Specify____ 

G4 -Q7. During 2022 -2023, did the financial model or structure changed between 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify 

G4 -Q8. During 2022 -2023, did you see any new financial models in other museums? 

- No 

- Yes 

o Specify 

G4 -Q9. During 2022 -2023, where any particular aspects prioritised in terms of funding? II - Qualitative Survey 

> XXI

# Group 5 : Funding 

This section contains general questions about funding and the cost of running a museum. 

Please answer with as much detail as you can. 

In your country, how do you define public funding? 

G5 -Q1. If your government funding has decreased in the last ten years, what are the 

impacts of the funding decrease in your museum? 

G5 -Q2. If your government funding has decreased in the last ten years, what steps, 

initiatives or programs were put in place to cope with the decrease in funding? 

G5 -Q3. Did the changes brought about by the pandemic modify in any way the museum 

and the way it is managed? 

G5 -Q4. Was funding available for a specific reason after the COVID -19 crisis? (better 

communication, digital media, staff subsidies, subsidies etc.) 

G5 -Q5. In the last five years, were museums encouraged to invest in digital/virtual media, 

or any other form of new technology? Did this occur in any specific part of the museum 

sector? 

G5 -Q6. In the last five years, were any departments, divisions or teams closed or 

downsized? Why? 

G5 -Q7. In the last five years, was there a decrease or an increase in 

collecting/acquisitions? 

G5 -Q8. In the last five years, were any projects scraped cancelled or deferred due to a 

lack of funding? 

G5 -Q9. Has your museums sourced, or discussed sourcing, any of the followings: (Select 

all) 

- Operational funding 

- Special project funding 

- Independent funding 

- Crowdsourcing 

- Donations 

- Brand commercialization 

- Retail/E -commerce 

- Renting venues 

- Others (Open ended question) II - Qualitative Survey 

XXII 

# Group 6 : Open -ended question 

The purpose of this survey is to better understand the current financial situation of 

museums around the world. We want to know and understand the challenges you face 

and the steps that you have put in place as well as any innovations or initiatives you ha ve 

explored over the last few years to deal with the various crises. 

In closing, is there anything else you feel would be beneficial to our final report that you 

would like to share with us? Something you did not say previously, or that you feel 

deserves more space. 

Are you aware of museum’s with original or innovative practices in terms of funding? III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXIII 

Geographical 

zone 

Countries Museums Type Status Funding 

1 Africa Botswana Phuthadikobo 

Museum 

History/Archaeology Public Public/Other 

2 Africa Burkina Faso The Georges 

OUEDRAOGO Music 

Museum 

Ethnography/Other -

Music 

Public/National Public/Autonomous 

3 Africa Burkina Faso Musée de l’Eau du 

Burkina Faso 

Other -Water and 

culture 

Private Mixed 

4 Africa Burkina Faso Musée RAYIMI Ethnography Private Private 

5 Africa Burkina Faso Musée Mgr Joanny 

Thévenoud 

History/Science Private Mixed 

6 Africa Burkina Faso Musée 

Ethnographique et 

du Conservatoire 

Botanique 

History Public/National Private 

7 Africa Burkina Faso Musée Communal 

Sogossira SANON 

Art/Ethnography Public/National Public 

8 Africa Cameroon Blackitude Museum Art/History Private Private 

9 Africa Gambia National Museum of 

the Gambia 

Art/History Public/National Public/Autonomous 

10 Africa Kenya National Museums 

of Kenya 

Art/Science Public/National Mixed 

11 Africa Morocco Maroc Telecom 

Museum 

Science Public/National Mixed III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXIV 

12 Africa Namibia National Museum of 

Namibia 

History/Archaeology Public/National Mixed 

13 Africa Seychelles Seychelles National 

Museum 

Art/History Public/National Public/Autonomous 

14 Africa South Africa KwaZulu -Natal 

Museum 

History/Science Public/National Public/Autonomous 

15 Africa South Africa La Motte Museum Art/History Private Private 

16 Africa South Africa Afrikaans Language 

Museum and 

Monument 

History/Other -

Language 

Public/National Public/Autonomous 

17 Africa South Africa Sanlam Archive and 

Museum 

History/Other -

Insurance and financial 

history 

Private Private 

18 Africa South Africa !Khwa ttu Heritage 

Centre 

Ethnology/ Other -

Anthropology 

Private Public/Private 

19 Africa South Africa South African Post 

Office Museum 

Other -Philately Public/National Public/Autonomous 

20 Africa South Africa University of Pretoria 

Museum 

Art/History Public/Universit 

y

Public/Private 

21 Africa Tanzania National Museum of 

Tanzania 

Art/History Public/National Public/Autonomous 

22 Asia (eastern) China Shanghai Museum Art/History Public/National Public 

23 Asia (eastern) China Shaanxi History 

Museum 

History Public/National Public III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXV 

24 Asia (eastern) China Emperor 

Qinshihuang’s 

Mausoleum Site 

Museum 

Archeology/History Public/National Autonomous 

25 Asia (eastern) China Ningxia Museum Archeology/History Public/National Public 

26 Asia (eastern) China Xi’an Qujiang 

Museum of Fine Arts 

Art 

History Private Mixed 

27 Asia (eastern) China Zhengzhou Museum History Public/National Public 

28 Asia (eastern) Japan National Art Centre, 

Tokyo 

Art Public/National Mixed 

29 Asia (eastern) Japan National Museum of 

Modern Art, Tokyo 

Art Public/National Public 

30 Asia (eastern) Japan Kyoto National 

Museum 

Art/History Public/National Public 

31 Asia (eastern) Japan Sen -oku Hakukokan 

Museum 

Art/History Private Private 

32 Asia (eastern) Japan Idemitsu Museum of 

Arts 

Art Private Private 

33 Asia (eastern) Korea National Museum of 

Korea 

Archeology/History Public/National Autonomous 

34 Asia (eastern) Korea National Folk 

Museum of Korea 

Other -Folk Public/National Public 

35 Asia ( eastern) Korea National Museum of 

Korean 

History Public/National Public III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXVI 

Contemporary 

History 

36 Asia (eastern) Korea Seoul Museum of 

History 

History Public/National Public 

37 Asia (eastern) Korea Busan Museum 

Archeology 

Archeology/History Public/Provinci 

al 

Public 

38 Europe Belgium Musée Royaux des 

Beaux Arts 

Art Public/Regional Public 

39 Europe Estonia University of Tartu 

Natural History 

Museum and 

Botanical Garden 

Science Public/National Public 

40 Europe France Musée de la 

Romanité 

Archeology Public/Regional Public/Private 

41 Europe France L’institut du Monde 

Arabe 

Other -Interdisciplinary Private Public/Private 

42 Europe Italy Museo Nazionale del 

Cinema 

Art Public/National Public/Private 

43 Europe Italy Museo Nazionale 

dell'Automobile 

Science Public/National Public/Private 

44 Europe Netherland Van Gogh Museum Art Public/National Public 

45 Europe Portugal Casa -Museu Abel 

Salazar 

Art/Science Public/Local Public 

46 Europe Portugal Museu Municipal de 

Tavira 

Art/History Public/Local Public III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXVII 

47 Europe Spain Casa Batlló Other -House museum Private/Local Private 

48 Europe Spain Casa Museo Pau 

Casals 

Other -House museum Public/Regional Public 

49 Europe Spain Ecomuseo La Ponte History /Science Public/Regional Public 

50 Europe Spain Ecomuseu de les 

Valls d'Àneu 

Art/History Public/Local Public 

51 Europe Spain Fundació Pilar i Joan 

Miró a Mallorca 

Art Public/Local Public 

52 Europe Spain Museo Arqueológico 

de Córdoba 

Archeology Public/Regional Public 

53 Europe Spain Museo Arqueológico 

Provincial 

Archeology Public/Local Public 

54 Europe Spain Museo de la 

Evolución Humana 

Archeology/Science Public/Regional Public 

55 Europe Spain Museo Gugenheim 

Bilbao 

Art Private/Regiona 

l

Private 

56 Europe Spain Museo Nacional de 

Antropología 

Anthropology Public/National Public 

57 Europe Spain Museu etnològic i de 

les Cultures del Món 

Anthropology Public/National Public 

58 Europe Spain Museu Memorial de 

l'Exili 

History Public/National Public 

59 Europe Spain Museu del 

Ferrocarril 

Science Public/National Public 

60 Europe Spain Museu del Montseny Anthropology Public/Local Public III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXVIII 

61 Europe Spain Museu del Pueblu 

Asturiano 

History/Anthropology Public/ Regional Public 

62 Europe Spain Museu del Ter History/Science Public/Regional Public 

63 Europe Spain Musèu dera Val 

d'Aran 

Art/History Public/Local Public 

64 Europe Spain Museu Nacional 

d'Art de Catalunya 

Art Public/Regional Public 

65 Europe Spain Museu Nacional de 

la Ciència i la 

Tècnica 

Science Public/Local Public 

66 Europe Sweden The Vasa Museum Archeology/Anthropolo 

gy 

Public/State Public 

67 Europe United Kingdom Black Country Living 

Museum 

History/Science Private/Regiona 

l

Private 

68 Europe United Kingdom Natural History 

Museum 

History/Science Public/Regional Public/Private 

69 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Argentina Museo Histórico 

Sarmiento 

History Public Public 

70 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Argentina Museo Nacional 

Casa del Acuerdo 

History Public Public 

71 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Casa Geyer Art/History Public Public III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXIX 

72 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Casa Museu Ema 

Klabin 

Art/History Private Mixed 

73 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Instituto Ricardo 

Brennand 

Art/History Private Public/Autonomous 

74 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu das 

Comunicações e 

Humanidades 

(MUSEHUM) 

Art Private Mixed 

75 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu da Memória e 

Patrimônio da 

UNIFAL -MG 

History/Science Public Public 

76 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu da Vida 

Fiocruz 

Science Public Public 

77 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu das 

Remoções 

Art Association Autonomous 

78 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu de 

Arqueologia e 

Etnologia da UFPR 

Archeology/Ethnology Public Public 

79 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu de Arte de 

Belém 

Art Public Public/Autonomous 

80 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu de Favela Society -Community Association Autonomous III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXX 

81 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu de Imagens 

do Inconsciente 

Art/Science Public Public 

82 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu do Homem 

do Nordeste 

Other -Anthropology Public Public 

83 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu Histórico do 

Tocantins 

History Public Public 

84 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu Nacional do 

Rio de Janeiro 

Science Public/National Public 

85 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Brazil Museu Victor 

Meirelles 

Art Public Public 

86 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Chile Parque por la Paz 

Villa Grimaldi 

Society -

Community/Other -

Human rights 

Public Mixed 

87 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Costa Rica Museo de la 

Identidad y el Orgullo 

Other -Human Rights Private Autonomous/Private 

88 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Cuba Museo Nacional de 

la Medicina 

Veterinaria 

History Association Autonomous 

89 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Ecuador Museo 

Antropológico y de 

Arte Contemporáneo 

Art/ Other -Anthropology Public Autonomous III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXXI 

90 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Mexico Memorial del 68 y 

Movimientos 

Sociales 

Other -Memory Public Public 

91 Latin America 

and 

Carribean 

Mexico Museo Soumaya 

Fundación Carlos 

Slim 

Art Private Private 

92 North 

America 

Canada Aga Khan Museum Art Private Mixed 

93 North 

America 

Canada Art Gallery of Ontario Art Public/Provinci 

al 

Mixed 

94 North 

America 

Canada Baile nan Gàidheal 

Highland Village 

History Public/National Mixed 

95 North 

America 

Canada Bata Shoe Museum Ethnology/Other -Shoes Private Mixed 

96 North 

America 

Canada Canadian Museum 

for Human Rights 

Other -Human Rights Public/National Mixed 

97 North 

America 

Canada Espace pour la vie Science Public/Provinci 

al 

Mixed 

98 North 

America 

Canada Monastère des 

Augustines 

Art/History Public/Provinci 

al 

Mixed 

99 North 

America 

Canada Musée d'art de 

Joliette 

Art Public/Provinci 

al 

Mixed 

100 North 

America 

Canada Musée des cultures 

du monde 

Art/History Private Mixed 

101 North 

America 

Canada Musée McCord 

Stewart 

History Private Mixed III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXXII 

102 North 

America 

Canada Musée national des 

beaux -arts du 

Québec 

Art Public/Provinci 

al 

Mixed 

103 North 

America 

Canada Museum of 

Anthropology 

(University of British 

Columbia) 

Art/ Other -Antropology Public/Universit 

y

Mixed 

104 North 

America 

United States of 

America 

Cleveland Museum 

of Art 

Art Other Mixed 

105 Oceania Pacific Samoa Museum Fale 

Mata ʻaga 

Other -Interdiscplinary National Public 

106 Oceania Pacific EFKS Museum 

Samoa 

Other -Religion Private Private 

107 Oceania New -Zealand Experience 

Wellington 

History/Art Public/Other Public/Council 

108 Oceania New -Zealand Te Papa Other -Interdiscplinary Public/National Public/Mixed 

109 Oceania New -Zealand New Zealand Cricket 

Museum 

History Private/Associa 

tion -community 

Private/Mixed 

110 Oceania New -Zealand Kauri Museum History Private/Associa 

tion -community 

Autonomous 

111 Oceania New -Zealand Whirinaki Whare 

Taonga 

Art/Society -Community Public/Other Council 

112 Oceania New -Zealand Christchurch Art 

Gallery 

Art Public Public/Council 

113 Oceania New -Zealand Waitaki Museum and 

Archive Oamaru 

History Public Council III: Complete list of the characteristics from the surveyed museums 

XXXIII 

114 Oceania New -Zealand Whanganui Regional 

Museum 

History/Science Public Public/Other 

115 Oceania Australia NMA Canberra History/Science Public/National Public 

116 Oceania Australia MONA Hobart Art Private Private 

117 Oceania Australia Australian Museum 

Sydney 

Ethnology/Science Public/National Public 

118 Oceania Australia Powerhouse Sydney Science Public/Other Public/Mixed 

119 Oceania Australia Flagstaff Hill 

Maritime Museum 

and Village 

History/Society -

Community 

Public/Other Public
