Title: 

URL Source: https://boe.hawaii.gov/Meetings/Notices/Meeting%20Material%20Library/2021-08-19%20GBM_Testimony.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 12 Aug 2024 21:36:28 GMT

Markdown Content:
> 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - GRANDPARENT TESTIMONY 8/19 meeting
> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708039601782034768&simpl=msg-f%3A17080396017… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## GRANDPARENT TESTIMONY 8/19 meeting 

1 message 

Diane Favreau-Chung <favreaussc@mac.com> Fri, Aug 13, 2021 at 5:58 PM To: testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

>

> Dear BOE Board, Chairpersons and Superintendent, 

>

> I am deeply concerned about my grandchildren and all the other children who is having to attend in person school during this Pandemic with the Delta variant spreading around like a wild fire!  The children should be at home where it is safe and be given the opportunity to do online virtual learning with teachers. 

> Why send our kids to school when we have a devastating Pandemic “Delta Variant spreading around? 

>

> Dr Fauci said,  “Now, you have a virus that does a better job of infecting anybody much more than the previous virus —-including children”. 

>

> Governor Ige limits people gathering, 10 indoors and 25 outdoors.  Restaurants , Bars, Restaurants, Gyms and social establishments at 50% indoor capacity.  Children at school are crowded into their classrooms. There is no social distancing in classes children are sitting next to other children for an entire class period breathing the same air. 

> They are in some classes 30 students in a class.  Where is the 10 indoors or the 50%. Capacity?  In school there is no distancing in the class, no 50% in the classroom and changing classes during the school day, all the students are crowded going to their next classes. —- It is not safe! 

>

> Please get the students out of in person school, before a wildfire of COVID Delta cases sweep through the campus bringing more patients to the hospitals which is already Overflowing. 

>

> I can’t imagine what the children are feeling hearing how high the numbers are going and the restrictions given —-yet you are sending them to in-person school.  Knowing that many of them will get the Delta variant.  They must be scared! 

>

> Please immediately stop in person school right away before more children get the  deadly Delta variant. 

>

> Thank you 

> Sincerely, 

> Diane Favreau-Chung 

>8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708216620549951014&simpl=msg-f%3A17082166205… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Trent Nakashima  <trent_nakashima@baldwin.k12.hi.us>  Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 4:51 PM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Aloha, 

My name is Trent Nakashima and I am a 9th grade and 12th grade ELA teacher at Baldwin High School on the island of 

Maui.  I have a dilemma.  On one hand, I love teaching and seeing the kids, but when we are risking the lives of our kids 

as well as ourselves, one has to rethink this.  It is very hypocritical to have the governor talk about not having gatherings 

of more than 10 indoors and 25 outdoors and I have 35 bodies in my classes.  I do not have one class under 29 this 

year!  My seniors are naturally  bigger in size than my freshman, so those classes look even more ridiculous.  Besides 

being in the heart of summer with no air conditioning, one can only think about the threat of COVID in the back of their 

minds all the while putting on a fake smile to encourage the students. 

My suggestion would be to go back to the blended learning we ended the year at last year and give up the physical sports 

and gatherings.  I coach football and I am an advocate for cancelling the season.  Having played in college as well as 

high school, I know firsthand how dirty the game can be.  Although the students are missing out, we are all in the middle 

of a pandemic and it is just a reality that is as real as can be.  I do not want to see some kid or teacher being rushed to 

the hospital.  We are more built for distance learning than ever.  People who claim there were more failures and retention 

last year, need to check their data because I had a lot less.  I built a great relationship with the kids from last year and 

although I love meeting them in person, most have told me they felt blessed to have had the opportunity to have school 

from home. 

Please rethink the whole system for this year or come up with some sort of modified plan.  Every day, we get an email 

about a staff member and two or three students being sent home due to COVID.  Allowing students to have the distant 

learning option and having a couple of teachers per subject in secondary education would suffice.  Many elementary 

schools are doing it on Maui.  Even with that, two schools got shut down due to too many cases.  I am going to do 

whatever you ask because I have no other choice, but with that in mind, please realize you are playing with peoples' lives; 

some children's as well.  I am diabetic and I am about the fifth person in my family I am worried about. 

Humbly, Trent Nakashima 

Sent from  Mail  for Windows We are trying our best to keep the school safe for all of our students, teachers, and staff. Everyone is pitching in from the minute students arrive on campus until they leave during our staggered pick up times. You will see administrators helping everywhere even in the kitchen serving lunches to wiping down the tables in the cafeteria. You will see counselors, PPT and EAs, and support staff everywhere helping to keep our school safe! Custodians are constantly working around the clock. We all do it because we want to do whatever possible to keep our students in school. 

But the physical setting and environment is our biggest concerns no matter how much we physically do in our power by cleaning and as much as possible physical distance the students and wear masks. 

Students will follow the rules. But students are children ages 4 to 11 years old in an elementary school. They play patty cake in their ohana bubbles during their wait time in the lanai for their teachers in the mornings. They talk to each other in a group circle during recess. They run and play with each other. They eat lunch with their masks off in the cafeteria full of approx.. 60 – 70 students as they look around and talk to others 6 feet apart. After they’re done eating, they pull their masks down to talk to others in the cafeteria to hear each other better and then get caught doing so and put it back up. Or they continue to drink their water in their hydro to keep their mask down and be able to talk to their friends. All students in the cafeteria spend approx. 30 minutes together eating, talking, sneezing or coughing all with their masks off when needed and on when they know we are watching. But how do you watch 60+ students with only 3-5 staff members (custodians, lunch room supervisor, counselors, admin) when you know once you turn your back they will resort to what is comfortable when talking. Not all but many do this; but just one student doing so is all too much! 

Our school is trying our best to keep everyone safe. Some of us have elderly parents to go home to care for, some of us have children who are under 12 and cannot get vaccinated yet. 

We care so much about the whole child – academics, social and emotional well being of each child. We care so much that we no longer choose to perform only our professional responsibilities and duties. We no longer see that coming in every day at 7 am or sooner and leaving after 3 pm is too much. 

But what are we doing? We cannot control everything that a child does because he is a child. We cannot stop the Delta variant and how it is so easily transmissible in the schools. What will it take for us to realize this reality? I cringe at what I see that goes on in the school with children. They are innocently being children and that in itself is dangerous to do. 

They don’t belong in an environment that may potentially get them ill and God forbid take their life away. 

Do we have to wait till it happens? 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708234740772825211&simpl=msg-f%3A17082347407… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Marlene Medeiros  <mkmedeir@hawaii.rr.com>  Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 9:39 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha, 

My name is Pua Medeiros and I am a secondary social studies teacher at Kea’au High School.  I am providing a typed 

electronic testimony regarding the safety of my students, colleagues, my own children, and myself.  I am very fearful to 

say the least, of this new variant of COVID that seems to be spreading more rapidly as the days go by.  I feel it’s very 

irresponsible of our own leaders, such as our governor, to essentially use our children and teachers as guinea pigs to see 

if COVID will further spread.  Ige made a claim stating that the cases of COVID are more community spread rather than 

tourists bringing in the virus.  If that is the case then way on earth would he have children and teachers at school in the 

masses?  That just does not make sense to me.  Also, why is it that State offices are not entirely working and functioning 

in full capacity but the biggest state institution is supposed to function in full capacity?  This also does not make any 

sense to me.  State and County mandates require that people are not supposed to gather in groups no larger than 25 

people.  I have 32 students in 2 of my classes, although I realize that there are exemptions to the above mandate, it’s 

scary to know that our leaders are making decisions such as these and risking further community spread.  It seems like 

logic is over run with stupidity and carelessness here.  Restaurants and other establishments are also mandated to 

function in 50% capacity but, again, public schools are supposed to function with 100% capacity.  Something is terribly 

wrong with the thought process here and our State leaders need to get a grip and dose of reality in the ways in which they 

are governing in the midst of this pandemic.  I get that school is important but not at the expense of our keiki people, 

wake up and do your due diligence for the greater good of our communities through out our great aloha state. 

Me ke aloha pumehana, 

Pua Medeiros 

Sent from my iPhone 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony - 

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708275649975228214&simpl=msg-f%3A17082756499… 1/2

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony -

Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 8:30 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To our Interim Superintendent, Governor Ige, and others concerned about students and staff at our public schools, 

If I have to wrap my thoughts/opinions/feelings into one statement one week into this school year I would say: the state 

and the HIDOE were not prepared for a safe and appropriate response to the pandemic as we start this school year.  As a 

seasoned educator  (13 years) as well a mother of a student who attends a public school, I know that in person learning is 

the best environment for student learning.  I agree that distance learning is not conducive to reaching grade level 

benchmarks.  However, I do not agree with the stance that it's okay to bring everyone back in school because 

"transmission" is not evident in schools.  This is a direct contradiction of the Governor's current stance on indoor 

gatherings with a limit of 10. Why is this rule for everyone else but does not apply to children and staff? Is it because 

parents need to work to keep the economy running?  Does economics come before safety and education?  I am not a 

politician but I do have common sense and rules typically are put in place with the understanding that it applies to all -

issue of equity.  However, this rule hinders public safety in our schools - in fact, it endangers everyone. 

All I am asking is for transparency.  Someone needs to explain to us the "why".  Tell us why we can have classrooms 

nearing 30 students (with no social distancing) if outside of the schools no one can gather in groups more than 10?  Why 

is the DOE agreeing to this?  Is the HSTA the only entity listening to the voices of educators and parents who do not feel 

schools are safe?  There are so many questions that needs to be answered by the leaders of the state and education. 

Frustration and resentment only festers when confusion is allowed to linger - this is something our schools cannot afford 

at this moment. 

Prior to the pandemic in Spring of 2020, the state was in discussion with the HSTA to improve certain conditions.  One 

issue that was resolved was that of paying SPED teachers an extra $10K a year to recruit and keep qualified SPED 

teachers.  The next item on the list was to address the compression issue where seasoned teachers were to be paid 

accordingly based on years of service - some teaches who had taught close to 20 years were underpaid because of 

years of contacts that did not include steps (raises) like the one we are currently in.  In addition to the compression issue, 

the state was dealing with a recruitment and retaining issue that seems to get worse year after year.  The last 2 items 

were never addressed because the pandemic struck, but these are still huge issues that cannot be ignored.  In the face of 

uncertain times, shouldn't we have systems in place to recruit and keep teachers?  I am appalled watching colleagues 

leave the field entirely and being replaced by unqualified long-term subs.  In addition, our own local children are not blind 

to the issues that educators face and that is why they will not choose to enter the field. 

Although coronavirus cases were dropping statewide, nationwide, and internationally, it was still there.  Our efforts to curb 

transmission helped but a new variant was approaching.  Even then, our leaders did nothing hoping that we would slowly 

to back to normal.  What upsets me the most is that the Governor and leaders of the HIDOE failed to have a contingency 

plan...our state did not have a back up plan - and now the response to plan is given to individual schools to figure out. 

The state had all of last school year and summer to plan/purchase/create an online option for families - that was up to 

schools again to figure out.  If leaders had listened to thousands of educators, parents, and students, they would have 

remembered to not expect teachers to teach in person and online.  Yet this is what is being expected again.  Why are we 

here again?  We are to lose hope, lose educations, lose support when our leaders choose not to listen to our needs. 

So here we are, year 2 with the coronavirus - with a even more problematic variant.  Let's bring all the students back - but 

wearing masks, of course.  Let's expect schools and teachers to roll with the punches - that's what they're paid to do -

even though everyone agrees last year did not go well.  Let's stop transmission by minimizing the size of gatherings - but 

let's not apply this to schools.  Let's make all state employees get vaccinate - it's okay to violate people's right to choose (I 

myself am vaccinated but do not agree that the state has the right to force this upon everyone).  Let's get our economy 

rolling - tourists are welcome even when resources are scarce and tensions are high with residents. Rather than making 

across the board decisions that I feel is based on convenience for the state, come to the table and have a conversation: 

We want all schools back in school, how can we make it safe for everyone?  Purchase millions of rapid tests that can be 

done in schools with certified nursed.  How can we keep all state employees safe if they do not get vaccinated?  Offer to 

pay employees to test weekly.  What if parents do not want kids in school?  We will provide an online program for parents 

who do not want kids to be in school for safety issues or we will provide training for schools to run their own online 

programs. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony - 

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708275649975228214&simpl=msg-f%3A17082756499… 2/2

It's just the start of Week 2 in school and the majority of all public schools in the state has already seen at least 1 case of 

coronavirus.  Staff are being forced to get vaccinated - and we have one of our SPED teachers who has just resigned 

because of this rule.  This.  This is why you all need to listen.  This affects schools, staff, students in a bad way. 

Please, do what's best for students.  What's best is to do what's best for educators.  Please remember that making the 

right decisions are hard - but make decisions for the right reasons and to help educators and students - not to help the 

economy.  From my point of view, keeping businesses running is taking a precedence and it's creating a feeling of 

hopelessness and frustration. 

Sincerely, 

A local educator (of 13 years) Please redact my personal information so my testimony is anonymous. 

Honorable Chairperson and Board Members, 

In my experience, nearly everything that's being touted about layered measures to mitigate COVID in Hawaii Public Schools is an exaggeration and in some cases just flat out lies.  

> •

Students aren't properly masking and need to be reminded over and over to wear their masks and to stay 6ft apart.  

> •

What recourse do teachers/schools have when individual students put those around them at risk with their refusal to properly mask?  

> •

I am in a 100 year old school building. Ventilation is so poor that my classroom is regularly 6-10 degrees hotter than outdoors.  

> •

There isn't enough staff to ensure adherence to masking and social distancing during lunch and recess.  

> •

How are classrooms exempt from 6ft social distancing when students are present for prolonged periods of time? My students heads are 4ft apart because of classroom size.  

> •

"When possible" is just flat out insulting to the health and safety of students, the community, and staff.  

> •

Grocery stores, Retail Stores, Restaurants, Bars all have guidance of 6ft.  

> •

All of my students are unvaccinated because they're too young.  

> •

We are on a Middle School campus, so they spend an hour in each class and then move throughout the school interacting with all other students and many other teachers.  

> •

There aren't enough teachers or classrooms for smaller class sizes.  

> •

Families, Teachers, School Staff, and Administrators have been put in the impossible situation of figuring this out without the resources necessary to do so.  

> •

ALL STUDENTS WHO DON'T HAVE THE CHOICE TO GET VACCINATED SHOULD HAVE THE OPTION FOR DISTANCE LEARNING BEING TAUGHT BY A REAL, HUMAN TEACHER! 

Hospitals are at capacity - what happens when this past week's cases of 700+ per day need hospitalization? What's going to happen to the children who need critical care that's not related to COVID? What's going to happen to the children who need critical care that is related to COVID? 

One of the truths of this whole situation is that many families don't have a place for their child to go if the schools are closed to the majority of in-person learning and that is a major driving force behind keeping schools open for full in-person learning. Governor Ige says that "it's worth the risk" - but statistically someone's child is going to die. Is that child, are those children, just going to be the collateral damage of "economic concerns"? 

The Hawaii DOE is failing everyone right now - all in the name of keeping students in schools so their parents can go to work. 

Why aren’t we doing what’s ethically and morally right? 

Thank You, 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony: Presentation on Opening school for the 2021-2022 school year  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708276274944115913&simpl=msg-f%3A17082762749… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony: Presentation on Opening school for the 2021-2022 school year 

1 message 

Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 8:40 AM 

To: "Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## · Meeting:  Presentation on opening schools for the  2021-2022 school year .

## · Position:  Comment 

## Aloha! 

I am a first grade school teacher on Maui. I would like to  keep my name anonymous, and I would like to share my 

testimony. 

I have been  trying so hard keeping my classroom, fellow students and colleagues their  families safe from this corona 

virus pandemic. Our desks are spaced 3 feet  apart all facing forward, we are all masked (but we still have some 

occasional  6 year olds slipping their masks under their noses or taking them off), we  constantly wash and/or sanitize 

our hands, we have 2 air purifiers in our  classroom, and I am safely trying to teach more than 6 feet away from the 

nearest student in front of the class. However, all these measures I have taken  to protect these children were still not 

enough. On Friday the 13 at around  12:30 PM, I receive a phone call from our health aid telling me that I have a 

student who tested positive. Then, the following day another student in my  class tested positive. 

I could not help but break down crying thinking I may have  failed trying to keep my students and their families safe at 

school. Worst of  all, I call my husband for moral support, and having to ask him “should I not  come home?” Not come 

home to my family because I may have been in contact with  students who tested positive. I have a 4 year old daughter 

who I shower with  hugs and kisses every day, and live with my retired parents, who help us take  care of our daughter 

while my husband and I go to work every day. The emotional  roller coaster and my mental health that day took an 

enormous hit on my blood  pressure. Also the anxiety of waiting, waiting for my test results to come  back, planning for 

the worst, but hoping and praying for the best. 

On that Friday the 13, while my students were getting picked  up one by one from their parents, I was also asked by my 

administrator to  prepare for distance teaching/learning. Given my fragile state, I was not ready  to distance teach/learn. 

If so, what if I was tested positive. Clearly I would  not be able to. 

I am be trying to keep my classroom safe, but I feel our  school could do a little better. We are asking our students to 

hand wash  frequently, but our school has made a schedule where some students go to recess  first and play (and are 

likely to grab rocks, dirt, twigs, leaves, etc…) and  when asked if they are going to wash their hands when they go to 

the cafeteria  to eat, our administration replied they will “sanitize” their hands with  sanitizer. Therefore, dirt and grime 

will still be on their hands and the  student will be eating their lunches with “clean dirt” on their hands. Also in  our 

cafeteria, the students are eating facing each other, not 6 feet apart. 

Also, teaching to our students with our masks on is very difficult. Trying to stretch my voice across the classroom to 6-

7 years olds with my mask on has taken a toll on my voice and breathing. It is not healthy. 

This pandemic has affected every person’s life in a negative  way. We are all trying to do our part, we all want the kids 

back at school. But  how can we do that in a safe and healthy way knowing that we are still teaching  in the same 

rooms, eating in the same cafeteria prior to the pandemic.  Classrooms and cafeterias are crowded. I have a niece who 

can’t eat lunch at  her high school cafeteria because the lines are too long and there isn’t enough  time to get her food 

and eat it. And if she does get her food there is no place  to eat it. 

We need to try harder in helping keep our keiki safe during  this pandemic. If you can, vaccinate… don’t wait. 

Mahalo for hearing me. To Whom It May Concern, 

I am submitting testimony in regards to the current condition of my classroom and COVID safety 

protocols. I do believe that everyone is trying their best to ensure that all students are safe and 

that procedures are being followed to limit the spread of COVID 19. However, there are things 

that are not within the control of the administration or the teachers despite every effort to 

maintain the safety guidelines that are put into place. 

Most classrooms are completely filled with 30 or more students, with more students being 

enrolled daily. It is not possible to social distance at all and the students are sitting right next to 

each other. Being children, they do not consistently wear their masks or wear their masks 

correctly. They are constantly being reminded to cover both their noses and mouths but they 

find it difficult because it is so uncomfortable and hot. I do not have the proper ventilation in my 

classroom and so incorrect mask usage poses a dangerous risk to students and the teachers 

when the amount of viral load that can be transmitted, especially in the case of the Delta variant, 

is so contagious. 

Incorrect mask usage is also a problem before school, at recesses, and after school. Kids just 

want to be kids and they disregard the protocols when they are not being monitored by an adult 

at all times. When students are not in their classes, they often pull their masks off their noses or 

wear their masks on their chins. Unfortunately, there are also some adults on campus who also 

do not wear masks or wear masks correctly while on campus. 

There is also a lot of crowding in lunch lines and in the cafeteria. This is scary because the 

students’ masks are off completely. Most of the students are not vaccinated or are ineligible to 

be vaccinated. Students eat lunch within a close proximity to each other and we do not have 

the space to have students eat outside. 

We were supposed to have been given wipes for our classrooms, but I did not receive cleaning 

materials for my class. I had to go and seek it out while others had supplies delivered to them. 

I have gone through a bag of industrial sized wipes within one week. Some teachers were also 

given disinfectant spray but I was not. Last year, the janitors would come around and spray 

sanitizer over all of our rooms at the end of each day but that has not happened this year 

despite having more kids in classrooms. 

Teachers and students are not being notified in a timely manner if they have been exposed to 

COVID. I have had many students out due to being a close contact. Students are all over the 

place in terms of curriculum because they have to be out for a minimum of 10 days at a time. I 

also feel uncomfortable with only having a 10 day absence in place rather than a negative test. 

If schools were given and allowed to test their students, this would alleviate a lot of concerns. I 

have had kids who have come to school and then have disappeared because they are 

considered close contacts but we don’t get any information about them other than they were 

out. Teachers are supposed to be 6 feet away from their students, but this is impossible given that they actually need help. It is not natural or nurturing to tell our kids to stay away from us. It is also impossible to help or give feedback from afar, especially in a mask when they cannot hear you and you cannot hear them. I do believe in face to face teaching and learning. And I do believe that kids need social and emotional support right now. Since the start of school, the students’ demeanor has drastically shifted from what they were like when they were only online. This is the right environment for them but I feel like that amount of students on campus at one time is not safe. I feel like there should either be hybrid teaching and learning at a lower percentage of the population or students can come on their face to face days and then do homework and supplementary online programs that they are being mandated to do anyway, like Achieve 3000 or iReady, on their at home days. Until the amount of cases decreases, it is in the best interest of the kids to have another layer of protection in place for them at this point in time. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Opening of the school year 2021-2022  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708287417180301587&simpl=msg-f%3A17082874171… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Opening of the school year 2021-2022 

1 message 

Tai Baird  <bair6939@gmail.com>  Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 11:37 AM 

To: Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Aloha, 

I am submitting written testimony regarding the opening of our schools for the 2021-2022 school year. As A special 

education teacher, I feel I need to express how unsafe the circumstances are right now regarding our students and cour 

school community. With so many groups we serve who choose not to be vaccinated, do not watch the news, do not follow 

our current scary situation, this is not a time for our schools to be gathering in groups. This is just downright unsafe. 

Please, I am urging us for all our our safety, letʻs move to a complete distance learning model so that we are confident 

that we are not spreading this virus.  I strongly urge us to close  our schools, and go to distance learning models. We can 

do this! It is so much better for our safety and health. Thank you, Tai Baird, Special  Education teacher, island of Maui. Reasons why I will not be vaccinated and /or tested: 

* These vaccines and testing swabs are in an experimental stage, and I do not choose to be a 

guinea pig for the pharmaceutical companies, or the government. 

* Religious exemption, God made our immune systems which are very strong and resilient 

when treated and cared for properly. My children are not vaccinated, I have not been 

vaccinated since being of age to make my own choice, nor do we take antibiotics. It is wrong to 

use fetal cells in vaccinations. 

* It is against our constitutional rights to be mandated to take a vaccine or a test for covid 19. 

This should be a personal choice. 

* I do not feel they are safe and have read numerous medical documents and listened to 

doctors who are researching the vaccines and coming up with data and information that does 

not coincide with what we the people are being told. 

* The number of fatalities and adverse reactions far exceed an acceptable safe number. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708328797428995010&simpl=msg-f%3A17083287974… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 10:34 PM 

To: testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Discussion Item VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 School Year 

Comment 

Hello Board Members, 

I am writing this testimony as both a parent of students in the Hawaii Public Schools and as a teacher.  What the 

Department of Education is showing in the news is not what is happening in most of Hawaii’s schools.  My classroom and 

many others have double desks.  There is no way to distance students on those desks.  I have 28 seats and my biggest 

class has 27 students.  They are sitting shoulder to shoulder in my classroom.  I try my best to keep them apart and to 

constantly remind them to wear their masks properly.  If you walk around campus, it looks like it did before covid except 

they have masks on.  I have caught students sharing food and sharing water from the same flask.  I talk to them about 

germs and how it’s not safe to share right now, but I’m sure it’s happening out of our view too.  Our first day of school, we 

had hundreds of students packed into our cafeteria for over an hour.  I realize we want to give the students a sense of 

normalcy, but this is putting them at risk.  We’ve been told to limit gatherings, yet we are packing the students into our 

rooms for 75-80 minutes each period.  Don’t get me wrong, I love seeing my students.  I love seeing their smiling eyes. 

But, I also worry about them and the danger we are putting them in.  Having a hybrid schedule where we split them in half 

would be much safer than what we are doing now. 

As a parent of a student who is not able to be vaccinated, I was horrified to get a phone call to tell me my child had been 

identified as a close contact to a student who tested positive for Covid-19.  The exposure happened on her first day of 

school!  This meant she had to quarantine for 10 days after exposure.  As I made phone calls to find out if I needed to 

have my son also quarantine, I thought of how many I could have exposed if this exposure caused us to be positive.  The 

exposure happened on a Thursday.  We were notified on the following Tuesday.  That meant that I had taught classes on 

Friday, Monday and half of Tuesday before the phone call.  My husband went to work and my son went to school on 

those same days.  That’s a lot of people who could have been exposed. 

The Department of Education keeps saying that not many opted for distance learning.  That’s because it’s not being 

offered everywhere.  The schools that are offering distance learning have waitlists.  My daughter’s school offers distance 

learning, but they recommend only taking the core subjects.  So, what does that mean for her being promoted to the next 

grade?  We agonized over the decision to send her to school or put her on distance.  Since she is too young to be 

vaccinated, it would be safer to put her on distance learning.  But, we also didn’t want her only taking core classes and 

missing out on all her other classes.  There was no other acceptable alternative. 

Thank you for reading my testimony. 

Sincerely, 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - School covid  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708381459324072125&simpl=msg-f%3A17083814593… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## School covid 

1 message 

Michelle Murray  <michellem@farringtonhighschool.org>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 12:31 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

I work at Farrington high  school and I love it. But the DOE's response to Covid is ridiculous. We have over 2000 students 

plus staff on campus daily. The governor  said not to have large gatherings and the DOH said the state is on fire and on its 

way to becoming a disaster. My CAS is tone deaf on this issue. We are not safe and we are putting our students and staff 

in danger. The state just closed the libraries  down because of covid but we are expected to work with over 2000 students. 

I question why we are exposed to danger but other state agencies are not.I am a dedicated educator  but am considering 

quitting to keep my own family safe. I take care of my 89 year old mother and I am afraid for her. My students are sitting in 

classes of 25+ and they are not even 2 feet from each other. I have 8 students excluded from school and 2 that their 

parents will not allow them to come to school because of covid. You are all educated people who know the danger covid 

especially the delta variant  but you stay silent. Remember you are giving silent consent to no real mitigation factors  no 

social distancing and no regard for human lives 

Michelle Murray 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708381466882145883&simpl=msg-f%3A17083814668… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Lawrence Frank  <lawrence.frank@k12.hi.us>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 12:31 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha Honorable Leaders, 

We are experiencing  unprecedented  rates of covid positive  cases in our state and our schools. Yet, our reaction to these 

numbers is illogical and honestly disrespectful. The governor must think we lack common sense not to notice our policies 

blatantly do not correlate or make sense. 

When we had far fewer positive cases, we went completely virtual; with the current case count coinciding with the state 

being open to tourism, a blended model would make more sense (if safety were really the main concern, virtual classes 

would be considered). We are packing 30+ students into spaces with no social distancing in many smaller classrooms, 

and I am not sure 3 feet of social distancing can be done in large classrooms anyway. It is absurd that we would reduce 6 

feet of social distance to three with a higher positivity rate than ever. We are being told sports must stop and that we 

can't  have assemblies, yet we continue to pack students into overcrowded classrooms for up to 75 minutes. As of 

Monday, August 16th, I had 20 students out on quarantine due to direct exposure in classrooms on campus. 

Last school year, I was fully vaccinated, caught covid from a positive student in my class (my only exposure), and brought 

it home to my three children. Already, during this school year, as I mentioned, 20 of my students are  out on quarantine 

from direct exposure in class.  Our admin has been turned into contact tracers,  which is problematic. 

As for athletics, our athletes have gone through enough. At our school, they are not catching covid at practice. They are 

catching/being exposed in overcrowded classrooms. The burden of forced vaccine/testing is unjustly being placed only on 

athletes. Our state restricts gatherings of no more than ten people indoors. That directive should be followed in the 

schools as well, or at least 50% capacity. What kind of logic are we following when state mandates limit in-door 

gatherings, but state schools are exempt like Coivd  can't touch us here. 

If we stay fully open and disregard the numbers, let us  be fully open and have assemblies and sports with covid protocols 

in place. Let's have consistency in our messaging. On the other hand, if we say assemblies and athletics are too risky, 

having 30+ students in a classroom is also too risky. If we are going to mandate vaccines for athletes, which is another 

controversial issue because bodily autonomy is a thing, then all students should have to vaccinate to come to school. 

Nobody can require that in a public school, and thus it should not be required for athletes. 

The bottom line is Covid is running rampant on school campuses and will continue to spread with this new variant, 

especially if we go full steam ahead packing students into overcrowded classrooms. Therein lies our problem; the focus 

should be on school safety and policy be directed to all students. 

If the messaging is that school is safe and we can pack all these students in a classroom, then the message should also 

be assemblies and athletics are also open and safe because schools are safe. If the covid numbers suggest otherwise 

and safety is truly a concern, the first thing that should be removed is the overcrowded classrooms! We cannot have 

double standards. It is either safe to run our schools with in-person  learning or not; we rely on those who hold leadership 

positions to decide that and act with clear, logical, relevant, safe, and responsible guidance. 

Mahalo, 

Dr. Lawrewnce P. Frank, Jr 

Radford HS PE Chair, Head Cheerleading Coach 

(23 years in the DOE) 

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. gp 

August 19 , 2021 

Hawaii State Board of Education 

General Business Meeting 

Catherine Payne, Chairperson 

Kenneth Uemura, Vice Chairperson 

Aloha Chair Payne , Vice Chair Uemura , and Members of the Board ,

Founded in 2017, HawaiiKidsCAN is a local nonprofit organization committed to 

ensuring that Hawaii has an excellent and equitable education system that reflects the 

true voices of our communities and, in turn, has a transformational impact on our 

children and our state. We strongly bel ieve that all students should have access to 

excellent educational opportunities, regardless of family income levels and 

circumstances. 

As an organization that has consistently testified to the Board of Education through the 

duration of the pandemic, HawaiiKidsCAN has advocated for transparency and clarity of 

data, communications, and planning. 

1) HawaiiKidsCAN offers comments on Finance and Infras tructure 

Committee Report on: (1) Presentation on Department’s allocation plan for 

use of federal funds in the second round of the Education Stabilization 

Fund’s Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (“ESSER II”) 

and in the third round of ESSER funds authorized under the American 

Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (“ESSER ARP”) .

HawaiiKidsCAN , along with several BOE members, expressed disappointment with the 

plan the Hawaii Department of Education (HIDOE) presented on June 17, 2021 for the 

use of federal ESSER funds. We felt that the plan submitted lacked the level of 

specificity and detail that was evident upon even a casual review of plans submitted by 

other states to the U.S. Department of Education (ED). 

While t he allocation plan being considered today is a step forward in terms of specificity, 

we find that there are a number of questions the BOE should pose to the HIDOE: • In our June 17 testimony, we shared concerns about the lack of clarity in the 

HIDOE plan about how to adequately assess needs at the school and complex 

levels. The section for Complex Area Accelerated Learnin g Proposals (2.03) and 

Complex Area Staff Well Being & Safe Return to School Proposals (7) reference a 

needs assessment to be created by the State Level Coordinated Support program, 

but it is unclear how this will be deployed and what items will be included. In 

contrast, Tennessee requires the same rigorous needs assessment to be 

completed by all local districts. This level of guidance creates consistency across 

districts an d schools, and a common framework for understanding how to 

prioritize funds and programming. This is especially important given the wide 

variation of school models and challenges across the HIDOE system in the 2020 -

2021 school year. The Tennessee needs ass essment can be found here: 

https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/education/esser -planning -

resources/ESSER%20Needs%20Assessment -Distric ts.pdf .

• In our June 17 testimony, we praised the HIDOE plan for including the following 

interventions: “ Summer learning programs; high -dosage tutoring responsive to 

families’ schedules, such as during evenings and weekends; extended learning 

time; and acad emic coaching will be managed by each school and complex area 

to allow for flexibility to address their unique needs. Professional development 

opportunities will be provided to educators to ensure they are equipped to 

address the array of student needs tha t have developed since the onset of the 

public health emergency .” Our concern was no specifics about how these 

interventions would be deployed were provided, and today’s allocation plan bears 

those concerns out: 

o We found no mention of tutoring or extended learning time in the 

allocation plan. Our assumption is that these services might be included in 

Rigorous Out -of -School time enrichment activities (2.02) and Complex 

Area Accelerated Learning Proposals (2.03) . Again, this continued lack of 

specificity is c oncerning. 

o For Rigorous Out -of -School time enrichment activities (2.02) , we were 

concerned that only a range of 3,500 - 4,500 students are expected to 

participate. This would represent less than 3% of the total HIDOE student 

population, resulting in limite d impact. 

o As a reminder, we testified on June 17 that other states have been able to 

provide a higher level of specificity. For example, Tennessee is using 5% of 

funds for a statewide tutoring model, called TN ALL Corps (Tennessee 

Accelerating Literacy and Learning Corps), that will ensure Tennessee 

students have access to high -dosage, low ratio tutoring over the next three 

years. Louisiana has Accelerate, a K -12 just -in -time tutoring initiative, as 

well as a framework to help schools select from evidence -based programs. Rhode Island is launching a math strategy that will provide Eureka specific 

curriculum implementation supports in the elementary grades, as well as 

coordinating several tutoring initiatives in the state, such as an expansion 

of RI’s AmeriCor ps organizations and a partnership with 

Schoolhouse.world, Khan Academy’s tutoring -focused sister organization, 

to help align efforts around a common vision for serving students. 

• On June 17, we flagged where the HIDOE ESSER plan mentioned transitions: 

“Pr ograms targeted to help students transition to their next school (elementary 

school, middle school, high school, or post -secondary institutions) will also be 

implemented to increase student success at the next level. One such program is a 

summer start kind ergarten transition program, a three -week summer bridge 

program to prepare students for entry into kindergarten .” Upon review of the 

allocation, plan we are encouraged to see the kindergarten transition summer 

start program budgeted, but we could find no other targeted programs for 

specific transition grades, with this work simply lumped into Summer Learning 

(for Su mmer 2022 or 2022 & 2023) (2.01) .

• On June 17, we also flagged where the plan mentioned learning acceleration: 

“HIDOE is currently finalizing a learning acceleration framework to provide 

guidance to schools, complex areas, and state offices in mitigating th e learning 

loss caused by the COVID -19 pandemic .” We did not find any example of this 

framework in the allocation plan. Is this work bucketed under State Middle 

School Student Leadership Coordinator (2.08) ? Why would this only be 

applicable to middle schoo l? 

• We applauded the BOE and HIDOE for making summer school free in 2021. 

Based on the allocation plan, it is unclear to us if summer school will continue to 

be free. If not, what is the justification for ending this important service? 

• HawaiiKidsCAN has tes tified on numerous occasions for a more strategic 

approach to the deployment of distance learning, with far greater coordination 

across the state and complex areas. On June 3, we testified that we should ensure 

“that virtual learning remains an option for all families who want it this fall .” 

We’ve heard from anxious parents, students, and teachers on the seemingly 

rushed statewide distance learning program or confusion at the school level, so 

we urge HIDOE to streamline offerings moving forward as much as possible. For 

example, the allocat ion plan puts State Online Learning Programs (2.06) and 

Distance Learning SY 2021 -2022 & SY 2022 -2023 (2.07) into different silos, 

whereas we would push HIDOE to explain how these programs work together 

moving forward so as to avoid duplication and be more planful around what is 

sure to be an evolving public health situation. 2) Hawaii KidsCAN offers comments on Discussio n Item A ) Pr esentation on 

opening schools for the 2021 -2022 school year 

We recognize the incredibly challenging task facing schools in trying to ensure students 

are learning and that the entire school community is mentally and physically sa fe. 

Overall, HawaiiKidsCAN find s the 3-1-1 strategy to be the right approach for our public 

schoo ls. 

In particular, we have questions about the Attendance priority area . In our 

conversations with parents, it is unclear what the systemwide approach to learning is 

when a student is required to be home under quarantine. We ’ve heard that some schools 

are sending paper packets home, but this does not seem to be univer sa l. How are 

schools ensuring that students are still learning and accounted for in this s cenar io? Are 

students able t o access distance learning in order to avoid falling beh ind ? Ho w does 

exte nded quarantine get considered w hen school s report out on chronic abse nteeism? 

For teachers who have to quarantine , what happen s to the students in those classes ? Are 

those teachers still able to conduct distance learning? Do we have the level of substitut e

staffing to handle mult iple long -term qua rantine absences, especiall y for teachers who 

have large classes? How does quarantine im pact sick leave? 

Mahalo for your consideration ,

David Miyashiro 

Founding Executive Director 

HawaiiKidsCAN Aloha Chairperson Payne and members of the BOE, 

I am very concerned about the rapidly rising number of COVID-19 cases that are occurring on school campuses since the first week of school. I would like to please request a consideration to implement a hybrid model to reduce class sizes and to make it easier for social distancing and contact tracing. I live on the Big Island and we are having extremely high daily case counts with the highest positivity rate in the State. Our hospitals are at max capacity. We are in a state of community spread where it is unsafe to leave the house. Not all schools have the same mitigation processes in place, as noted by Superintendent Hayashi. Not all schools are doing wellness checks, temperature checks, and some schools are taking several days to report COVID cases to families. If this is not something that happens immediately, COVID-19 may have already spread to many people. Please help support our students, allowing them to attend school, yet keeping them a little safer by allowing them to spread out and social distance. 

Thank you for your attention to this matter. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708387959692615357&simpl=msg-f%3A17083879596… 1/4
> Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Mermaid Surfer <mermaidsurfer@hotmail.com> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 2:15 PM
> To: "testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov>

August 19th, 2021, General Business Meeting 

Discussion Item A: Presentation on opening of schools 

Commenting and providing feedback on the return to full in person learning as a DOE teacher 

Aloha, 

To start, I am asking that you please order the DOE to revise their 2021-2022 SY school year 

reopening guidelines to include the combination of hybrid/distance learning  models based on positivity 

counts as well as mandate that the DOE meet with HSTA to negotiate another MOU to better protect 

teachers. Why hasn’t this been considered a priority? Libraries are closing once a week; courts are 

postponing trials and yet schools  continue to march on as if COVID doesn’t exist. What makes courtrooms 

and libraries different from schools? Both are controlled settings that shuffle different groups of people, 

mainly adults or children supervised by adults, through their structures throughout  the day. Masks are still 

required. If anything, there’s usually the presence of either law enforcement personnel or contracted security 

outside of those buildings who could assist workers if people refuse to comply with mask mandates. The 

population on a school  campus is much greater than that of a library or court with less staff around to 

monitor and enforce mandates for children the ages of 5 all the way to 18. Josh Green claims we do not need 

to change anything about full in person instruction because we do not  have any major outbreaks occurring 

within the schools but from when I last checked, neither do the courts or libraries here in Hawaii yet they’ve 

made recent changes to their operations. I suspect other state offices that service the public and have 

inconveniently  been operating throughout this entire pandemic in ways that do not service the public, even 

when positivity levels were much lower, will follow suit. So please tell me what makes schools impervious 

to doing the same regarding models of instruction to protect  our children, staff members and communities? 

Please allow me to personally “invite” you into my classroom as you read through this testimony. 

Imagine sitting in a non-air-conditioned space, on this windless day in  Hawaii nei, with sweat uncomfortably 

dripping down your back and mind you, the day just started and sunshine blazing through the doors and 

windows, making the room feel even hotter than it already is. Imagine trying to learn as well as teach with 

your face  being smothered by a mask that is soaking wet with sweat, elbow to elbow with people you are not 

related to after months of being told to practice social distancing and avoid gatherings of any kind with 

people outside of your household while feeling full of  anxiety at the same time for your safety. Imagine 

having to work at a desk that is sticky and wet from the mixture of perspiration and humidity that has not 

been cleaned after the people before you sat there. Half of my classroom doesn’t have electrical outlets  and I 

must use every inch of spare space to squeeze in enough desks to accommodate full classes of students so the 

only part of the room I can have fans in is the front, which does not help matters. Our school also doesn’t 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708387959692615357&simpl=msg-f%3A17083879596… 2/4

have the money to purchase new fans  for every single classroom (but we are getting a new football field) and 

I have less than $6 in my own bank account to go till our next payday, but I’ve got car repairs, bills, and 

other responsibilities to pay for since my medical premiums went up and my  pay was cut thanks to the 

approval of our newly “negotiated” contracts! I can tell you as a teacher that all I’ve been feeling since 

summer ended is sick to my stomach and miserable over this entire situation. I feel devalued, demoralized 

and like a slave  rather than an educated professional who has nothing but love in her heart for kids and 

teaching them how to be better readers, writers, speakers, and human beings. I have been struggling to sleep, 

eat and function because I am afraid of not only compromising  my own health but also finding out a student 

of mine is sick or ends up in the hospital and may not even have a ventilator to be hooked up to because our 

hospitals are full of people needing help. I have not received any training on how to address learning  loss, 

assist students with the transition back to school after being out of the norm for over a year and a half or how 

to help the ones who have experienced trauma and are struggling emotionally either. I am being forced to 

pretend everything is fine, we are  back to normal and COVID did not really exist after all and the measures 

we’ve been taking and sacrifices we’ve made were a waste of time. I can assure you; my students see the 

same hypocrisy about this entire situation that I do. 

In addition, there’s not much else I can say that many concerned parents, community members, 

medical professionals and other people working in education have said already  but given the high surge in 

numbers due to the Delta variant, I am not understanding why classrooms full of unrelated people are 

exempt from being considered a “gathering” but restaurants and other businesses are now operating at 50%. 

Why are government offices  as well as other state entities still closed or only open on an appointment basis 

but will shut down immediately if one person contracts COVID? Why is UH offering their employees and 

students distance learning and telework options when these are adults who  can get vaccinated and should be 

working on campus as well? Masking indoors is a mandate statewide so using it as an argument as to why 

schools should be open to in person learning is a moot point since other businesses are not acting as though 

they are essential  even though they are for the public. Why are board meetings still virtual when the people 

who take part in them are adults who can also be vaccinated and masked in a contained, air conditioned and 

much more appropriately ventilated space than a classroom?  Given the nature of all these double standards 

floating around, distance and blended learning models need to make their way back into our schools until 

things are safer for us all. 

While Governor Ige and other politicians as well as “medical professionals”  continue to defend their 

stance of “in person learning being worth the risks” by repeating  their “mitigation measures” when they are 

on television, what they fail to realize is that even with a mask mandate in the schools, students still wear 

them inappropriately. In many ways, they cannot help it. If they try to participate in a class discussion,  their 

mask slips down. If they need to ask me a question, their mask slips down. When they eat lunch and drink 

water, their masks slip down. When they gather with their friends before the start of class, during passing 

times and at recess, their masks slip  down. Masking is hardly a mitigation measure just because of the ways 

in which teenagers are used to acting while they are at school. Rather than bring them in at a gradual pace 

and re-introduce themselves to the “new normal”, we jumped the gun and went full  speed ahead. Can you 

blame the kids for being confused about all these mixed messages? 

Secondly, another mitigation measure that I find fault with is promoting the vaccine and this is not 

because of how I feel about vaccinations. I am vaccinated. But I also  support free choice and am not going to 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708387959692615357&simpl=msg-f%3A17083879596… 3/4

push the government’s agenda on my students even though I keep being told to advertise vaccination in my 

classroom. My students come from all walks of life and who am I to tell a parent what they should or 

shouldn’t  do when it comes to their child’s health? If teachers can get placed on investigation for 

encouraging conversations about politics or religion in a classroom, what makes you think a parent wouldn’t 

turn a conversation about vaccinations into a complaint as  well? 

Similarly, hand washing is only effective if you have enough soap and hand sanitizer in a classroom 

or a bathroom on campus. Since we’ve started school a week ago, I’ve  had students tell me twice that there’s 

no soap or paper towels in our bathrooms. In addition, you also cannot force teenagers to wash their hands. 

Lastly, keeping the kids 3 feet apart or to the “greatest extent” possible is not happening in many classrooms, 

especially secondary ones. Classrooms are also not being sanitized and cleaned on a regular basis since we 

are short classroom cleaners at my school and many others throughout the state. 

Furthermore, if Governor Ige truly cared about education, our classrooms would not resemble dirty, 

dusty dungeons from the plantation era. Every classroom would have AC.  Each teacher would have a 

classroom set of computers for students to use. Desks and chairs would not have 20 plus years of graffiti and 

chewing gum decorating them. Teachers and students would not have to float between classrooms due to 

black mold growing  on the walls of their portables. Class sizes would not be nearing 40 with only one 

teacher and over 20% of those students either having IEP’s/504’s/behavior issues or being EL’s. We’d have 

more counselors and mental health services available for our at-risk  populations. Our kids would not be at 

the bottom when it comes to meeting benchmarks and standards. They wouldn’t be wandering around 

campus, hiding out in bathrooms with their cell phones or vaping with their friends and getting away with it 

if education  were truly a priority. I’m not sure when our politicians last set foot in a classroom but times have 

changed and the days of teachers talking the entire period and students just writing notes down have gone 

away. Teachers nowadays encourage discussion, collaboration,  and student-centered approaches to learning-

these are instructional methods that are extremely difficult to implement given the pandemic crisis we are in 

now with our class sizes and lack of space. If all we are expected to do is talk with a mask on for 80  minutes 

straight and the kids take notes, we might as well be behind a computer screen, properly distanced, mask free 

and safe at home to keep space open in the hospitals. The kids question why they can be mask free in an 

open-air cafeteria with their peers  right next to them but cannot do so in a classroom? It’s the same concept. I 

also do not address this point because I am “anti-mask” even though I hate wearing one in this heat. I’m 

merely pointing it out because it is a double standard and I feel the same  way my students do- none of these 

“mitigation measures” are really keeping us safe and if it were truly safe to be in school, why did we just 

spend the last year in a half at home, suffering and sacrificing when the case numbers were lower, and the 

Delta variant  didn’t exist yet? 

To conclude, please, let’s drop the false political narrative and take some action. Make highly 

qualified, teacher-led distance learning an option in the state of Hawaii  to keep families and school staff safe. 

Teachers and students should not be forced into classrooms without any space to breathe during the surge of 

a pandemic. Less bodies on campus means more spaces that can be utilized for students and staff members 

who  DO feel safe being in person while those of us with health issues or concerns can work with students 

who are more comfortable at home. Having a quality blended learning/online DOE program needs to be an 

option even after this pandemic is under control because  traditional classroom settings are NOT for 

everyone. If you truly value differentiation and supporting student needs, please give us more options. The 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708387959692615357&simpl=msg-f%3A17083879596… 4/4

education system in Hawaii needs reform and you have tech savvy, younger generations of teachers like me 

who genuinely enjoy teaching and are perfect matches for these types of positions. 

Thank you and have a nice day, 

Jennifer Corpion, Secondary ELA Teacher 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Face to fave learning  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708395126819362697&simpl=msg-f%3A17083951268… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Face to fave learning 

1 message 

nora Skolnick  <noraskolnick@me.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 4:09 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha I am writing  This letter as a testimony to request face-to-face learning during this difficult times because our kids 

need schools just like tourist need hotels because our kids need sports just like tourist activities because our kids need 

consistency just like the rest of the island and people that come to 

Visit. 

One thing we had and we could have again that had some sort of consistency was the testing!. 

Test tourist and residents before they get to the islands and after they arrive to to the island. Not to mention inter-island 

testing. 

Our Keiki had enough!!!! Treat them fairly! Keeping them out of school is keeping them away from academic and 

emotional growth is not the right thing to do! 

Let the adults that understand change deal with it! Enough is enough! 

I cannot stress this topic because at this point there’s so much more to say that I don’t know if you will really pay attention 

to or do anything about! 

one thing I know for sure my son is a year or 2 behind because of distance-learning last year, and my family cannot afford 

to take him to a private school. I work a full-time job and so is my husband he is only nine years old how is he going to 

stay home alone to do distance-learning it is just not the right thing and The county knows it! And the department of 

education knows it! so keep face-to-face learning it cannot be any other way. 

For the hard working families that care about making Maui a great place to live, grow and flourish. 

Thank you for taking the time to read my testimony. 

Sent from my iPhone 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - 

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708409588134205810&simpl=msg-f%3A17084095881… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

1 message 

Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 7:59 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

General Business Meeting (full Board) 

Agenda item: opening of school year ’21-2’22d 

Position: Is the DOE in denial? Please  respect the science of survival! Get real, folks! 

FACE-TO-FACE SCHOOL NEEDS TO BE SHUT DOWN if only for a a few weeks to a 

month! These past  2 weeks, (4) students in my class have  “disappeared off ” every so 

many days to be excused until  “clearance ” is given and I am supposed to think,  “Oh!????” 

Carry on nonchalantly in class with high school teenagers who constantly need to be 

reminded to keep the mask over their noses and social distance? It is terrifying to go to 

school every day; am I the only teacher struggling with anxiety and sleep issues? I August 17, 2021 

Dear BOE, 

I am a teacher on Kauai and I am writing to express my concerns over the Doe having to plan for the start of the school year. We have already seen hundreds of cases popping up at our public schools in the first two weeks of school. Students are quarantining due to being close contacts and so are teachers. Some teachers have been made to attend the opening of school meetings, committee meetings or faculty meetings in closed, air-conditioned rooms. Virtual meetings are a thing of the past for many schools. Teachers’ and students’ safety is definitely not top priority for the DOE. 

We needed to have a plan prior to the start of the school year and we haven’t seen one yet. The DOE needs to meet with the union so that a current MOU can be negotiated to help ensure that teachers are kept safe working in such close contact with so many students. This in turn can help students stay safe and not get infected and bring it home to their families. Each school seems to be left to figure this out and so each school is doing something different when they should all be following the same guidelines. Procedures and protocols should be the same across the board, not left up to schools to figure out. 

Please help keep us safe again. We’ve been through this before, but the DOE acts like we haven’t. A plan should have been in place a long time ago since they had all of last year to figure out how to bring students and teachers back as safe as possible. I truly do not understand why we are in this predicament. Something needs to be done now!! 

Sincerely, 

Kapa’a Elementary School-Teacher 

Kauai, Hawaii 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708416515966216467&simpl=msg-f%3A17084165159… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Miriam Clarke  <miriam.clarke@k12.hi.us>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 9:49 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha Board Members, 

Please accept my testimony in regard to the opening  of schools during the Covid-19 pandemic.  It is my intention that a 

safe and equitable solution is found to resolve some safety and work issues presented by the increasing  cases of Covid 

19 in our community and schools. 

Mahalo for your consideration, 

Miriam Clarke 

Teacher at Pukalani Elementary School, Maui 

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. 

Numb and Confused.pdf 

37K Numb and confused. I have been trying to find my words for this 

# complicated situation, but I have been at a loss until just recently. I 

# acknowledge that there are no easy answers and for every reason children 

# should be in school and learning in person, there is a reason to think this is a 

# dangerous gamble. 

# Last year, teachers and students did something that had never been done 

# before. Mountains were climbed by teachers who worked tirelessly to 

# recreate their profession, and students sacrificed, most importantly, the social 

# and emotional learning that happens during in person learning. As a result, 

# our community was safe. The end justified the means. 

# At the school I teach at we have seen more cases of Covid among our 

# students in the first two weeks of school than we had during the entire span 

# between March of 2019 and June 2021. And for some unknown and 

# unsupported reason we are crowded in classrooms, masked and sweating in 

# an attempt to regain something that no longer exists. A safe and standard 

# education is no longer a reality. Students are missing days and weeks at a 

# time due to being a close contact, or even worse sick with highly contagious 

# symptoms. Sadly, and through no fault of teachers, we are not prepared to 

# provide a cohesive educational experience when a student or students are 

# suddenly being sent home to quarantine for 10 days, not to mention prepared 

# for what could happen when a teacher also needs to quarantine. 

# Last year schools were supported, maybe inconveniently, by families who 

# ultimately had the responsibility to care for and monitor their children while 

# teachers provided a stable and consistent model of hybrid learning, and as a 

# result our community was safe. Currently, we are teaching in person, grateful 

# to be back in familiar territory, grateful to support families, and able to 

# provide services to children who would not be receiving them at home, but 

# we are left with gaping holes each and every time a cluster of students is sent 

# home. Are we or are we not teaching in a hybrid situation? I am confused as to what the DOE expects from teachers, angry this is such a gray area, and 

# alarmed at the rate students are becoming infected with various strains of 

# Covid 19. 

# I feel as though teachers are again expected, without compensation, to be 

# doing two jobs in one. We have proven that it can be done, and we were 

# willing to be flexible when we knew that we were doing our part to keep our 

# community safe. This year it feels like we are again climbing mountains to 

# reach students quarantining at home and those learning at school, but the 

# difference is that we are NOT safe. Our cases of Covid in schools are 

# increasing daily, we are putting families, children, and teachers at risk. I 

# don’t know what the answer is, I just know the reality of what I am seeing on 

# a daily basis at my school. Students are getting sick, and sent home at 

# various intervals. They are missing chunks of learning and teachers are left 

# wondering how to maintain the learning connections between home and 

# school, scrambling to send home computers, chargers, packets, and creating 

# online assignments for some, while also teaching classroom students in an 

# efficient and effective way. Two jobs in one. Same as last year but without 

# the MOU from the DOE and without the result of safety. As a teacher I am 

# left numb and confused wondering what will happen next and who will be 

# sent home tomorrow. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708421651242797257&simpl=msg-f%3A17084216512… 1/1
> Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year   

> 1 message
> Kathy Tanita Ohama <kathy.tanita_ohama@k12.hi.us> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 11:10 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

## To Whom It May Concern, 

## This is my 30th year of teaching. I do  not  feel safe in school and I worry about the 

## welfare and safety of the students at our school. 

## My administrators are doing a great job but since they follow the directives from those 

## above them, there is only so much that they can do. 

## My concerns are: 

## 1.  3 ft of distance between desks is not feasible due to the size of the room and the 

## amount of students in it.  I have about 30 students per period.  This is not safe. 

## 2.  We were told that we did not have to disinfect the rooms and the bell schedule does 

## not allow for it.  This is not safe since the Delta Variant stays on surfaces for 24 hours. 

## 3.  The Delta Variant can be spread among vaccinated people, yet students and 

## teachers are not told to quarantine or to get tested.  This is not safe. 

## 4.  The students eat and/or mingle outside but many times they take off their masks. 

## This is not safe. 

## I strongly  suggest: 

## That we go back to distance earning  for everyone's safety. 

## Thank you and take care. 

## Sincerely, 

## Kathy Tanita Ohama 

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708424621362670828&simpl=msg-f%3A17084246213… 1/2

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Sarah Totten  <sarah.totten@k12.hi.us>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 11:57 PM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

General Business Meeting, August 19th, 2021. 

VI-A:  Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. 

Comment. 

I struggled to come up with the words for this testimony. I have many strong emotions but, above all, I feel helpless. 

The reality of the situation is this: I already have 1 positive case in my classroom. 7 of my students are at home 

quarantined because they were close contacts. I sent a student home sick today who turned out to be a close contact, but 

myself and all the other students are expected to be back on campus tomorrow because that student hasn't tested yet. 

But that's just this week. 

At this rate every student in my class will have had COVID by the end of the school year, maybe even by the end of the 

2021 calendar year. Our "protocols" are not enough. In fact we barely have any. Our school claims parents can't enter 

due to the risks, yet I see parents walking around daily. Students are too young to consistently mask properly or their 

parents have taught them it isn't important. There is no distancing on campus because we have too many students, and 

we are too short staffed to monitor during lunch which is the only time they are actually "required" to be "distanced" 3ft, at 

least at my school.  Even the staff, including our principal and vice principals, have had trouble keeping their masks on. I 

see teachers and other adults walking around maskless or using bandannas/mesh masks that do nothing. Every day I 

risk my life and my families lives by going to work, and every day I get closer to resigning because a job is not more 

important than the life and health of myself or my loved ones. 

The most frustrating thing for me is that none of this even benefits the students. First and foremost their health and the 

communities health is at stake. Kids can catch, spread, and die from COVID. Especially since I teach at an elementary 

school, which means none of my students can be vaccinated yet. 

But secondly, they are not learning! Just today, nearly half of my class was out for 10 days of quarantine. Am I expected 

to continue teaching new content when half the students will miss it? Do I need to reteach material every other week? I 

cannot provide instruction to the students at home, I do not have time to plan quality work to send home every time 

another student starts quarantine. A student is considered "chronically absent" at 15 days, and already I have students 

who will reach that by the end of the 1st quarter. In my opinion, inconsistent learning on campus is much worse than 

consistent distanced learning. 

My last comment is this: it is clear the Department of Education does not care about the safety of its educators. We are 

not expected to quarantine despite interacting the positive students, because we are vaccinated. But vaccinated people 

can still catch COVID, they can definitely still spread it, and on rare occasions they do die from it. I am not considered a 

close contact to the positive students in my class despite spending ~6 hours a day in a room with them. I am not even 

asked to test, let alone quarantine. If you spent 6 hours in a room with a covid case, walked by them regularly, spoke to 

them, and had to remind them every 10 minutes to fix their mask, would you feel protected? Would you feel safe going 

home to your family? 

The DOE won't come to the table with the HSTA which tells me all I need to know about the DOEs position: they don't 

want to hear it. Well, I hope they hear this: I am not the only teacher at my school considering quitting. 

Sarah Totten 

Kealakehe Elementary School 

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708424621362670828&simpl=msg-f%3A17084246213… 2/2

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - BOE Testimony 8-19-21 ITEM IV.  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708418079932225444&simpl=msg-f%3A17084180799… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## BOE Testimony 8-19-21 ITEM IV. 

1 message 

hughey2000@aol.com  <hughey2000@aol.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 10:13 PM 

Reply-To: hughey2000@aol.com 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

ITEM IV. COMMITTEE ACTION ON RECOMMENDATION CONCERNING PRIORITY ALLOCATION OF FEDERAL FUNDS IN ESSER 

II AND ESSER ARP 

AUGUST 19, 2021 · BOE FINANCE COMMITTEE · CHAIR BRUCE VOSS 

POSITION: Support with revisions. 

This is the hardest year ever to be on the front lines with unvaccinated kids in overcrowded schools during a pandemic of which the virus is more 

contagious than chickenpox. Last year a student I taught contracted covid and his father died. I expect to go to a few funerals of staff and students 

before this year s over. We need every member of the Board of Education to show some leadership. Your actions today could save or end many 

lives. 

1. I urge the committee to revise the HIDOE’s proposal to include funding for the 21 hours of professional development time lost in the last 

round of contract negotiations and to match the $2,200 retention bonus that was passed by legislators. Don’t sit on the money and allow the 

legislature to use the rationale that the DOE can operate with less funding, when this state has suffered from too few teachers, dilapidated 

building and meager funding since 1911 (Hawaii Pono). 

2. Board members and the HIDOE should also engage in impact bargaining with HSTA to negotiate the terms of testing options available to 

teachers and school staff under the state’s vaccine mandate. You need to direct the DOE to do this or it won’t happen.  Our schools must be the 

conduit to lead our communities out of this pandemic. That can’t happen if they are infested with covid. 

3. It is imperative, then, that the HIDOE act with urgency to design and implement a health metric to guide school safety protocols. At least the 

Elementary schools with the unvaccinated children and overcrowded classrooms should go back to distance learning for two weeks minimum. Is 

the current health metric that once the ICU’s are filled with children and turning away people, schools will close? I have an ER Doctor friend of 

mine told me today that he is treating people in the lobby and in their cars. 

4. Provided that for indoor air quality measures, priority shall be given to those projects that also provide heat abatement through mechanical 

cooling, such as air conditioning with appropriate Centers for Disease Control filtration systems. 

5. I encourage you to require schools to deliver rigorous COVID-19 curricula to all students and increase campus-based vaccination efforts. 

Again we need to take our head out of the sand and teach the next generation the historical background of vaccines. We need to teach our keiki 

how to recognize disinformation from social media or we will never get out of this mess. 

Mahalo, 

Mr. Hughey 

Third Grade Special Education Teacher 

King Kamehameha III Elementary 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year."  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 1/6
> Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 

## 2021-2022 school year."   

> 1 message
> Derek Bishop <derekcbishop@hushmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 6:15 AM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov
> Cc: president@hsta.org

Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school 

year." 

Dear Hawaii State Board of Education, 

My name is Derek Bishop. I am a 31-year special education teacher veteran at Paauilo Elementary and 

Intermediate School on the Big Island. This is my testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation 

on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year." 

My concern is that Hawaii pursue a path of minimizing harm as it manages COVID. Please instruct the 

Department of Education to do more thorough due diligence as it researches courses of action. There are 

"authorities" that offer conflicting guidance. For example, the DOE has its preschool teachers enforcing 

mask wearing on 3 year olds, based on CDC guidance. Compare this to guidance provided by WHO and 

UNICEF: 

"Based on the expert opinion gathered through online meetings and consultative processes, children aged up 

to five years should not wear masks for source control. This advice is motivated by a “do no harm” approach 

and considers: childhood developmental milestones; compliance challenges and autonomy required to use a 

mask properly." 

https://www.who.int/ publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC_Masks-Children-2020.1 

I work with 3-5 year olds and view it as child abuse to force these little kids, who are at essentially zero risk 

for COVID, to wear these masks. I, also, dislike the heat to my face and decreased oxygen uptake that 

accompanies mask wearing as an adult. It places a great burden on my interacting with others. 

When you are recommending policies that harm economic productivity and human health, please consider 

multiple sources of information. The CDC is a private corporation that owns patents to over 80 vaccines, 

earns $billions annually from the sales of vaccines, and has as a core mandate, the promotion of vaccine use 

in the US. 

COVID has a survival rate of 99.7%, and higher for people below 70 years of age. The seasonal flu is more 

dangerous. Death rates world wide have not increased over the past decade. Consider that. There is no 

"pandemic" with bodies piling up in our streets. Please consider the social, psychological, and economic 

impacts of regulations that place our keiki at risk. 

Also, please research the claims of the Lt. Governor Josh Green and the CDC that the unvaccinated are 

worsening the "pandemic." Consider that economic and other motives lie behind these claims. 

I will leave you with a quote from a recent Mercola piece from August 16, 2021: 

The Lies Behind the ‘Pandemic of Unvaxxed’ 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year."  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 2/6

https://articles.mercola.com/ sites/articles/archive/2021/ 08/16/pandemic-of-unvaxxed-lies.aspx 

STORY AT-A-GLANCE 

-According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the White House and most mainstream media, 

what we have now is a “pandemic of the unvaccinated,” with 95% to 99% of COVID-related hospitalizations 

and deaths being attributed to the unvaccinated 

-To achieve that statistic, the CDC included hospitalization and mortality data from January through June 

2021. The vast majority of the United States population was unvaccinated during that timeframe 

-January 1, 2021, only 0.5% of the U.S. population had received a COVID shot. By mid-April, an estimated 

31% had received one or more shots, and as of June 15, 48.7% were fully “vaccinated” 

-Natural immunity offers robust protection against all variants, whereas vaccine-induced immunity can’t. 

The reason for this is because when you recover from the natural infection, you have both antibodies and T 

cells against all parts of the virus, not just the spike protein 

-According to Dr. Anthony Fauci, the Delta variant is both more transmissible and more dangerous than the 

original virus and previous variants, but real-world data show it is actually weaker and far less dangerous, 

even though it does spread more easily 

-According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the White House and most mainstream media, 

what we have now is a “pandemic of the unvaccinated.”1 

According to the official narrative, 99% of COVID-19 deaths and 95% of COVID-related hospitalizations 

are occurring among the unvaccinated. In a July 16, 2021, White House press briefing,2 CDC director Dr. 

Rochelle Walensky claimed “over 97% of people who are entering the hospital right now are unvaccinated.” 

But as reported by Fox News anchor Laura Ingraham on “The Ingraham Angle,” “that statistic is grossly 

misleading,”3 and in an August 5, 2021, video statement, Walensky inadvertently revealed how that 95% to 

99% statistic was created. 

Grossly Misleading Data Manipulation 

As it turns out, to achieve those statistics, the CDC included hospitalization and mortality data from January 

through June 2021. It does not include more recent data or data related to the Delta variant, which is now the 

most prevalent strain in circulation. The problem is, the vast majority of the United States population was 

unvaccinated during that timeframe. 

January 1, 2021, only 0.5% of the U.S. population had received a COVID shot. By mid-April, an estimated 

31% had received one or more shots,4 and as of June 15, 48.7% were fully “vaccinated.”5 Keep in mind that 

you’re not “fully vaccinated” until two weeks after your second dose (in the case of Pfizer or Moderna), 

which is given six weeks after your first shot. This is according to the CDC.6 

So, those receiving an initial dose in June, for example, won’t be “fully vaccinated” until eight weeks later, 

sometime in July or August. 

By using statistics from a time period when the U.S. as a whole was largely unvaccinated, the CDC is now 

claiming we’re in a “pandemic of the unvaccinated,” in an effort to demonize those who still have not agreed 

to receive this experimental gene modification injection. 

Selective Pressure Promotes Emergence of New Variants 

Here’s what Canadian viral immunologist and vaccine researcher Dr. Byram Bridle told Ingraham about the 

claim that we’re in a pandemic of the unvaxxed, and that the unvaccinated are hotbeds for dangerous 

variants: 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year."  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 3/6

“Absolutely, it’s untrue to be calling this a pandemic of the unvaccinated. And it’s certainly untrue … that 

the unvaccinated are somehow driving the emergence of the novel variants. This goes against every scientific 

principle that we understand. 

The reality is, the nature of the vaccines we are using right now, and the way we’re rolling them out, are 

going to be applying selective pressure to this virus to promote the emergence of new variants. Again, this is 

based on sound principles. 

We have to look no further than … the emergence of antibiotic resistance … The principle is this: If you 

have a biological entity that is prone to mutation — and the SARS-CoV-2, like all coronaviruses is prone to 

mutation — and you apply a narrowly focused selective pressure that is nonlethal, and you do this over a 

long period of time, this is the recipe for driving the emergence of novel variants. 

This is exactly what we’re doing. Our vaccines are focused on a single protein of the virus, so the virus only 

has to alter one protein, and the vaccines don’t come close to providing sterilizing immunity. 

People who are vaccinated still get infected, it only seems particularly good at blunting the disease, and what 

that tells you therefore is that these vaccines in the vast majority of people are applying a nonlethal pressure, 

narrowly focused on one protein, and the vaccine rollout is occurring over a long period of time. That’s the 

recipe for driving variants.” 

Natural Immunity Offers Far Superior Protection 

Bridle also explains why natural immunity offers robust protection against all variants, whereas vaccine-

induced immunity can’t. When you acquire the infection naturally, your body develops antibodies against 

ALL of the viral proteins whereas the COVID shots only trigger antibodies against one, namely the spike 

protein. 

As mentioned above, when you have antibodies against just one of the viral proteins, the virus only needs to 

mutate that one protein in order to evade your immune system. When you have natural immunity, on the 

other hand, your antibodies will recognize all parts of the virus, so even if the spike protein is mutated, your 

body will recognize other parts of the virus and mount an attack against those. 

That SARS-CoV-2 works the same way other viruses do was shown in a Nature Reviews Immunology 

study7 by Alessandro Sette and Shane Crotty, published in October 2020. The study, “Cross-Reactive 

Memory T Cells and Herd Immunity to SARS-CoV-2” argued that naturally-acquired immunity against 

SARS-CoV-2 is potent, long-lasting and very broad in scope, as you develop both antibodies and T cells that 

target multiple components of the virus and not just one. 

If we are to depend on vaccine-induced immunity, as public health officials are urging us to do, we’ll end up 

on a never-ending booster treadmill. Boosters will absolutely be necessary, as the shot offers such narrow 

protection against a single protein of the virus. Already, data around the world show vaccine-induced 

protection is waning rapidly in the face of new variants, and Moderna has publicly stated that the need for 

additional boosters is expected.8 

How Dangerous Is the Delta Variant? 

According to Dr. Anthony Fauci, the Delta variant is both more transmissible and more dangerous than the 

original virus and previous variants. July 4, 2021, he told NBC News:9 

“It is more effective and efficient in its ability to transmit from person to person. And studies that we've seen 

where they have been the variant that's dominated in other countries, it's clear that it appears to be more 

lethal in the sense of more serious — allow you to get more serious disease leading to hospitalization, and in 

some cases leading to deaths.” 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year."  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 4/6

In a June 29, 2021, interview,10 Fauci called the Delta variant “a game-changer” for unvaccinated people, 

warning it will devastate the unvaccinated population while vaccinated individuals are protected against it. 

The Delta is more contagious but it’s far less deadly, far less worrisome. In fact, it’s a much weaker virus 

than both the U.K. [Alpha] and the South African [Beta] variants. ~ Dr. Peter McCullough 

Remember, Fauci is not a clinician and has never treated someone infected with SARS-CoV-2. Other health 

experts and practicing physicians who treat COVID-19 patients disagree with Fauci’s claims, arguing that 

not only is the Delta variant not more dangerous, it’s certainly not more dangerous for the unvaccinated. 

As reported by Ingraham in June 2021 (video above), there’s an evolutionary genetics theory called Muller’s 

Ratchet, which states that as an outbreak starts to peter out, the virus tends to mutate into a more 

transmissible form, but at the same time it grows weaker, causing far less serious infection. According to 

epidemiologist and cardiologist Dr. Peter McCullough, this is exactly what we’re seeing. He told Ingraham: 

“The good news is on the 18th of June, the United Kingdom presented their 16th report11 on the mutations 

— and they’re doing a great job, much better than our CDC — and what they demonstrated is that the Delta 

is more contagious but it’s far less deadly, far less worrisome. In fact, it’s a much weaker virus than both the 

U.K. [Alpha] and the South African [Beta] variants.” 

Spike Mutations Render Vaccinated Vulnerable to Delta 

Importantly, the Delta variant contains three different mutations, all in the spike protein. This, McCullough 

explains, allows this variant to evade the immune responses in those who have received the COVID jabs — 

but not those who have natural immunity which, again, is much broader. In a June 30, 2021, appearance on 

Fox News (video above), McCullough stated:12 

“It is very clear from the UK Technical Briefing13 that was published June 18th that the vaccine provides no 

protection against the Delta variant. It’s a very mild variant. 

Whether you get the vaccine or not, patients will get some very mild symptoms like a cold and they can be 

easily managed … Patients who have severe symptoms or at high risk, we can use simple drug combinations 

at home and get them through the illness. So, there’s no reason now to push vaccinations.” 

Children’s Health Defense chief scientific officer Brian Hooker, Ph.D., has echoed McCullough’s 

sentiments. The Defender quotes Hooker:14 

“What we’re seeing is virus evolution 101. Viruses like to survive, so killing the host (i.e. the human who is 

infected) defeats the purpose because killing the host kills the virus, too. For this reason, new variants of 

viruses that circulate widely through the population tend to become more transmissive but less pathogenic. 

In other words, they will spread more easily from person to person, but they will cause less damage to the 

host. 

The vaccine focuses on the spike protein, whereas natural immunity focuses on the entire virus. 

Natural immunity — with a more diverse array of antibodies and T-cell receptors — will provide better 

protection overall as it has more targets in which to attack the virus, whereas vaccine-derived immunity only 

focuses on one portion of the virus, in this case, the spike protein. Once that portion of the virus has mutated 

sufficiently, the vaccine no longer is effective.” 

Real-World Data Show Most of Infected are Fully ‘Vaccinated’ 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year."  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 5/6

Real-world data from areas with high COVID jab rates show the complete converse of what media, the CDC 

and White House officials are telling us. In addition to the British Technical Briefing No. 16,15 cited above, 

we have additional data from Israel, Scotland, Massachusetts and Gibraltar: 

• August 1, 2021, director of Israel’s Public Health Services, Dr. Sharon Alroy-Preis, announced half of all 

COVID-19 infections were among the fully vaccinated.16 Signs of more serious disease among fully 

vaccinated are also emerging, she said, particularly in those over the age of 60. 

A few days later, August 5, Dr. Kobi Haviv, director of the Herzog Hospital in Jerusalem, appeared on 

Channel 13 News, reporting that 95% of severely ill COVID-19 patients are fully vaccinated, and that they 

make up 85% to 90% of COVID-related hospitalizations overall.17 As of August 2, 2021, 66.9% of Israelis 

had received at least one dose of Pfizer’s injection, which is used exclusively in Israel; 62.2% had received 

two doses.18 

• In Scotland, official data on hospitalizations and deaths show 87% of those who have died from COVID-19 

in the third wave that began in early July were vaccinated.19 

• A CDC investigation of an outbreak in Barnstable County, Massachusetts, between July 6 through July 25, 

2021, found 74% of those who received a diagnosis of COVID19, and 80% of hospitalizations, were among 

the fully vaccinated.20,21 Most, but not all, had the Delta variant of the virus. 

The CDC also found that fully vaccinated individuals who contract the infection have as high a viral load in 

their nasal passages as unvaccinated individuals who get infected.22 This means the vaccinated are just as 

infectious as the unvaccinated. 

• In Gibraltar, which has a 99% COVID jab compliance rate, COVID cases have risen by 2,500% since June 

1, 2021.23 

While those who benefit from keeping the pandemic going would like you to cower in fear at the thought of 

the Delta variant, there’s really no evidence that it’s any worse than the original. It’s more transmissible, yes, 

but far less dangerous, as its primary symptoms are that of a regular cold. 

According to Harvard and Stanford professors, the actual number of Americans dying from or with COVID-

19 are actually at an all-time low, so alarmism is uncalled for.24 

And, as for viral social media posts by doctors and nurses claiming hospitals are overflowing with 

unvaccinated COVID patients, don’t believe them. Most are bots. We’ve repeatedly seen evidence that 

fearmongering is being spread not by real people but by fake accounts run by artificial intelligence. This 

includes blue check accounts. Here’s a sampling of recent bot farm tweets trying to scare everyone: 

Don’t Fear It, Just Treat It 

In closing, remember there are several different treatment protocols for COVID-19 that appear just as 

effective for variants as for the original virus, including the following: 

Front Line COVID-19 Critical Care Alliance’s I-MASS Prevention and At-Home Treatment protocol 

The FLCCC’s I-MASK+ Prevention and Early Outpatient Treatment protocol 

The FLCCC’s I-RECOVER management protocol for long-haul COVID-19 syndrome 

Nebulized hydrogen peroxide for prevention and treatment of COVID-19, as detailed in Dr. David 

Brownstein’s case paper26 and Dr. Thomas Levy’s free e-book, “Rapid Virus Recovery.” Levy believes 

nebulized hydrogen peroxide can also be an invaluable strategy for combating spike protein toxicity27 

because, in addition to being a powerful antiviral, it will also augment and speed up cellular healing, in part 

by improving oxygenation 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony regarding discussion item "VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year." 

https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708448370351103827&simpl=msg-f%3A17084483703… 6/6 8/18/2021 Dell Marketing LP Mail - Testimony  

> https://mail.google.com/mail/u/3?ik=84c4e7b8e2&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f%3A1708449226133762636&simpl=msg-f%3A17084492261… 1/1

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Bianca Cappello  <biancacappello@kw.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 6:29 AM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

In regards to VI:A 

Aloha, 

I am writing this testimony in favor of our students continuing face to face in person learning. 

The last year + , has been detrimental to my children’s learning. They have suffered from having to partake in virtual 

learning in place of in person learning. They are frustrated and falling further behind. 

They thrive off interaction with their peers  and their teacher. I have already seen a huge difference in their emotional 

state from getting to go full time in person. They are happy. They deserve to go to school. Our children deserve to be put 

first. 

Private schools have figured out how to keep their students going in person full time for over a year now.... why can’t our 

DOE figure it out. It’s not fair. My kids don’t understand why their private school friends got to go to school all last year but 

they couldn’t. Perhaps we should look to them for a contingency plan. 

I hope every possibly thing  will be done to put our keiki first, so that they can thrive and continue to learn. Virtual learning 

is not sustainable for us as parents or our children. I’d much rather pull them out of the public school system. 

Mahalo, 

Bianca Cappello 

--

Mahalo, 

Bianca Cappello 

Realtor RS-80936 

1-808-377-0070 

Keller Williams Realty Maui Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony -V1:A 

1 message 

Charles Cappello <charles.cappello@hotmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 6:31 AM To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Aloha, 

It’s important that my kids and their peers be in the classroom full time for face to face learning. My kids have suffered and are behind from the past year and a half of disruptions. 

The private school system has been able to figure out how to keep their kids in school with very little disruptions. Does only the families with money get to provide a complete learning experience to their kids? 

Should full time face to face learning be halted we will be pulling our kids out of the public school system. Enough is enough as every other state has managed to operate as normal as possible but Hawaii can’t seem to figure it out. 

Mahalo, 

Charles Cappello Hawaii Board of Education: 

My name is Aaron Kubo I am an eighth-grade social studies teacher at Hilo Intermediate 

School in the Hilo-Waiakea Complex area on Hawai`i Island. I am testifying on discussion 

item VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. 

As of writing this testimony on August 17, 2021 there are about 8,238 active cases in the 

state of Hawai`i, with 1,436 of them on the Big Island with 31 persons hospitalized. There 

is a clear and dramatic rise in COVID-19 positive cases. 

I live in a multigenerational household with medically vulnerable persons as well as kids 

that cannot get the vaccine yet. I, myself, am considered medically vulnerable as well. 

Other diseases and pre-existing conditions like heart attacks, strokes, cancer among many 

others still are going on and affecting our communities. I live on the Big Island with 

limited medical facilities and with the increase in positive COVID-19 cases it is adding 

undue burden and stress to our already over taxed medical communities. 

Currently, I have about three to four students absent per class for unknown reasons with 

more not coming every day. I may or may not receive a homework request for two weeks 

from parent(s)/guardian(s). I may or may not receive notice that the student is going to be 

out. Sometimes parent(s)/guardian(s) email me directly telling me why their child/ward is 

out, often times however, I receive nothing and they are simply absent for weeks. 

Faculty and staff are told of active cases on campus but how are they to truly know where 

that student/adult has been and for how long? How are administrators to actually do the 

contract tracing when they do not know everywhere the adult/student has been? Before 

school and recesses are unstructured time and adults cannot monitor all spaces with fidelity 

for that many people; not realistic. Is 15 minutes of contact still true with the Delta 

Variant? Are administrators trained to be contact tracers? Should they have to be? 

It is hot and humid every day on our campus with many sweating through their paper/cloth 

masks. Is this safe? Where is the guidance on this? Some masks do not fit the student’s 

faces and so they twist the bands, crisscrossing it over their ears which then bunch the mask 

along their cheeks, no longer creating a nice seal. Is this safe? Every day of teaching I am 

exhausted (fatigued) from being in a hot humid room all day, have a strained throat 

(scratchy throat) for talking louder through a mask and have headaches (due to dehydration) as I am unable to drink as much water as necessary because of having to wear 

the mask all the time and not enough breaks to do so. Are these symptoms considered 

COVID-19 symptoms? How many of you are currently performing your job in a hot 

sweaty environment? With a mask on the entire time? With 20-30 students who may or 

may not be vaccinated? Who may or may not be wearing an appropriate mask? It is 

rough! 

We also have students that can request a medical exemption for mask wearing and wear a 

face shield instead. I am not disputing the medical exemption, however, is wearing only a 

face shield safe? Does this protect the student from catching COVID-19? Does this 

protect everyone else from possibly catching it from those exempted from mask wearing? 

What is being done to protect all parties? 

In many districts there are a shortage of substitutes and with more and more faculty and 

staff staying home, for whatever reason, what is being done to ensure coverage during 

those time periods? What happens when there is not enough coverage? If teachers, 

janitors, staff, administrators are sick and cannot come to school…who takes over? Who 

will teach the students when teachers cannot work? Who will feed the students when 

cafeteria workers cannot work? Who will take care of the school/disinfectant/sanitize it 

when the janitors/custodians cannot work? Who will operate the school/run the office/take 

care of ill students if the staff/administrators cannot work? Still left with many questions. 

The courts in Hawai`i are not going to hold in person jury trials until at least October. 

Governor Ige revised the law to no more than 10 persons indoors at any given time. Every 

day more and more students are either getting COVID-19 or are possible close contacts and 

need to quarantine. What is being done? 

As I was a close contact with someone that got COVID-19 as well as working in a school I 

decided to take a COVID-19 test as a precautionary measure. Once I told the nurse that I 

work in a school setting, classroom, they wrote “high risk” on the paper. If we are 

considered high risk why are we not all provided N-95 or similar masks? They are now 

saying that after eight to nine months of getting the vaccine a booster, third shot, 

“…elicited significantly higher antibody levels against the original pandemic virus, as well 

as the more transmissible delta and beta variants.” This may mean requiring a booster shot 

for more than just immunocompromised people, for everyone. It can also be inferred that 

the original doses are no longer as effective at protecting people from COVID-19. It is understandable that many people in the state of Hawai`i want students back in school. 

Many educators want to be back in the classrooms with their students too but done in the 

safest possible way based on the most up to date science available, including pertaining to 

the Delta Variant, in an organized manner, with a well thought out plan with clear and 

consistent guidance and expectations (with consequences clearly explained and laid out), 

with all necessary safety precautions met, including all safety materials provided at all 

schools, for the sake of all parties involved. Right now things are chaotic, educators are 

exhausted, stressed out, and are left feeling helpless and frustrated at a time where there 

needs to be clear, strong and consistent leadership. Everyone knew this was coming and 

yet poor planning, unclear guidance sent out at the last minute is extremely disappointing 

and dangerous. 

Respectfully, 

Aaron Kubo, Hilo-Waiakea Complex, Hawai`i Island 4348 Wai ʻalae Ave. Suite 322 

> Honolulu, HI 96816
> 1

August 19 , 2021 

General Business Meeting 

Dear Chair Payne and Members of the Committee ,

We would like to comment on Discussion Item VI. A., DOE’s presentation on the opening of schools for the 

2021 -2022 school year. 

The DOE’s memo states that “schools have spent several months demonstrating that campuses can operate 

safely while accommodating students for in -person le arning.” This was true before the COVID -19 Delta 

variant spread through the islands, causing a surge of infections, and endangering our young students who 

are not able to be vaccinated. We are disappointed that the DOE’s memo has not mentioned a contingenc y

plan in case infections increase or if schools need to close. While we agree that we should encourage in -

person learning as much as possible, we think that the DOE plan fails to sufficiently provide for distance 

learning, which would be the fall back if the COVID -19 situation continues to worsen . We would like the 

DOE to articulate such contingency plan with distance learning so that we can be assured that our students 

will continue to receive a safe, quality education. 

We also have questions about how the DOE is accounting for attendance and school hours when a

classroom closes due to a COVID -19 infection. We have heard that some classrooms have shut down due to 

an infection and students and teachers have had to quarantine for two weeks. In so me cases, we 

understand that students have had no instruction for two weeks. Is this time away from school considered 

an absence , which affects attendance and chronic absenteeism ? If there are two weeks of no instruction, 

will this mean that the DOE would fail to meet the required sch ool hour requirement? What happens if 

after the first quarantine, a second infection shuts down the same classroom again? 

Additionally, we have a few suggestions to address the current situation. 

1. Random testing would provide information to schools for quick action on mitigating the spread of 

COVID -19 infection 

2. A return to more grouping of students in bubbles would also help contain the spread of the virus as 

well as provide better information on contact tracing 

3. Expanded distance learning options with a teacher and a cohort of children would ensure online 

learning with proper support 

4. Metrics for when a classroom should close or when a school should transition to distance learning 

Thank you for this opportunity to testify. 4348 Wai ʻalae Ave. Suite 322 

> Honolulu, HI 96816
> 2

Sincerely ,

Cheri Nakamur a

HE ʻE Coalition Direct or 

HE ʻE Coalition Members and Participants 

Academy 21 

Alliance for Place Based Learning 

American Civil Liberties Union 

*Castle Complex Community Council 

*Castle -Kahuku Principal and CAS 

*Education Institute of Hawai ʻi 

*Faith Action for Community Equity 

Fresh Leadership LLC 

Girl Scouts Hawa iʻi

Haro ld K.L. Castle Foundation 

*HawaiiKidsCAN 

*Hawai‘i Afterschool Alliance 

*Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and 

Economic Justice 

*Hawai‘i Association of School Psychologists 

Hawai‘i Athletic League of Scholars 

*Hawai‘i Children’s Action Network 

Hawai ʻi Education Association 

Hawai‘i Nutrition and Physical Activity 

Coalition 

* Hawai‘i State PTSA 

Hawai‘i State Student Council 

Hawai‘i State Teachers Association 

Hawai‘i P -20 

Hawai‘i 3Rs 

Head Start Collaboration Off ice 

It’s All About Kids 

*INPEACE 

Joint Venture Education Forum 

Junior Achievement of Hawaii 

Kamehameha Schools 

Kanu Hawai‘i 

*Kaua‘i Ho‘okele Council 

Keiki to Career Kaua‘i 

Kupu A‘e 

*Leaders for the Next Generation 

Learning First 

McREL’s Pacific Center for Changing the 

Odds 

Native Hawaiian Education Council 

Our Public School 

*Pacific Resources for Education and 

Learning 

*Parents and Children Together 

*Parents for Public Schools Hawai‘i 

Special Education Provider Alliance 

*Teach for America 

The Learning Coalition 

US PACOM 

University of Hawai‘i College of Education 

*Youth Service Hawai ʻi  

> Voting Members (*) Voting member organizations
> vote on action items while individual and non -voting
> participants may collaborate on all efforts within the
> coalition.

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony-Concerned Parent 

1 message 

Laura Paet-Tamboa  <laurapaettamboa@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 8:32 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

General Business Meeting 

Agenda Item: VI A: Presentation on Opening Schools for 2021-2022 school year 

Position: Comment 

To BOE Hawaii, 

As a parent of Elementary school students that cannot be vaccinated, I urge you have DOH and DOE update school 

safety mandates with this more contagious Covid Delta Variant.  As stated by Dr. Libby Char and Governor Ige this is a 

PANDEMIC of the UNVACCINATED which is ALL our our students under 12 years old, who are not eligible for the 

vaccine. There needs to be stricter safety mandates in all schools to minimize the transmission of the Delta Variant. 

Suggests to be considered: 

1.  Continue Mask Mandates indoors and outdoors in schools 

2.  Social Distance in the classrooms 3-6 ft while in classrooms from all sides of a student’s desk. 

3.  Social Distance 6ft in cafeterias, increase ventilation, and plexiglass barriers for alll students- these students are 

unmasked. 

4.  Social Distance during drop off and pick-up of students.  Very difficult due to lack of space and the number of students 

on campus even if start and end times are staggered.  School staff and volunteers unable to control- too many students in 

a small property. 

5.  Free weekly Covid testing at the school 

6.  Transparency of ventilation classroom reports for all schools- Mandate schools with poor ventilation to purchase fans, 

open classroom doors, and windows. 

Other suggestions to be considered for Blended learning, hybrid learning, or distance learning: 

-Low vaccination rates in the Community/School Complex 

-High Covid Positivity Rate in the Community/School Complex. 

NO one wants their ineligible for the vaccine children to not be able to attend in-person school.  As our Hawaii leadership 

team has stated, Delta Variant has changed how we combat COVID and it’s now the PANDEMIC of the 

UNVACCINATED.  So our DOH and DOE need to CHANGE their mitigation safety mandates in schools to protect our 

keikis that are ineligible for the vaccine.  We cannot be “ok” that “yes we will see COVID case counts go up as students 

go back to school,” stated by Dr. Libby Char.  We need to re-look and mandate the safest possible strategies to protect 

the ineligible for the vaccine students.  It’s the RIGHT thing to do for our KEIKIS!!! 

Mahalo Nui Loa! 

Sent from my iPad Teaching Today for Hawaii’s Tomorrow 

> 1200 Ala Kapuna Street ● Honolulu, Hawaii 96819
> Tel: (808) 833-2711 ● Fax: (808) 839-7106 ● Web: www.hsta.org
> Osa Tui, Jr.
> President
> Logan Okita
> Vice President
> Lisa Morrison
> Secretary-Treasurer
> Wilbert Holck
> Executive Director

August 13, 2021 

An open letter to: 

Hawaii State Department of Education Interim Superintendent Keith T. Hayashi 

State of Hawaii Board of Education Chairperson Catherine Payne 

Members of the State of Hawaii Board of Education 

Hawaii Governor David Y. Ige 

From: Concerned educators of Hawaii’s public schools 

Subject: The Safety Our Students Deserve 

The first weeks of the 2021–22 school year have been incredibly alarming as COVID-19 case 

counts skyrocket to record levels. 

Health and safety guidelines, including proper masking and social distancing, go unenforced in 

our schools. Reporting and notification remain inconsistent. A lack of personal protective 

equipment, improper ventilation, and other outstanding issues are not being addressed. 

We are seeing frequent failures to adhere to guidance with no support regarding COVID-19 

response in our schools. This ultimately hurts the education we all believe is essential for our 

keiki. 

During the 2020–21 school year, the Hawaii State Teachers Association (HSTA) and the Hawaii 

State Department of Education (HIDOE) agreed to modify the HSTA collective bargaining 

agreement to ensure safer practices in the workplace in light of the COVID-19 pandemic in the 

form of a memorandum of understanding (MOU). However, this MOU expired on June 30, 2021, 

and the state refused to bargain a renewal and update of the MOU for the 2021–22 school year. 

It’s time to reconsider this decision and meet us at the bargaining table to address these 

mounting concerns and more. 

Page 1 Many educators feel schools are not safe 

When asked, respondents to an HSTA survey of members on Friday, July 30, indicated 

overwhelmingly that they felt somewhat unsafe or very unsafe for both themselves (~60%) and 

for students (~70%) as they prepared for roughly 175,000 public school students to return to 

in-person learning. 

When asked a week later to provide comments on how safe or unsafe conditions were with 

students back on campus, over 80% of responses relayed how unsafe conditions were and 

continue to be. 

## Guidelines for social distancing, masking, etc. not followed 

The most prevalent feedback revolves around the fact that social distancing is often impossible. 

From classroom arrangements where students have no choice but to sit shoulder to shoulder at 

the same table to crowded cafeterias and impromptu gatherings to socialize with friends, the 

potential for transmission has risen significantly with all students back on campuses. 

Crowded classrooms 

A middle school teacher in Honolulu reported: 

There is barely enough space to fit desks in the room so forget about safety. It’s just 

pack them in as much as possible. We keep procedures in the classroom, but at lunch, 

the cafeteria is overfilled. We have whole grade-level assemblies of 100 kids at a time, 

and recess is kids hanging all over each other and in everyone’s face with and without 

masks worn properly. It’s an absolute free for all. 

Large, in-person meetings 

Likewise, administrators are also mandating that faculty members meet unnecessarily in person. 

Here’s what one Honolulu teacher had to say: 

A principal doesn’t care about his staff. He forced his entire staff to meet in the library 

with no social distancing or ventilation. He forced the entire staff to ride in packed school 

buses, two people per seat, on a staff “field trip.” 

The irony is not lost on us that the governor issued an executive order on Aug. 10 prohibiting 

indoor social gatherings from exceeding 10 people. How does this match what a teacher from 

Hawaii Island wrote? 

How is it that we can meet (in the high school setting) four classes a day with 28+ 

students and yet family members are being asked to limit gatherings to 10 max? How is 

it that the state is being asked to practice six-foot social distancing and we in the 

classroom are being asked to only have three feet between students? 

Page 2 Protocols ignored, unenforceable 

Mask wearing was another major issue that respondents commented on. One teacher from 

Hawaii Island shared: 

I already have had to call parents of students who think it's a joke to wear a mask and 

repeatedly and purposely wear them incorrectly, exposing noses, or just take them off in 

class. I have seen students go to off-limits areas that aren't monitored as well, take off 

their masks, and some engage in PDA. While I understand the urgent developmental 

need for socialization and human contact, it's unsettling to see rules being disregarded 

and more opportunities for the spread of the coronavirus. 

A Windward Oahu teacher also spoke to the difficulty with masks: 

Students do not keep masks on. Kids take them on and off. It's a battle to keep them on 

and it is incredibly hot in our unairconditioned classrooms which makes it even harder to 

enforce as students are profusely sweating and are more uncomfortable breathing 

through sweat-soaked masks. 

And students are coming to school with symptoms, according to a Central Oahu teacher: 

One student has a runny nose and wet cough, but I was told that the student had a 

doctor’s note from the last school year for allergies and was fine. Another student told 

me that he had a sore throat and cough. When the health aide asked the student why he 

didn’t tell her that he was feeling sick when she did the morning wellness check, the 

student said that his dad told the student not to tell the health aide that he was sick. 

## Lack of notification, inconsistent response and reporting 

As cases in Hawaii rise, so too are the cases being discovered in our schools. Yet we are 

seeing inconsistent responses when these cases occur. For example, one school might 

quarantine an entire class while another school might only quarantine a tight radius of students, 

even though both sets of students may have had multiple interactions inside and outside the 

classroom during the school day. 

Our educators have also pointed out that known positive cases in their schools are not always 

reflected in the weekly reporting of cases on the HIDOE website, as is now required by law. 

Delayed notification puts families at risk 

A teacher on Hawaii Island reported that the school’s failure to follow protocols put a family 

member at risk: 

I was in contact with an active case of COVID-19 on Friday. I assumed that I was not 

associated with the cases at my school since I wasn’t contacted by my principal, like she 

Page 3 announced she would do if we had contact with any of the three cases. Unfortunately, 

she contacted me on Monday after I spent time with my unvaccinated family member 

over the weekend. 

Discrepancies in reporting 

A teacher in Windward Oahu noticed a discrepancy between what was reported on the HIDOE 

website and the known positive case count on their campus: 

Not all cases are being reported to the DOE. My campus has known cases but they are 

not listed on the reporting for either this week or last week. 

## Underlying health and safety issues persist in our schools 

Many of the safety precautions that were put in place for the 2020–21 school year were 

summarily removed for 2021–22. With current daily case counts roughly triple what they were a 

year ago, reinstating some of these safeguards would go a long way toward increased safety in 

our schools. 

Insufficient sanitization 

A Leeward Oahu teacher shared that sanitizing protocols, which were followed regularly last 

school year, are no longer in place: 

There were sanitizing protocols and regular sanitizing happening last year, however this 

year there are the same set protocols but they are not being done. No sanitizing has 

been done in classes and high-touch areas to minimize spread. I have to sanitize my 

own class regularly to help minimize the spread for my students and myself to help 

minimize the risk of bringing home germs to my family, my 99-year-old grandmother. 

Poor ventilation 

In Central Oahu, a teacher reported: 

Ventilation in classrooms is left to the discretion of teachers, some classes have very 

little airflow. No “specialist” has come to our classrooms or campus to verify safety. 

A Honolulu teacher echoed similar sentiments: 

We had two full days of meetings in an unventilated library. Janitors are not wiping down 

desks and we have to buy the PPE. There are no clear plans at school for social 

distancing and yet you want us to use our sick leave if we catch COVID at school? 

Page 4 Teaching under impossible circumstances 

The HIDOE had months to plan for the upcoming school year. Yet, its COVID-19 Health and 

Safety Guidance for School Year 2021–22 wasn’t posted until the afternoon of Friday, July 30, 

after educators were already at school for three days with just one more day to prepare for the 

return of their students. 

Teachers want to provide safe spaces where their students can learn without distraction. 

However, the vigilance necessary to maintain that safety in overcrowded classrooms is already 

taking its toll. 

Just saying schools are safe doesn’t make it so 

According to a Kauai teacher: 

The public is being told that it’s safe at schools because schools are following the 

mitigating measures. I am here to say, “NO, THEY ARE NOT!” 

A Honolulu teacher sums up the situation: 

Our school administrators are doing their best to protect students and staff under the 

circumstances we’ve been dealt. There’s just too many kids and too many people, and I 

am scared. 

Another Honolulu teacher offers this plea to parents: 

Everyone says that this year will be so much easier than last year, but this year will bring 

a myriad of unique challenges now that most students are back and we are still in a 

pandemic. As a teacher, I cannot make any promises that your child will be safe. Please 

understand that I am doing my best with what I have. 

## We need to come together now 

When the coronavirus first hit Hawaii’s public schools, former Superintendent Christina 

Kishimoto signed a letter of commitment with HSTA to ensure continuity of education through 

the crisis by addressing changing working conditions. At the end of the 2019–20 school year, it 

was clear that COVID-19 would still be around and the HIDOE and HSTA negotiated an MOU 

for the 2020–21 school year. 

Efforts to renew and update the MOU went nowhere as the employer refused to consider any 

COVID-related modifications for the 2021–22 school year. They expected all students to return 

to in-person learning and insisted that safety concerns would be addressed through the 

HIDOE’s own health and safety guidance. 

Page 5 However, due to the Delta variant, COVID-19 continues to spread like wildfire in Hawaii and has 

become even more contagious. Infection among children has also grown and even people who 

are fully vaccinated are susceptible to breakthrough infections. Children under 12 years old still 

have no access to vaccinations. Current health and safety protocols cannot counteract students 

sitting shoulder to shoulder in cramped classrooms or gathering unmasked in large crowds in 

the cafeteria. Furthermore, the HIDOE and the Department of Health have removed the 

thresholds and any contingencies that would be triggered by an explosion of cases. 

We cannot do this alone. We must come together to make the right decisions that will keep our 

communities safe. HSTA continues to stand ready and willing to work as partners in this 

process. We urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our current 

conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

Sincerely, 

Osa Tui, Jr. 

HSTA President, McKinley High 

Logan Okita 

HSTA Vice President, Nimitz Elementary 

Lisa Morrison 

HSTA Secretary-Treasurer, Maui High 

Aaron Kubo 

HSTA NEA Director, Hilo Intermediate 

Attachment: Concerned educators of Hawaii’s public schools co-signers 

Cc: Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission Interim Executive Director Yvonne Lau 

Hawaii Senate President Ronald D. Kouchi 

Hawaii Senate Education Committee Chairperson Michelle N. Kidani 

Hawaii Speaker of the House Scott K. Saiki 

Hawaii House Education Committee Chairperson Justin H. Woodson 

Page 6 We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 1 of 35 

Roberta Akiu 

HSTA Central President, Mokulele Elementary 

Daryl Fujino 

HSTA Central Director, Aiea Elementary 

Leslilyn Pauahi Kazunaga 

HSTA Central Director, Aiea High 

Dana Kobayashi 

HSTA Central Director, Wheeler Elementary 

Melissa Turner 

HSTA Hamakua President, Honokaa Elementary 

Edwin Kagawa 

HSTA Hilo President, Keaau High 

Tina Miyataki 

HSTA Hilo Director, Waiakea Elementary 

Inga Park Okuna 

HSTA Honolulu President, Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Shannon Garan 

HSTA Honolulu Director, Linapuni Elementary 

Raechelle Villanueva 

HSTA Honolulu Director, Waialae Elementary PCS 

Caroline Freudi g

HSTA Kauai President, Kalaheo Elementary 

Wendy Nickl 

HSTA Kohala President, Kohala Middle 

Jill Jacobs 

HSTA Kona President, Kealakehe Elementary 

Jennifer Kaaikala 

HSTA Lanai President, Lanai High -Elem 

Julie Reyes Oda 

HSTA Leeward President, Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Brandon Cha 

HSTA Leeward Director, Pearl City High 

Kelli Kaanaana 

HSTA Leeward Director, Holomua Elementary 

Vickie Kam 

HSTA Leeward Director, Ilima I ntermediate 

Sarah Milianta -Laffin 

HSTA Leeward Director, Ilima Intermediate 

J Michael Landes 

HSTA Maui President, Lahainaluna High 

Ashley Olson 

HSTA Maui Director, Lahainaluna High 

Tes Kaulia 

HSTA Molokai President, Maunaloa Elementary 

Jodi Beaty 

HSTA Wind ward President, Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Kana Naipo 

HSTA Windward Director, Castle High 

Ashleigh Milani 

Ahrens Elementary 

Jill Murashima 

Ahrens Elementary 

Jo Dee Schmidt -Young 

Ahrens Elementary 

Celeste Katayama 

Ahuimanu Elementary 

Carissa Mackenzie 

Ahuimanu Elementary 

Maile Akiona 

Aiea Elementary 

Katrina Kanemoto 

Aiea Elementary 

Lori Kanemoto 

Aiea Elementary 

Juli Shinn 

Aiea Elementary 

Joy Cauble 

Aiea High 

Piilani Chun 

Aiea High 

Desiree Cremer 

Aiea High 

Benjamin Goodson 

Aiea High 

Jennifer Ly 

Aiea High 

Jacie Miyashiro 

Aiea High 

Matthew Momohara 

Aiea High 

Mary Margaret Peterson 

Aiea High 

Andrew Shain 

Aiea High 

Roy Chang 

Aiea Intermediate 

Shari Tanaka 

Aiea Intermediate 

Jan Wong 

Aiea Intermediate 

Shannon Allen 

Aikahi Elementary 

Alexandria Kauhini 

Aikahi Elementary 

Kiani Mcbean 

Aikahi Elementary 

Dayle Choi 

Aina Haina Elementary 

Jonnell Kupihea 

Aina Haina Elementary 

Jennifer Moku 

Ala Wai Elementary 

Rhonda Morishige 

Ala Wai Elementary 

Robin Paulin 

Ala Wai Elementary 

Makenzie Stang 

Ala Wai Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 2 of 35 

Amie Yee 

> Ala Wai Elementary

Donna Daum 

> Alakai O Kauai PCS

Ashleigh Nguyen 

> Alakai O Kauai PCS

Stephanie Hayashi 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Dina Hussey 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Jennifer Kanhai 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Brianne Kuratani 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Wilene Morey 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Leilani Nomura 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Monica Ramirez 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Jamielyn Sabas 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Amy Christine Suzuki 

> Ali amanu Elementary

Saundra G Takara 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Jennifer Teruya 

> Aliamanu Elementary

Sarah Overton 

> Aliamanu Middle

Marna Baricuatro -Rae 

> Anuenue School

Blayne Kamalani 

> Anuenue School

Katherine Kumaew 

> Anuenue School

Adrianne Llanos 

> Anuenue School

Samuel Makua 

> Anuenue School

Sara Aronin 

> Baldwin High

Joseph Cosner 

> Baldwin High

Tammy Gamble 

> Baldwin High

Donna -Lynne Hanlon 

> Baldwin High

Laura Lipp 

> Baldwin High

Joyce Miyamoto 

> Baldwin High

David Negaard 

> Baldwin High

Tori Silva 

> Bald win High

Carlene Symons 

> Baldwin High

Amber Takatani 

> Baldwin High

Joan Tamashiro 

> Baldwin High

Kimberly Tengan 

> Baldwin High

Donna Vierra 

> Baldwin High

Michelle Ichioka 

> Barber's Point Elementary

Lorie Javier 

> Barber's Point Elementary

Laureen Kaliloa 

> Barber's Point Elementary

Leilani Villalobos -Arakaki 

> Barber's Point Elementary

Sherry Lynn Cassetta 

> Campbell High

Laxmi Diaz 

> Campbell High

Elizabeth Holme s

> Campbell High

Karly Kanehiro 

> Campbell High

Laurabel Katagiri -Hoshino 

> Campbell High

Jiena Marquez 

> Campbell High

Jo Ann Mastin 

> Campbell High

Chastity Nobriga 

> Campbell High

Val Tina O ishi 

> Campbell High

Melissa Padilla 

> Campbell High

TraciAnn Palmer 

> Campbell High

Sybil Ranada 

> Ca mpbell High

Corey Rosenlee 

> Campbell High

Christina Russo 

> Campbell High

John Takamori 

> Campbell High

Shannon Takushi 

> Campbell High

Dawn Tuifua 

> Campbell High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 3 of 35 

Jo -Hannah Liz Valdez 

> Campbell High

Nellwyne Young 

> Campbell High

Byron Bass 

> Castle High

Rockwell Bounos 

> Castle High

Dale Detton 

> Castle High

Nelson Maeda 

> Castle High

Susana Racadio 

> Castle High

Leah Rampolla 

> Castle High

Wendy Hong 

> Central District Office

Alvin Lacar 

> Central District Office

Juliana Romero 

> Central District Of fice

Shana Valenzuela 

> Central District Office

Evelyn Cullen 

> Central Middle

Melelina Fiaui  

> Central Middle

Christopher Heaton 

> Central Middle

Sheila Leong 

> Central Middle

Abigail Palmer 

> Central M iddle

Noelani Takayesu 

> Central Middle

Kathleen Wines 

> Connections PCS

Terri Kuwahara 

> Desilva Elementary

Tracie Yamashita 

> Desilva Elementary

Angie Choi 

> Dole Middle

Nohea Goo 

> Dole Middle

Ryan Jetnil 

> Dole Middle

Cathy Lagrimas 

> Dole Middle

Kevin McGinnis 

> Dole Middle

Victor Padilla 

> Dole Middle

Elizabeth Gaccione 

> Dreamhouse Ewa Beach PCS

Kristina Viloria 

> Dreamhouse Ewa Beach PCS

Tamarie Butcher 

> Eleele Elementary

Lori Carl 

> Eleele Elementary

Spence Irimata 

> Eleele Elementary

Florence Langaman 

> Eleele Elementary

Miyazaki Miyazaki 

> Eleele Elementary

Ashley Newton 

> Eleele Elementary

Raquel Rita 

> Eleele Elementary

Judith Ryan 

> Eleele Elementary

Pamela Tipton 

> Eleele Elementary

Misty Tsukayama 

> Eleele El ementary

Torre Mozzachio 

> Enchanted Lake Elementary

Diana Sutton 

> Enchanted Lake Elementary

Roda Aggabao 

> Ew a Beach Elementary

James Braithwaite 

> Ewa Beach Elementary

Karen Casino 

> Ewa Beach Elementary

Jody Nakasone 

> Ewa Beach Elementary

Susan Nakasone 

> Ewa Beach Elementary

Jordan Ota 

> Ewa Beach Elementary

Tracy Aki 

> Ewa Elementary

Reshel -Ann Arias 

> Ewa Elementary

Heather Knaus 

> Ewa Elementary

Dondra Ozaki 

> Ewa Elementary

Kaleena Scoville 

> Ewa Elementary

Shari - Lyn Yamamoto 

> Ewa Elementary

Brittany Beauchan  

> Ewa Makai Middle School

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 4 of 35 

Miki Cacace 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Carol Esquibel 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Rebecca Forte -Blunt 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Shirley Fusato 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Jacqueline Lockhart 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Chad Mahoe 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Kristen Masunaga 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Justine Nakagawa 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Jocelyn Pajimula 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Lisa Ponce 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Nathan Reyes Oda 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Megan Rigos 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Ihilani Szmodis 

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Angela Zaldivar  

> Ewa Makai Middle School

Marites Agag 

> Farrington High

Ricky Anderson 

> Farrington High

Jerome Crisostomo 

> Farrington H igh

Raymond Cruz 

> Farrington High

Mason Dimond 

> Farrington High

Kirstyn Galius 

> Farrington High

Jennifer Grant 

> Farrington High

Carrie Hendryx 

> Farrington High

Bobbie -Lynn Kalama 

> Farrington High

Elianna Kantar 

> Farrington High

Matthew Kim 

> Farrington High

Rayne Lau 

> Farrington High

Jasmin Kay Libron 

> Farrington High

Melody Lin 

> Farrington High

Michelle Murray 

> Farrington High

Ce leste Pali 

> Farrington High

Sandy Ramiscal 

> Farrington High

Nohea Reveleymahan 

> Farrington High

Catherine Ritti 

> Farrington High

Jeremy Seitz 

> Farrington High

Lauta’amutafea Shen 

> Farrington High

Mejelyne Simon 

> Farrington High

Patricia Smith 

> Farrington High

Inger Stonehill 

> Farrington High

Coralyn Sunico 

> Farrington High

Brad Tanabe 

> Farrington High

Lawrence Wayman 

> Farrington High

Claire Ya mada 

> Farrington High

Nicole Yasuda 

> Farrington High

Alette Yoshii -Ho 

> Farrington High

Louise Cayet ano 

> Fern Elementary

Shannon Kaaa 

> Fern Elementary

Linda Khalek 

> Fern Elementary

Kelli Taboada 

> Fern Elemen tary

Helena Costa 

> Haaheo Elementary

Adrean Floro 

> Haaheo Elementary

Brandi Tulang Mahuna 

> Haaheo Elementary

Janice Avellana 

> Hahaione Elementary

Susan Frost 

> Haiku Elementary

Abigail Schwartz 

> Haiku Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 5 of 35 

Melissa Novikoff 

Halau Ku Mana PCS 

Monica Fatu 

Hale O' Olomana 

Kathini Myers 

Haleiwa Elementary 

Peggy Folker 

Hana High -Elem 

Beth Senner 

Hana High -Elem 

Sara Deblin 

Hanalei Elementary 

Allis on Kohlhepp 

Hanalei Elementary 

Carol Seielstad 

Hanalei Elementary 

Lisa Chang 

Hauula Elementary 

Amber Tai Hook 

Hauula Elementary 

Susan Lee 

Hawaii Academy Arts -Sciences PCS 

Gina Little 

Hawaii Academy Arts -Sciences PCS 

Teressa Trem aglio 

Hawaii Academy Arts -Sciences PCS 

Randi Wold -Brennon 

Hawaii Academy Arts -Sciences PCS 

Brenna Gorresen 

Hawaii District Office H/W 

Blake Hamura 

Hawaii District Office H/W 

Danielle Dixon 

Hawaii District Office K/K/P 

Darlene Ewan 

Hawaii School For The Deaf & The Blind 

Dana Adler 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Shoshannah Brasher 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Carmen Cald eron 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Julie Hamilton 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Melissa Hawkins 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Elizabeth Oden 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Leilani Peña 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Florence Scott 

Hawaii Technology Academy PCS 

Meg Baumgardt 

Heeia Elementary 

Corrie Gomes 

Heeia Elementary 

Shawna Hirakawa 

Heeia Elementary 

Rosemarie Rawlins 

Heeia Elementary 

Katherine Shinsato 

Heeia Elementary 

Katherine Tanaka 

Heeia Ele mentary 

Michelle Matsumoto 

Helemano Elementary 

Krystal Soraoka 

Helemano Elementary 

Dayle Tamagawa 

Helemano Elementary 

David Harvey 

Hickam Elementary 

Nikki Howick 

Hickam Elementary 

Carol Kawano 

Hickam Element ary 

Kelsey Komoto 

Hickam Elementary 

Shannon Luciano 

Hickam Elementary 

Molly Mardany 

Hickam Elementary 

Leon Moore 

Hickam Elementary 

Jennifer Pang 

Hickam Elementary 

Nicole Paro 

Hickam Elementary 

Cassandra Reid -Selth 

Hickam Elementary 

Michele Sasaki 

Hickam Elementary 

Ann Uyehara 

Hickam Elementary 

Valerie Yamakawa 

Hickam Elementary 

Dina Yanagi 

Hickam Elementary 

Dwayne Abuel 

Highlands Intermediate 

Cathie Collier 

Highlands Intermediate 

Amy Colmenares 

Highlands Intermediate 

David Colmenares 

Highlands Intermediate 

Leisha Cunningham 

Highlands Intermediate We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 6 of 35 

Jon Shirafuji 

> Highlands Intermediate

Wanette Shirafuji 

> Highlands Int ermediate

Jacob Tamaye 

> Highlands Intermediate

Kathryn Tonaki 

> Highlands Intermediate

Kristin Aiona 

> Hilo High

Michelle Araki 

> Hilo High

Elizabeth Benson 

> Hilo High

Claire Camero 

> Hilo High

Nyr a Dee 

> Hilo High

Alexis Duldulao 

> Hilo High

Kirsten Eberly 

> Hilo High

Drew Fernandez 

> Hilo High

Wendy Hamane 

> Hilo High

Sarah Kalawe 

> Hilo High

Elizabeth Laliberte 

> Hilo High

Cori -Ann Lorenzo 

> Hilo High

Donald Memmer 

> Hilo High

Vickie Murata 

> Hilo High

Debra Sanbei 

> Hilo High

Todd Sato 

> Hilo High

Rana Suginohara 

> Hilo High

Nancy Usher 

> Hilo High

Cheryl Walker 

> Hilo High

Linda Esprecion -Andres 

> Hilo Intermediate

Pualeilani Fernandez 

> Hilo Intermediate

Cynthia Fong 

> Hilo Intermediate

Haunani Haasenritter 

> Hilo Intermediate

Cheney Kaku 

> Hilo Intermediate

Michelle Kaku 

> Hil o Intermediate

Laura Kelson 

> Hilo Intermediate

Dana Kuramoto 

> Hilo Intermediate

Pascale Pinner 

> Hilo Intermediate

Alson Sakamoto 

> Hilo Intermediate

Terrilee Switzer 

> Hilo Intermediate

Elizabeth Timbal 

> Hilo Intermediate

Jade Toma 

> Hilo Intermediate

Jodie Urakami 

> Hilo Intermediate

Heiki Wolf 

> Hilo Intermediate

Kayla Callarec 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Wenona Correa 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Irene Garrison 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Nicole Harrison 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Davelyn Kanewa 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Phillips Laura 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Lisa Leach 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Gerlinde Morris 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Kacie Shirai 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Noa Thomas 

> Hilo Union Eleme ntary

Kelsie Valledor -Yoshida 

> Hilo Union Elementary

Ronda Goo 

> Hokulani Elementary

Jacie Kanetani 

> Holomua Elementary

Ryan Kanetani 

> Holomua Elementary

Christel Lleces 

> Holomua Elementary

Michelle Matias 

> Holomua Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 7 of 35 

Christen Obedoza 

Holomua Elementary 

Heidi Soriano 

Holomua Elementary 

Kelly Tanimura 

Holomua Elementary 

Mark Tanimura 

Holomua Elementary 

Jaimee -Ann Uemura 

Holomua Elementary 

Kara Yasui 

Holomua Elementary 

Abby Arnott 

Holualoa Elementary 

Annabelle Barte 

Holualoa Elementary 

Britaney Cosner 

Holualoa Ele mentary 

Courtney D'Agostino 

Holualoa Elementary 

Bennadeth Ellis 

Holualoa Elementary 

Brennan Ellis 

Holu aloa Elementary 

Lianne Ichishita 

Holualoa Elementary 

Marina Keizer 

Holualoa Elementary 

Jessica Lee Loy 

Holu aloa Elementary 

Salena Takaki Puou 

Holualoa Elementary 

Lisa Vail 

Holualoa Elementary 

Josephine Cho Fr eehauf 

Honaunau School 

Fredeelyn Freeman -Koepke 

Honaunau School 

Gwendolyn Radziwon -Yurong 

Honaunau School 

Suzy Andrade 

Honokaa Elementary 

Deneva Broughton -Neiswanger 

Honokaa Elementary 

Jennifer Fr eitas 

Honokaa Elementary 

Lina Manning 

Honokaa Elementary 

Brenda McDonald 

Honokaa Elementary 

Karla Miranda 

Honokaa Elementary 

Nolynn Nishida 

Honokaa Elementary 

Niki -Lyn Silva 

Honokaa Elementary 

Lisa Anderson 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Ashley DeSilva 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Felicia Ferrance 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Liberty Furchgott 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Toni Hall 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Milette Ho'opai 

Honokaa High -Inter 

U’ilani Macabio 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Ric Elloy Mendoza 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Christopher Mione 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Li li Solomon 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Maerose Tabios 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Maron Mariel Tabios 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Aaron Tanimoto 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Lane Yanagisawa 

Honokaa High -Inter 

Liane Auyong -Imamura 

Honolulu District Office 

Dawn Dunford 

Honolulu District Office 

Lorriann Kondo 

Honolulu District Office 

Liane Marutani -Cole 

Hon olulu District Office 

Michelle Palafox 

Honolulu District Office 

Dessy Scoville 

Honolulu District Office 

Beck ey Wong 

Honolulu District Office 

Leilani Johnson -Hagmoc 

Honouliuli Middle 

Mariko Niosco 

Honouliuli Middle 

Naomi Ikeda 

Honowai Elementary 

Troy Jarrell 

Honowai Elementary 

Lori Madrona 

Honowai Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 8 of 35 

Chad Seki ya 

Honowai Elementary 

Crystal Alejandro 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Deborah Eveland 

Ho'okele Elementary 

De Anna Gomez 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Desiree Gomez 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Jennifer Gutierrez 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Howell Howard 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Rose Howell 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Carla Laybon 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Joey Laybon 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Michelle Pascual 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Angela Ramey 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Sarah Ramia 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Stacey Reese 

Ho'okele Elementary 

Maryann Aguinaldo 

Iao Intermediate 

Sonia Avasthi 

Iao Intermediate 

Jill Beyer 

Iao Intermediate 

Monica Collias 

Iao Intermediate 

Katie Hearl 

Iao Intermediate 

Ann Nakashima 

Iao Intermediate 

Cynthia Van Kleef 

Iao Intermediate 

Kelly Wadlegger 

Iao Intermediate 

Debra Weisz 

Iao Intermediate 

Jo Ann Yao 

Iao Intermediate 

Avery Espinda 

Iliahi Elementary 

Lili Fujino 

Iliah i Elementary 

Lea Ann Kakimoto 

Iliahi Elementary 

Iris Nakasone 

Iliahi Elementary 

Koryne Acob 

Ilima Intermed iate 

Kristy Arakawa 

Ilima Intermediate 

Elizabeth Baker 

Ilima Intermediate 

Erin Kato 

Ilima Intermediate 

Lennie Long 

Ilima Intermediate 

Kellie -Ann Morikawa 

Ilima Intermediate 

Michael Press 

Ilima Intermediate 

Natalie Scarborough 

Ilima Intermediate 

Aoi Shinagawa 

Ilima Intermediate 

Rachel Silverman 

Innovati ons PCS 

Elizabeth Araki 

Inouye Elementary 

Dallas Kinsey 

Inouye Elementary 

Michelle Lau 

Inouye Elementary 

Christine Putzulu 

Inouye Elementary 

Jerilynn Schaefer 

Inouye Elementary 

Stephanie Seeden 

Inouye Elementary 

Tami Sego 

Inouye Elementary 

Torrianne Sue -Remata 

Inouye Elementary 

Kristin Villal obos 

Inouye Elementary 

Michelle Garofalo 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Kevin Kato 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Sloane Kealalio 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Robin Kouchi 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Deanne Pong 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Samantha Seeman 

Iroquois Point Elementary 

Tammy Silao 

Iroquois Point Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 9 of 35 

Ted Edwards 

Jarrett Middle 

Fe Dahlia Lapitan 

Jarrett Middle 

Kathryn Parsons 

Jarrett Middle 

Audrey Shiotsu 

Jarrett Middle 

Bobbie Lee Nakihei 

Ka 'Umeke Ka'eo PCS 

Traci Kanoa 

Ka Waihona O Ka Na'auao PCS 

Kathy Leong 

Ka Waihona O Ka Na'auao PCS 

Charles Soon 

Ka Waihona O Ka Na'auao PCS 

Angela Huntemer 

Kaaawa Elementary 

Susan Tamayo 

Kaaawa Elementary 

Anjelica Ayers 

Kaahumanu Elementary 

Dalton Murata 

Kaahumanu Elementary 

Trina Oato 

Kaahumanu Elementary 

Sherry Robello 

Kaahumanu Elementary 

Kaylen Carmichael 

Kaala Elementary 

Tracy Hookala 

Kaala Elementary 

Sumner Mckasson 

Kaala Elementary 

Marissa Pagente 

Kaala Elementary 

Laurie Ines 

Kaelepulu Elementary 

Stephanie Taira 

Kaelepulu Elementary 

Lianne Kanamu 

Kaewai Elementary 

Annamarie Medeiros -Bruno 

Kaewai Elementary 

Claire Oshita 

Kaewai Elementary 

Melissa Burr 

Kahakai Elementary 

Autumn Cranwell 

Kahakai Elementary 

Nancy Deleeuw 

Kahakai Elementary 

Erin Graig 

Kahakai Elementary 

Chris Rances 

Kahakai Elementary 

Sher ri Redou 

Kahakai Elementary 

Cecilia Woodbury 

Kahakai Elementary 

Tysha Freitas 

Kahala Elementary 

Samantha H yeon 

Kahala Elementary 

Elizabeth Kong 

Kahala Elementary 

Elizabeth Salerno 

Kahala Elementary 

Ja cqueline Ing 

Kahaluu Elementary 

Vanessa Knoepfel 

Kahaluu Elementary 

Michele Mainaaupo 

Kahaluu Elementary 

Denise Payba 

Kahaluu Elementary 

Milton Tanji 

Kahaluu Elementary 

Josette Akim Hanohano 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Bonnie Blake 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

James Blake 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Kathleen Brizuela Absalon 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Bonita Cavanaugh 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Jennifer Corpion 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Beatrice DeRego -Coffield 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Leialoha Finai 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Shanae Hatche ll 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Nathan James 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Maile Johnson 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Brett Kewish 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Lila Mae Lelepali 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

Tia Moeai 

Kahuku High & Intermediate 

S. Kau'i Ontai 

Kahuku High & Intermediate We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 10 of 35 

Amber O'Reilly 

> Kahuku High & Intermediate

Nadia Raich 

> Kahuku High & Intermediate

Kris Cabanilla 

> Kahului Elementary

Fiona Cherrett 

> Kahului Elementary

Robynne Fukunaga 

> Kahului Elementary

Dawn Henderson 

> Kahului Elementary

Keith Isagawa 

> Kahului Elementary

Tammi Ishikawa 

> Kahului Elementary

Angela Kan Hai 

> Kahului Elementary

Francine Lee 

> Kahului Elementary

Cleora Logan 

> Kahului Elementary

Wendy Shishido 

> Kahului Elementary

Wendy Wells 

> Kahului Elementary

Tracy Doane 

> Kailua Elementary

Jenny Kimhan  

> Kailua Elementary

Michelle Matsuzaki 

> Kailua Elementary

Maira Reyes 

> Kailua Elementary

Michele Tavares 

> Kailua Elementary

Suzanne Cummings 

> Kailua High

Gayle Fujita Ramey 

> Kailua High

Raylene Peters 

> Kailua High

Samantha Silva 

> Kailua High

Laura Tomasello 

> Kailua High

Zellie Kamahele 

> Kailua In termediate

Scott LaBoy 

> Kailua Intermediate

Chivas Niau 

> Kailua Intermediate

Lisa Rodrigues 

> Kailua Intermediate

Susana Roman 

> Kailua Intermediate

Eunice Werner 

> Kailua Intermediate

Wendy Boggs 

> Kaimiloa Elementary

Ashley Domingo 

> Kaimiloa Elementary

Victoria Alexis Kaleimamahu 

> Kaimiloa Elementary

Rosemarie R eyes 

> Kaimiloa Elementary

Lisa Shimabukuro 

> Kaimiloa Elementary

Randall A. Burgess 

> Kaimuki High

Kevin Carr 

> Kaimuki High

Johnathon Griffiths 

> Kaimuki High

Maria Guardino 

> Kaimuki High

Lynette Low 

> Kaimuki High

Nicholas Matherne 

> Kaimuki High

Chani Matsui 

> Kaimuki High

Dean Nakagawa 

> Kaimuki H igh

Jennie Oliver 

> Kaimuki High

Renea Ruark 

> Kaimuki High

Thomas Schemel 

> Kaimuki High

Kapena Wong 

> Kaimuki High

Reid Yoshikawa 

> Kaimuki High

Alita Charron 

> Kaimuki Middle

Keoni Dunn 

> Kaimuki Middle

Melissa Ellison 

> Kaimuki Middle

Robert Hayakawa 

> Kaimuki Middle

Rachel Hung 

> Kaimu ki Middle

Teresa McAveney 

> Kaimuki Middle

Kelli Miike -Lee 

> Kaimuki Middle

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 11 of 35 

Amy Ogasawara -Fukumoto 

> Kaimuki Middle

Raena Shigeta 

> Kaimuki Middle

Ashley Henion 

> Kainalu Elementary

Colleen Mosher 

> Kainalu Elementary

Nicole Ames 

> Kaiser High

Jamie Psak 

> Kaiser High

Jennifer Solmirin 

> Kaiser High

Stephanie Takashima 

> Kaiser High

David Tanabe 

> Kaiser High

Dallas Uti 

> Kaiser High

Jamie -Lee Alderman 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Joana Arakaki 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Peggy Barretto 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Georgia Blas 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Melissa Ching 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Charisse Kapapa 

> Kaiulani Elementary

LeeMyra LeMaster -Sega 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Julie Nakamura 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Nadine. Okazawa 

> Kaiu lani Elementary

Cheryl Onishi 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Jason Pavia 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Bethany Thorpe 

> Kaiulani El ementary

Lynn Tsuzaki 

> Kaiulani Elementary

Jennifer Wong 

> Kaiulani Elementary

April Babcock 

> Kalaheo High

Catherine Dichner 

> Kalaheo High

Shino Izumi -Hee 

> Kalaheo High

Gary Kikuchi 

> Kalaheo High

Lisa Lea 

> Kalaheo High

Marie Lindsey 

> Kalaheo High

Shauna Miyazono 

> Kalaheo High

Micah Pregitzer 

> Kalaheo High

Kimberly Shinno 

> Kalaheo High

Erich Smith 

> Kalaheo High

Vanessa Souki 

> Ka laheo High

William Tong 

> Kalaheo High

Ryan Williams 

> Kalaheo High

Stacie Caires 

> Kalakaua Middle

Janice Eala 

> Kalakaua Middle

Molly Hagmann 

> Kalakaua Middle

Valerie Harmon 

> Kalakaua Middle

Richard Jenkins 

> Kalakaua Middle

Micah Pexa 

> Kalakaua Middle

William Schriefer 

> Kalakaua Middle

Rochelle Shiraki 

> Kalakaua Middle

Sara Uyeno 

> Kalakaua Middle

Trina Albright 

> Kalama Intermediate

Athena Anderson 

> Kalama Intermediate

Dezireen Austin 

> Kalama Intermediate

Rachelle Bras 

> Kalama Intermediate

Tracy D eshield 

> Kalama Intermediate

Tracy Deshields 

> Kalama Intermediate

Flora Green 

> Kalama Intermediate

Lisa Ann Hookano 

> Kalama Intermediate

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 12 of 35 

Eric Iwasaki 

Kalama Intermediate 

Leinani Kana 

Kalama Intermediate 

Cory Lee 

Kalama Intermediate 

Donna Montalvo 

Kalama Intermediate 

Robi Nitake 

Kalama Intermediate 

Andrew Okimoto 

Kalama Intermediate 

Anne Orellana Whitney 

Kalama Intermediate 

Emily Pepitone 

Kalama Intermediate 

Melissa Reyes 

Kalama Intermediate 

David Tanaka 

Kalama Intermediate 

Jenna Tate 

Kalama Intermediate 

Chuyang Baideme 

Kalani High 

Jennifer Chang 

Kalani High 

Alexander Kendrick 

Kalani High 

Travis Masuda 

Kalani High 

Shawna Matsumura 

Kalani High 

James Mosher 

Kalani High 

Guenn Adare 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Waracka Amber 

Kalanianao le Elem -Inter 

Kristen Bento 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Corina Calsing 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Britney Carey 

Kalanianao le Elem -Inter 

Sara Mine 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Leteasha Northrop 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Martha Prieskorn 

Kalan ianaole Elem -Inter 

Susan Pugliese 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Aysha Spencer 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Adam Tuifagu 

Kalaniana ole Elem -Inter 

Andrea Wilson 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Pamela Wilson 

Kalanianaole Elem -Inter 

Krysten -Joy Caraan g

Kaleiopuu Elementary 

Sherri Ko 

Kaleiopuu Elementary 

Kathy Kobayashi 

Kaleiopuu Elementary 

Emmett Wong 

Kaleiopu u Elementary 

Kathleen Grondin 

Kalihi Elementary 

Sarah Jenny 

Kalihi Elementary 

Melanie Okimoto 

Kali hi Elementary 

Eva Aweau 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Marilou Bulagay 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Ardith Chung 

Kalihi -Kai Elem entary 

Brittany Ea 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Rabago Emmalaine 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Cara Fukuda 

Kalihi -Kai Elem entary 

Jo Ann Hino 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Rebecca Hirakami 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Shelley Konishi 

Kali hi -Kai Elementary 

Lee Kunimitsu 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Marcie Matsuoka 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Tobi Miyashiro 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Michelle Nakazato 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Lisa Ozaki 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Miche le Patague 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Marilyn Shota 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Darren Takushi 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 13 of 35 

Lesli S. Takushi 

Kalihi -Kai Elementary 

Athena Cheng 

Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Liza Kaniho 

Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Jessica Killilea 

Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Avis Moriyama 

Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Clyde Sabas 

Kalihi -Uka Elementary 

Reina Chang 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Janet Kaneshiro 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Natalie Lee 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Chang Matthew 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Joanna Pillittieri 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Debbie Shimabukuro 

Kalihi -Waena El ementary 

Pualani Wilmington 

Kalihi -Waena Elementary 

Shestin Gibeau 

Kamaile Academy PCS 

Kathleen Hopp e

Kamaile Academy PCS 

Raena Leleo 

Kamaile Academy PCS 

Jessica Molina 

Kamaile Academy PCS 

Annmaria Spruel l

Kamaile Academy PCS 

Elizabeth Baclayon 

Kamakahelei Middle 

Sarah Kern 

Kamakahelei Middle 

Manuel Manzo Jr 

Kamakahelei Middle 

Toni Tasaka -Alapai 

Kamakahelei Middle 

Sarah Tochiki 

Kamakahelei Middle 

Cat herine Davis 

Kamalii Elementary 

Julia Davison -Wyse 

Kamalii Elementary 

Denise Dryhurst 

Kamalii Elementary 

Jill Kaho‘ohanohano 

Kamalii Elementary 

Nivol Niemi 

Kamalii Elementary 

Kayleen Pieper 

Kamalii Elementary 

Angela Tompkins 

Kamalii Elementary 

Kaitlyn Aure 

Kamehameha III Elementary 

David Brown 

Kamehameha III Elementary 

Justin Hug hey 

Kamehameha III Elementary 

Jessica Sill 

Kamehameha III Elementary 

Susan House 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Lisa S. Kane shiro 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Kyle Kim 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Joanne Martin 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Cody Okuhara 

Kaneohe Ele mentary 

Michelle Otsu 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Sarah Passoff 

Kaneohe Elementary 

Bethany Yamaguchi 

Kaneoh e Elementary 

Kendi Fuller 

Kanoelani Elementary 

Lisa Hee 

Kanoelani Elementary 

Kathryn Roxburgh 

Kanoelani Elementary 

Kaitlyn Atkins 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Maile Becka 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Shana Benz 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Maya Chong 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Thomas Meringolo 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Eldon Pate -Kahakalau 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Jamie Perry 

Kanu O Ka Aina PCS 

Susan Chandler 

Kanuikapono PCS 

Erin Noel 

Kanuikapono PCS We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 14 of 35 

Miharu Ishikawa 

> Kaohao PCS

Keri Powers Pye 

> Kaohao PCS

Laura Burton 

> Kapaa Elementary

Ciara Delos Reyes -Caires 

> Kapaa Elementary

Violet DePoe 

> Kapaa Elementary

Abigail Lapetina 

> Kapaa Elementary

Sienna Makarewicz 

> Kapaa Elementary

Jennifer Nagle 

> Kapaa Elementary

Yvette Rapozo 

> Kapaa Elementary

Heidi Tokuda 

> Kapaa Elementary

Jennifer Veeck 

> Kapaa Elementary

Bernadine Villatora 

> Kapaa Elementary

Todd Barcial 

> Kapaa High

Tamarine Carvalho 

> Kapaa High

Jean Esaki 

> Kapaa High

Guy Ho 

> Kapaa High

Natasha Arruda 

> Kapaa Middle

Christine Bandsma 

> Kapaa Middle

Russell Josephson 

> Kapaa Middle

Monica Kawakami 

> Kapaa Middle

Mia Grant 

> Kapalama Elementary

Heather Higa -Funada 

> Kapalama Elementary

Stephanie Kau 

> Kapalama Elementary

Carrie Markham 

> Kapalama Elementary

Dawn Mashima 

> Kapalama Elementary

Eleanor Shinsato 

> Kapalama Elementary

Shari Ann Williams 

> Kapalama Elementary

Diane DeCorte 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Jonette Fujitake 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Jennifer Jo 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Jenna Nakao 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Fukuda Nanea 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Jadee -Marie Oda 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Season Paniku 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Chelsie Santos 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Koren Zane 

> Kapiolani Elementary

Kristin Frank 

> Kapolei Elementary

Sondra App leton 

> Kapolei High

David Bucknell 

> Kapolei High

Alice Iraha 

> Kapolei High

Craig Kleefisch 

> Kapolei High

Jasmine Kumar 

> Kapolei High

Sharmayne Lee 

> Kapolei High

Gillian Grace Leibelt 

> Kapolei High

Glendaile Llamelo 

> Kapolei High

Ryan Matsumoto 

> Kapolei High

Jenella Ogitani 

> Kapolei High

Sarah Smorol 

> Kapolei High

Jeremy Soriano 

> Kapolei High

Jill Tanaka 

> Kapolei High

Carl Wright 

> Kapolei High

Donna Fisher 

> Kapolei Middle

Lissa Hakala 

> Kapolei Middle

Espinoza Jamiw 

> Kapolei Mi ddle

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 15 of 35 

Kristal Jonasen 

Kapolei Middle 

Lorena Jose 

Kapolei Middle 

Joy Otsuka 

Kapolei Middle 

Shirley Yamauchi 

Kapolei Middle 

Kyle Hall 

Kapolei PCS 

Harlan Henna 

Kapunahala Elementary 

Vierr a Jayli 

Kapunahala Elementary 

Tanya Park 

Kapunahala Elementary 

David Berry 

Ka'u High -Pahala Elem 

Christine Bothmer -Stinson 

Ka'u High -Pahala Elem 

Janice Javar 

Ka'u High -Pahala Elem 

Angela Miyashiro 

Ka'u High -Pahala Elem 

Michael Depoe 

Kauai District Office 

Marla Domingo 

Kauai District Office 

Leila Kuboyama 

Kauai District Office 

Alicia Miyashiro 

Kauai District Office 

Carrie Lea Sato 

Kauai District Office 

Michelle Dressler 

Kauai High 

Leinaala Kealoha 

Kauai High 

Lindsey Lee -Hornstine 

Kauai High 

Terry Low 

Kauai High 

Darryl Miyasato 

Kauai High 

Kristi Moises 

Kauai High 

Alexa Nelson 

Kauai High 

Nathan Pontious 

Kauai High 

Carin Shotliff 

Kauai High 

Jeri Yamagata 

Kauai High 

Jesand Amodo 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Ember Brock 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Constance Contreras 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Adele Horikawa 

Kauluwela Element ary 

Skye Kusao 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Jaime Lee 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Gayle Oura 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Porsche Puulei -Storm 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Jessica Remotap 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Kelli Shirota 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Tiana Sur 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Tiffany Whitman 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Jamie Yamamoto 

Kauluwela Elementary 

Kris Cabreira 

Kaumana Elementary 

Travis Flynn 

Kaumana Elementary 

Mari Oshiro 

Kaumana Elementary 

Cari -Lynn Barcial 

Kaumualii Elementary 

Stacie Cantu 

Kaumualii Elementary 

Amber Thronas 

Kaumualii Elementary 

Laurie Madani 

Kaunakakai Elementary 

Malia Sakamoto 

Kaunakakai Elementary 

Dawn Bischoff 

Kawananakoa Middle 

Jon Chung 

Kawananakoa Middle 

Brian Flatt 

Kawananakoa Middle 

Korine Kodama 

Kawananakoa Middle 

Mari LeFe bvre 

Kawananakoa Middle 

Kathleen McDonough 

Kawananakoa Middle We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 16 of 35 

Marsha Miyata 

> Kawananakoa Middle

Jade Pha m

> Kawananakoa Middle

Lillian Shaw 

> Kawananakoa Middle

Perry Matthew 

> Ke Kula 'O 'Ehunuikaimalino

Dawn K ala ʻi-Aguiar 

> Ke Kula O Nawahiokalani'opu'u

Willette Akima -Akau 

> Ke Kula O Nawahiokalani'opu'u Iki, PCS

Nancy Peterson -Holt 

> Ke Kula O S amuel M Kamakau PCS

Bertha Alicia Alcaraz 

> Keaau Elementary

Robyn Amana 

> Keaau Elementary

Win dy Berrigan -Sanchez 

> Keaau Elementary

Leisley Cobile 

> Keaau Elementary

Daphna Ehrenhalt 

> Keaau Elementary

Asia Harman 

> Keaau Elementary

Christin Kekaualua 

> Keaau Elementary

Sharyn Nakano 

> Keaau Elementary

Joy Oliveira Smith 

> Keaau Elementary

Vanessa Quiocho 

> Keaau Elementary

Susanna Rivera 

> Keaau Elementary

Wendy Sako 

> Keaau Elementary

Brittnie Toloumu 

> Keaau Elementary

Melissa Watanabe 

> Keaau Elementary

Katherine Wood 

> Keaau Elementary

John Bonewitz 

> Keaau High

Shu -Ying Bonner 

> Keaau High

Chase Desa 

> Keaau High

Li nda Eriksson 

> Keaau High

Charlotte Godfrey -Romo 

> Keaau High

Casey Hulten 

> Keaau High

Shana Kiriu 

> Keaau Hig h

Cynthia McAnish 

> Keaau High

Marlene Medeiros 

> Keaau High

Marlene Mederios 

> Keaau High

Michele Meyers Conol 

> Keaau High

Terence Moniz 

> Keaau High

Laurie O'Brien 

> Keaau High

Jenne Olayon 

> Keaau High

Arnold Peneueta 

> Keaau High

Andrew Sanchez 

> Keaau High

Daniel Tavares 

> Keaau H igh

Ku’ulei Arceo 

> Keaau Middle

Julianne Arkangel -Kawaha 

> Keaau Middle

Randee Arkin 

> Keaau Middle

Kristin Bajo 

> Keaau Middle

Sandra Bonk 

> Keaau Middle

Kristel Brogdon 

> Keaau Middle

Katherine DeKemper 

> Keaau Middle

Joshua Jacobs 

> Keaau Middle

Andrea Medrano 

> Keaau Middle

Gordon Piianai a

> Keaau Middle

Elizabeth Sharrock 

> Keaau Middle

Janice Tanaka 

> Keaau Middle

Brenna Usher 

> Keaau Middle

Cindy Chock 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Suzanne Dadzie 

> Kealakehe Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 17 of 35 

Kelly Duell 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Joy Hanato 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Jenna Lee 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Lorene Livingston 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Bre tt McCardle 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Antoinette Reynolds 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Ann Marie Sager 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Kyle Segawa 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Kari Swangel 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Susan Tanaka 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Sarah Totten 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Christina Vien 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Shauna Yusko 

> Kealakehe Elementary

Fawzia Ali 

> Kealakehe High

Bill Armijo 

> Kealakehe High

Keith Colvin 

> Kealakehe High

David Huitt 

> Kealakehe High

Manuel Jadulang 

> Kealakehe High

Fumi Koizumi -Droge 

> Kealakehe High

Tamisha Lee 

> Kealakehe High

George Macklin 

> Keala kehe High

Rebecca Marsh 

> Kealakehe High

Sandra Stone 

> Kealakehe High

Kristy Sunada 

> Kealakehe High

Erin Williams 

> Kealakehe High

Michelle Anastasio 

> Kealakehe Inter

Rebecca Brito 

> Kealakehe Inter

Foster Karen 

> Kealakehe Inter

Kenneth Kimmage 

> Kealakehe Inter

Deborah Richard 

> Kealakehe Inter

Alfonso Riv era 

> Kealakehe Inter

Angela Tannehilll 

> Kealakehe Inter

Jennifer Baptista 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Donna Ha nohano 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Kimberly Kahawaiola’a 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Wendi Kimura 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Sherry Nakata 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Mia Pereira 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Evie Saltiban 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Amy Stoddart  

> Keaukaha Elementary

Holly Uehara 

> Keaukaha Elementary

Lynn Charton 

> Kekaha Elementary

Shaunna GaNun 

> Kekaha Elementary

Jonelle Renti Cruz 

> Kekaha Elementary

Beate Arendale 

> Kekaulike High

Glenda Bendell 

> Kekaulike High

Jonathan Bowe 

> Kekaulike High

Michelle Brown 

> Kekaulike High

Jeanine Coombs -Todd 

> Kekaulike High

Ann Crawford 

> Kekaulike High

Saafiga Foster 

> Kekaulike High

Curt Hashimoto 

> Kekaulike High

Lori Johns on 

> Kekaulike High

Rebecca Kiili 

> Kekaulike High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 18 of 35 

Patricia Pascual 

> Kekaulike High

Laila Popata 

> Kekaulike High

Brooklynn Ramos 

> Kekaulike High

Dawn Shirota 

> Kekaulike High

Andrzej Wolski 

> Kekaulike High

Jayna Yamamoto 

> Kekaulike High

Lorna Gomes 

> Keolu Elementary

Yolanda Dana 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Paulette Gangano 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Emily Lethlean 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Hope McKeen 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Connor Piper 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Lester Rivera 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Patricia Shillingford 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Tricia Shillingford 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Debra Shirai 

> Keonepoko Elementary

Falepouliuli Asaeli 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Cecily Best 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Andrea -Li Fukuda 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Jennifer Kramer 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Samoana McAngus 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Dawn Sarsona 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Maureen Uytingco 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Corrina Yonemori 

> Keone'ula Elementary

Kathleen Barr 

> Kihei Elementary

Bernadette Fulgencio 

> Kihei Elementar y

Jody -Lynn Glickman 

> Kihei Elementary

Kristen Goodwin 

> Kihei Elementary

Cory Horwitz 

> Kihei Elementary

Evelyn Ibonia 

> Kihei Elementary

Mary Joyce Manglicmot 

> Kihei Elementary

Anna McNay 

> Kihei Elementary

Jessie O’Neill -Prest 

> Kihei Elementary

Corey Pasman 

> Kihei Elementary

Rachel Reyes 

> Kihei Elementary

Renee Romerdahl 

> Kihei Elementary

Matthew Ruiz 

> Kihei Elementary

Mary Schaeffer 

> Kihei Elementary

Michael Kline 

> Kilauea Elementary

Cynthia Luafalemana 

> Kilohana Elementary

F Bellinger 

> King Intermediate

Ratu Jared Bukarau 

> King Intermediate

Dennis McCaulley 

> King Intermediate

Michelle Murphy 

> King Intermediate

Joelle Neuman 

> King Intermediate

Richard Pettit 

> King Intermediate

Deborah Schmeding 

> King Intermediate

Lori Harris 

> Kipapa Elementary

Cory Ann Kaimuloa 

> Kipapa Elementary

Dana Katsura 

> Kipapa Elementary

Kimberly Nakamura 

> Kipapa Elementary

Nancy Parker 

> Kipapa Elementary

Mark Tanaka 

> Kipapa Elementary

Sandra Gusman 

> Kohala Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 19 of 35 

Kristy Ku 

> Kohala Elementary

Melanie Matsuda 

> Kohala Elementary

Anne Tucker 

> Kohala Elementary

John Bolitho 

> Kohala High

Amber Corrales 

> Kohala High

Brittney Hedlund 

> Kohala High

Renee Bautista 

> Kohala Middle

Jennifer De Silva Stevens 

> Kohala Middle

Jasmine DeCosta 

> Kohala Middle

Peter ODonnell 

> Kohala Middle

Blaine Tsukayama 

> Koloa Elementary

Jacqueline Cramer 

> Kona Pacific PCS

Anika Agerlie 

> Konawaena Elementary

Cami Iwanaga 

> Konawaena Elementary

Holly Nakamoto 

> Konawaena Elem entary

Thelma Reeves 

> Konawaena Elementary

Maile Wikum 

> Konawaena Elementary

Tessa Fries 

> Konawaena High

Timothy Henry 

> Konawaena High

Shannon Jacob Kline 

> Konawaena High

Ernie Okumura 

> Konawaena High

Jean Riley 

> Konawaena High

Anna Bartels 

> Konawaena Middle

Danielle Bloch 

> Konawaena Middle

Kaylee Castillo 

> Konaw aena Middle

Mia -Pia Cummins -VanHerreweghe 

> Konawaena Middle

John Franks 

> Konawaena Middle

Rhianna F ry 

> Konawaena Middle

Kathy Jo Kube 

> Konawaena Middle

Aasa Lundstroem -Leto 

> Konawaena Middle

Ca ndice Nozaki -Wong 

> Konawaena Middle

Danielle Russell 

> Konawaena Middle

Nicole Ullian 

> Konawaena Middle

Caitl in Wagstaff 

> Konawaena Middle

Elizabeth Wiggans 

> Konawaena Middle

Mark Fontaine 

> Kua O Ka La PCS

Eileen Carr 

> Kualapuu Elementary PCS

Penny Duvauchelle 

> Kualapuu Elementary PCS

Mich’lae Waialeale 

> Kualapuu Elementary PCS

Karen Fujimoto 

> Kuhio Elementary

Emily Hirama 

> Kuhio Elementary

Christina Cowell 

> Kula Elementary

Kristi Kakiuchi 

> Kula Elementary

Patrick McCall 

> Kula Elementary

MariaDonell Thomas 

> Lahaina Intermediate

Andrew Akahi 

> Lahainaluna High

Debralyn Arellano 

> Lahainaluna High

Tracy Brojakowski 

> Lahainaluna High

Anne Cook 

> Lahainaluna High

John Noah P. Hoomanawanui 

> Lahainaluna High

Sara Murphy 

> Lahainaluna High

Anjanette Naganuma 

> Lahainaluna High

Matthew O'Brien 

> Lahainaluna High

Noe Pizano 

> Lahainaluna High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 20 of 35 

Robert Sternthall 

> Lahainaluna High

Marianne Winfield 

> Lahainaluna High

Victoria Zupancic 

> Lahainaluna High

Anna Court 

> Laie Elementary

Susan Chew 

> Lanai High -Elem

Elizabeth Conroy -Humphrey 

> Lanai High -Elem

Romeo Ele no 

> Lanai High -Elem

Lisa Galloway 

> Lanai High -Elem

Linda Jones 

> Lanai High -Elem

Luz Larotta 

> Lanai High -Elem

Brenda Palumbo 

> Lanai High -Elem

Valerie Robinett 

> Lanai High -Elem

Robin Rosenbalm 

> Lanai High -Elem

Anita Tacderas 

> Lanai High -Elem

Jacquelyn Ho 

> Lanakila Elementary

Brandon Ing 

> Lanakila Elementary

Amy Kamakaiwi 

> Lanakila Elementary

Carol Kim 

> Lanakila Elementary

Stacy Miyashiro 

> Lanakila Elementary

Cassie Romero 

> Lanakila Elementary

Autumn Encinas -Domingcil 

> Laupahoehoe Community PCS

Stacie Nakamura 

> LDO -Annex

Joanne Powell 

> LDO -Annex

Shari Suzuki 

> LDO -Annex

Jessica Kato 

> Leeward District Office

Lawrence Hill 

> Lehua Elementary

Selene Maballo 

> Lehua Elementary

Karen Noda 

> Lehua Elementary

Valerie Simmo ns 

> Lehua Elementary

Daniel Taira 

> Lehua Elementary

Wendy Uyeda 

> Lehua Elementary

Kryssa Isobe 

> Leihoku Elementar y

Nicholle Omayas 

> Leihoku Elementary

Kim Blanchard 

> Leilehua High

Cori Hirayama 

> Leilehua High

Jamie Ideue 

> Leilehua High

Davidene Iman 

> Leilehua High

Lois Lozano 

> Leilehua High

Bren da Nomura 

> Leilehua High

Margaret Ohara 

> Leilehua High

Brianna Souza 

> Leilehua High

Maha Weeks 

> Leilehua High

Andrea Baer 

> Lihikai Elementary

Tai Baird 

> Lihikai Elementary

Kathleen Ann Batulayan 

> Lihikai Elementary

Ashley Cabanas 

> Lihikai Elementary

Marilyn Coloma 

> Lihikai Elementary

Christine Cook 

> Lihikai Elementary

Margaret Dalzell 

> Lihikai Elementary

Miki -Ann Fetalvero 

> Lihikai Elementary

Jane Filipi 

> Lihikai Elementary

Tiana Haia 

> Lihikai Elementary

Sydney Harris 

> Lihikai Elementary

Amanda Jimenez 

> Lihikai Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 21 of 35 

Veanne Matson 

Lihikai Elementary 

Kristi Nitta 

Lihikai Elementary 

Renee OBrien 

Lihikai Elementary 

Celia Oshita 

Lihikai Elem entary 

Eve Ramos 

Lihikai Elementary 

Daryl Sato 

Lihikai Elementary 

Dawn Schorling 

Lihikai Elementary 

Kris Shirota -Hong 

Lihikai Elementary 

Szhameen Vasquez 

Lihikai Elementary 

Jonathan Vince -Cruz 

Lihikai Elementary 

Samantha Yamada 

Lihikai Elementary 

Courtney Yamashiro 

Lihikai Elementary 

Gregory Serve 

Liholiho Elementary 

Corey Yasuda 

Liholiho Elementary 

Lisa Garnett 

Likelike Elementary 

Mari Hokama 

Likelike Elementary 

Patrice Mizuno 

Likelike Elementary 

Kristine Nakaoka 

Likelike Elementary 

Evelyn Akai 

Lincoln Elementary 

Erin Kamemoto 

Lincoln Elementary 

Kristi Maruno 

Lincoln Elementary 

Kalelani Ogata 

Lincoln Elementary 

Erin Baldauf 

Lokelani Intermediate 

Catherine Fitzpatrick 

Lokelani Intermediate 

Janet Araki 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Liandra Bonifacio 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Sarah Cappel 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Sarah Click 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Sheri Gallagher 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Robyn McNichols 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Tiffany Sera 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Lori Towata 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Amber Tyndzik 

Lunalilo Elementary 

Katie Robinson 

Maemae Elementary 

Diane Styles 

Maemae Elementary 

Jacklynn Bruhn 

Maili Elementary 

Jo -Lyn Correa 

Maili Elementary 

Christine Hanakahi 

Maili Elementary 

Stacey Hunt 

Maili Elementary 

Lauren Mauai 

Maili Elementary 

Lisa Perez 

Maili Elementary 

Sara Allen 

Makaha Elementary 

Lorraine Bennett 

Makaha Elementary 

J Kuroda 

Makaha Ele mentary 

Annalyn Mesina 

Makaha Elementary 

Athena Milligan 

Makaha Elementary 

Chantel Navarro 

Makaha Elementary 

Lori Nelson 

Makaha Elementary 

Jaclyn Wills 

Makaha Elementary 

Melanie Yagi 

Makaha Elementary 

Ashlie Johnson 

Makakilo Elementary 

Ella Chabra 

Makalapa Elementary 

Cameron Inouye -Ng 

Makalapa Elementary 

Kathlene Suzuki 

Makalapa Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 22 of 35 

Alyssa Balderas Silva 

> Makawao Elementary

Robyn De Leon 

> Makawao Elemen tary

Leanne Dunn 

> Makawao Elementary

Holly Lee 

> Makawao Elementary

Sarah Shewmaker 

> Makawao Elementary

Theresa Thompson 

> Makawao Elementary

Jamie Walker 

> Makawao Elementary

Wendy Wilhelm 

> Makawao Elementary

Dari Ann Matsuda 

> Manana Elementary

Tina Marie Myers 

> Manana Elementary

Flor Angeline Rodriguez 

> Manana Elementary

Darcie Kajioka 

> Manoa Elementary

Kristen Maehara 

> Manoa Elementary

Allison Miyamoto 

> Manoa Eleme ntary

Christy Okano 

> Manoa Elementary

Cody Parmley 

> Manoa Elementary

Patty Gorski 

> Maui District Office

Debra -Ann Kiyabu 

> Maui District Office

Minnarie Lov 

> Maui District Office

Katherine McDougall 

> Maui District Office

Jessica Adkins 

> Maui High

Rachael Denessen 

> Maui High

Clint Gima 

> Maui High

Mi chelle Gima 

> Maui High

Carol Holland 

> Maui High

Ryan Ishizu 

> Maui High

Lisa Kakiuchi -Gima 

> Maui High

Jodi Kunimitsu 

> Maui High

Nanna Lindberg 

> Maui High

Tiara Matsui 

> Maui High

Naomi McCall 

> Maui High

Vickie Murata 

> Maui High

Leah O'Brien 

> Maui High

Adrienne Pulu 

> Maui High

Teresa Rosario 

> Maui High

Michele Sera 

> Maui High

Bronwyn Tatman 

> Maui High

Joseph Bem 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Kamiki Benavides 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Erick Justin Domingo 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

John Fitz patrick 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Mayumi Fukuoka 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Ann Jimenez 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Kevin Kawam ura 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Shannon Kealoha 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Melinda Martinez 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Kim Ram os 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Teri Reed 

> Maui -Waena Intermediate

Karen Oliver 

> Mauka Lani Elementary

Diane Omura 

> Mauka Lani El ementary

Moana Piena 

> Mauka Lani Elementary

Yahna Kawaa 

> Maunawili Elementary

Kellsie Tokita 

> McKinley Community Sc hool

Shunya Ku’ulei Arakaki 

> McKinley High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 23 of 35 

Joseph Cho 

McKinley High 

Shane Cummings 

McKinley H igh 

Rajani Dhakhwa Morita 

McKinley High 

Hobbes Lee 

McKinley High 

Jonathan Loomis 

McKinley H igh 

Eren Star Padilla 

McKinley High 

Kyung Park 

McKinley High 

Cynthia Reves 

McKinley High 

Lisa Saito 

McKinley High 

Stacie Sakihara 

McKinley High 

Dusty Santos 

McKinley High 

Ir ene Tanaka 

McKinley High 

Dana Ayala 

Mililani High 

Laurie Blalock 

Mililani High 

Deborah Hagihara 

Mili lani High 

Vanessa Humphreys 

Mililani High 

Kathleen Kaya 

Mililani High 

Dale Kenui 

Mililani High 

Tyson Kikugawa 

Mililani High 

Kimberly Lauzon 

Mililani High 

James Millwood 

Mililani High 

Malika Nahina 

Mililani High 

Curtis Ogi 

Mililani High 

Katie Rockwell 

Mililani High 

Byron Shang 

Mililani High 

Sara Yamaguchi 

Mililani High 

Dana Ayala 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Cheryl Caffrey 

Mililani Ike E lementary 

Lisa Ebinger 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Sherry Esteban 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Shelley Fujimori 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Kyllie Nakamura 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Lori Ann Powell 

Mililani Ike Elementary 

Javen Aranaydo 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Kim Baker 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Ketty Fong 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Kelsey Goo 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Julie Ko -lee 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Chelsie Miyashiro 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Ashley Monden 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Michele Okahashi 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Lori Rickerby 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Ryan Watada 

Mililani Mauka Elementary 

Julie Ariola 

Mililani Middle 

Keri Coloma 

Mililani Middle 

Yvonne Kauihou 

Mililani Middle 

Tracie Kurashige 

Mililani Middle 

Carlos Pai 

Mililani Middle 

Richard Stan ge 

Mililani Middle 

Jennifer Takamori 

Mililani Middle 

Benny Villanueva 

Mililani Middle 

Miche lle Wilson 

Mililani Middle 

Carole Wong 

Mililani Middle 

Stacey Kelley 

Mililani -Uka Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 24 of 35 

Nekita Kennedy 

> Mililani -Uka Elementary

Danielle Roussos 

> Mililani -Uka Elementary

Kathi Uyemura 

> Mililani -Uka Elementary

Nicole Arakawa 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Verona Holder 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Angelita Iaea 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Lola Ito 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Michelle Ito 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Sherri Koide 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Leilani Manoa 

> Mililani -Waena Elementary

Raejean Gamiao 

> Moanalua Elementary

Chrystie Isaacs 

> Moanalua Elementary

Rebekah Lynn Messer 

> Moanalua Elementary

Brandy Chang 

> Moanalua High

Berna Dela Cruz 

> Moanalua High

Jeffrey Fujimoto 

> Moanalua High

Mark Ikenaga 

> Moanalua High

Keith Kitamura 

> Moanalua High

Joanna B Kobayashi 

> Moanalua High

Jennifer Ladao 

> Moanalua High

Jaimelynn Tateyama 

> Moanalua High

Theresa Tomimbang 

> Moanalua High

Margaret Travers 

> Moanalua High

Lorena Wong 

> Moanalua High

Sc ott Yamada 

> Moanalua High

Jarrett Honjiyo 

> Moanalua Middle

Andrew Hopoi 

> Moanalua Middle

Jolene Ifuku -Yi 

> Moanalua Middle

Kristina Lee 

> Moanalua Middle

Minori Oumi 

> Moanalua Middle

Monica Armstrong 

> Mokapu Elemen tary

Michelle Baker -Nauta 

> Mokapu Elementary

Suzanne Braun 

> Mokapu Elementary

Jennifer Dou gherty 

> Mokapu Elementary

Sheri Frye 

> Mokapu Elementary

Alicia Mochizuki 

> Mokapu Elementary

Phaedra Rob inson 

> Mokapu Elementary

LeeAnn Van Woerkom 

> Mokapu Elementary

Neva Masuoka 

> Mokulele Elementary

Amy Oki nishi 

> Mokulele Elementary

Lee Ann Oshiro 

> Mokulele Elementary

Jodi Tahara 

> Mokulele Elementary

Malia Lee Akutagawa 

> Molokai High

Frances Albino 

> Molokai High

Perry Buchalter 

> Molokai High

Alexa ndra Buchanan 

> Molokai High

Jason Elder 

> Molokai High

Josephine Faalele 

> Molokai High

Jessie Ford 

> Molo kai High

Kenetta Kawaa 

> Molokai High

Diane Mokuau 

> Molokai High

Ponciano Raguindin 

> Molokai High

Tilana Roberts 

> Molokai High

Lisa Takata 

> Molokai High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 25 of 35 

John Van Ornum 

Molokai High 

Maliekekai Ward 

Molokai High 

Lori Boehler 

Molokai Middle 

Karen Hirata 

Momilani Elementary 

Lisa N akama 

Momilani Elementary 

Kainoa Arensdorf 

Mountain View Elem 

Irene Barber 

Mountain View Elem 

Ana Bingham 

Mount ain View Elem 

Kelley Brown 

Mountain View Elem 

Judith Dahl 

Mountain View Elem 

Dayna Lynn Ganigan 

Mountain View Elem 

Kyra Ito 

Mountain View Elem 

Jaime Lewis 

Mountain View Elem 

Catherine Lott 

Mountain View Elem 

Hana Mauldin 

Mountain View Elem 

KemuEl Negus 

Mountain View Elem 

Kerry Ogawa 

Mountain View Elem 

Erik Onishi 

Mountain Vie w Elem 

Michelle Buck 

Naalehu Elem -Inter 

Jahaslyn Noella Karasuda 

Naalehu Elem -Inter 

Amelia Monroe 

Naalehu Elem -Inter 

Cherrish Spegar 

Naalehu Elem -Inter 

Kiley Adolpho 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Mic helle Bonet -Salawich 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Elizabeth Bowen 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Claire Dobson 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Carla Hazlet 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Joy Kubota 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Megan Landes 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Seamus Murphy 

Nahi enaena Elementary 

Stephanie Shoemaker 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Janell Simpliciano 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Suzanne Walters 

Nahienaena Elementary 

Francesca Alberto -Rojas 

Nanaikapono Elementary 

Marissa Faleolo 

Nanaikapono Elementary 

Rebecca Hadley -Schlosser 

Nanaikapono Elementary 

Kimi Mark 

Nanaikapono Elementary 

Bryson Mats ushima 

Nanaikapono Elementary 

Fay AngelesAguda 

Nanakuli Elementary 

Christina Cubilo 

Nanakuli Elementary 

Cathy Guerrero 

Nanakuli Elementary 

Margarita Alo -Chu 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Hilary Arakaki 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Ruby Ching 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Cassandra Christensen 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Angel Decierdo 

Nana kuli High -Intermediate 

Blythe Emler 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Leonard Fergusen 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Ka thryn Fisher 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Maris Galban 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Alison Gronley 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Rich Harragan 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

David Kaniaupio 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Stacy Koyama 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 26 of 35 

Vanessa Lariosa 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Kori Nishi 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Patricia Ohashi 

Nanakuli High -Interm ediate 

Cheryl Orallo 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

William Pacheco 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Leah Angela Padilla 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Raemie Pagaduan 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Kele Roberts 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Mokulani Stephens 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Kevin Tynan 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Jeffrey -Conrad Uyemu ra -Reyes 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Randal Vause 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Megan Wilson 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Debra Yamakawa 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Monica Yasuda 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Pamela Yuen 

Nanakuli High -Intermediate 

Kristy Alama 

Nimitz Elementary 

April Apana 

Nimitz Elementary 

Lisa Espiritu 

Nimitz Elementary 

Blyt he Everett 

Nimitz Elementary 

Chieko Idemoto 

Nimitz Elementary 

Lori Shibata 

Nimitz Elementary 

Jason Wong 

Nimit z Elementary 

Shannon Yano 

Nimitz Elementary 

Jennifer Fung 

Niu Valley Middle 

Hanna Na 

Niu Valley Middle 

Noelani Chang 

Noelani Elementary 

Tracey Joy Matsui 

Noelani Elementary 

Demi Yoshimoto 

Noelani Elementary 

Erin Fukumoto 

Nuuanu Elementary 

Colleen Skrimstad 

Nuuanu Elementary 

Andrew Beh 

Olomana School 

Karine De Lima 

Olomana School 

Donna Okita 

Olomana School 

Del Onaga 

Olomana School 

Kay Zane 

OTM 

Maureen Appleton 

Paauilo Elem -Inter 

Haley Agbayani 

Pahoa Elementary 

Debra Borges 

Pahoa Elementary 

Hanalei Conda 

Pahoa Elementary 

Melissa Domingcil 

Pahoa Elementary 

Gayle Enriquez 

Pahoa Elementary 

Margaret Grabowsky 

Pahoa Elementary 

Karen Kohagura 

Pahoa Elementary 

Kali Linder 

Pahoa Elementary 

Amy Masaoka 

Pahoa Elementary 

Irene Perez -Gilbride 

Pahoa Elementary 

Genevieve Balderston 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Joel Behr 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Samantha Fuhrmann -Blyth 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Nancy Iaukea 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Lisa Labrador 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Michelle Lindsay -Lewis 

Pahoa High -Inter 

Kiyomi Nozawa Edwards 

Pahoa High -Inter We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 27 of 35 

Sheryl Ogawa 

> Pahoa High -Inter

Amy Pierce 

> Pahoa High -Inter

Leilani Silva 

> Pahoa High -Inter

Montana Tsubamoto 

> Pahoa High -Inter

Heidi Zucker 

> Pahoa High -Inter

Jessica Crivello 

> Paia Elementary

Tany a Harders 

> Paia Elementary

Jasmyn Kaiwi 

> Paia Elementary

Chalice Kaneshiro 

> Paia Elementary

Kaleialoha Kaniaupio -Crozier 

> Paia Elementary

DanaLei Koomoa 

> Paia Elementary

Marie Edwards 

> Palisades Elementary

Suanne Kim 

> Palolo Elementary

Laurella Pang 

> Palolo Elementary

Sarah Sousa 

> Palolo Elementary

Matthew Wong 

> Palolo Elementary

Shelby Furtado 

> Parker Elementary

Deborah Yasuda 

> Parker Elementary

Duncan Sutherl and 

> Pauoa Elementary

Jennifer Baltero 

> Pearl City Elementary

Arleen Bourcier 

> Pearl City Elementary

Karol Dusendschon 

> Pearl City Elementary

Laura Ginoza 

> Pearl City Elementary

Mary -Faye Hagiwara 

> Pearl City Elementary

Caryn Alyn Nunokawa 

> Pearl City Elementary

Judy Okazaki 

> Pearl City Elementary

Amanda Park 

> Pearl City Elementary

Brandi Smith 

> Pearl City Elementary

Traci Tanouye 

> Pearl City Elementary

Aitulagi Ala 

> Pearl City High

Kay Bicoy 

> Pearl City High

Alden Bunag 

> Pearl City High

Connie Calantoc 

> Pearl City High

Micha el Gardner 

> Pearl City High

Michelle Hakes 

> Pearl City High

Ernell Hallaman 

> Pearl City High

Sharolyn Harris 

> Pearl City High

Michelle Hopoi 

> Pearl City High

Jayson Javiee 

> Pearl City High

Steven Kam  

> Pearl City High

Cindy Kawamura 

> Pearl City High

Joanne Kimura 

> Pearl City High

Kumi Kojima 

> Pearl City High

Jayson Kramer 

> Pearl City High

Dayna Lopez 

> Pearl City High

Anthony Lum 

> Pearl City High

Jenni fer Lum 

> Pearl City High

Tricialyn Negre 

> Pearl City High

Gail Okada Fujino 

> Pearl City High

Jac quelyn Pang 

> Pearl City High

Brent Parks 

> Pearl City High

Mio Sato 

> Pearl City High

Ricky Shibuya 

> Pearl City High

Tricia Sumstine 

> Pearl City High

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 28 of 35 

Kathy Tanita Ohama 

Pearl City High 

Sugiko Tomori 

Pearl City High 

Jeffrey Uyeda 

Pearl City High 

Schiller Xiomara 

Pearl City High 

May Yamamoto 

Pearl City High 

Kathy Montgomery 

Pearl City Highlands Elementary 

Raynette Morioka 

Pearl City Highlands Elementary 

Claire Barroga 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Tanya Casil 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Rayna Kinoshita 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Jennife r McCord 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Courtney Mizufuka 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Malia Tamashiro 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Krystin Thorson 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Kyra Wong 

Pearl Harbor Elementary 

Leilani Ngumezi 

Pearl Harbor Kai Elementary 

Kimberly Oshiro 

Pearl Harbor Kai Elementary 

Emily Cheung 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Corri Ferreira 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Kathryn Miyamoto 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Tammy Sakato 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Jennifer Sarpi 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Alanna Souza 

Pearl Ridge Elementary 

Shelby Stern 

Pohakea Elementary 

Emi Yamada 

Pohakea Elementary 

Janice Acopan 

Pomaikai Elementary 

Tracey Baybayan 

Pomaikai Elementary 

Kristen Lawlor 

Pomaikai Elementary 

Eric Madrid 

Pomaikai Elementary 

Laura Chong 

Pope Elementary 

Casandra Koahou palalay 

Pope Elementary 

Charisse Perez 

Pope Elementary 

Lynn Sonoda 

Pope Elementary 

Miriam Clarke 

Pukalani Elementary 

Christine O’Sullivan 

Pukalani Elementary 

Amy Zolotow 

Pukalani Elementary 

Lorna Kekua 

Puohala Elementary 

Josephine Malama 

Puohala Elementary 

Tierra -Leigh McRoberts 

Puohala Elementary 

Dana Tomita 

Puohala Elementary 

Taryn Decker 

Puu Kukui Elementary 

Cassidy Madrid 

Puu Kukui Elementary 

Kelly Hirahara 

Puuhale Elementary 

Harrison DePondicchello 

Radford High 

Lawrence Frank 

Radford High 

Troy Freitas 

Radford High 

Susan Harrington 

Radford High 

Mahina Komeiji 

Radford High 

Thomas Luna 

Radford High 

Maria Oka 

Radford High 

Carol Sahara 

Radford High 

Patti Kadohiro 

Red Hill Elementary 

Nancy Agustin 

Roosevelt High 

Karen Arakaki 

Roosevelt High We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 29 of 35 

Steve Avellana 

> Roosevelt High

Naomi Chun 

> Roosevelt High

Nathan Davis 

> Roosevelt High

Phillippe Fernandez -Brennan 

> Roosevelt High

Ivy Kim 

> Roosevelt High

Kazuyo Kitaguchi 

> Roosevelt High

Tysha Konishi 

> Roosevelt High

Jamie Kumashiro 

> Roosevelt High

Jenny Leung 

> Roosevelt High

Brian Look 

> Roosevelt High

Daniel McLaughlin 

> Roosevelt High

Priscilla No 

> Roosevelt High

Jiaxin Ruan 

> Roosevelt High

Sara -Ashley Tellio 

> Roosevelt High

Sharlene Teraoka 

> Roosevelt High

Dara Zakimi 

> Roosevelt High

Heather Mahan 

> Royal Elementary

Heather Nishimura 

> Royal Elementary

Ker Porter 

> Royal Elementary

Sarah Starr 

> Royal Elementary

Heather Corpuz 

> Sa lt Lake Elementary

Cynthia Levy 

> Salt Lake Elementary

Valerie Mimura 

> Salt Lake Elementary

Troy Okumura 

> Salt Lak e Elementary

Dale Takimoto 

> Salt Lake Elementary

Summer Tan 

> Salt Lake Elementary

Ardis Apuna 

> Scott Elementary

David Fujii 

> Scott Elementary

Steven Hathaway 

> Scott Elementary

Naedine Idica 

> Scott Elementary

Brad Kusunoki 

> Scott Elementary

Arnold Madela 

> Scott Elementary

Vicki Minello 

> Scott Elementary

Richard Nakatsu 

> Scott Elementary

Michelle Ninomoto 

> Scott Elementary

Rhesa Ugot 

> Scott Elementary

Kuu ipo DeRego 

> SEEQS PCS

Makayla Fitzpatrick 

> Shafter Elementary

Carol Paul -Paz 

> Shafter Elementary

Rena Sa h

> Shafter Elementary

Lori -Ann Takiguchi 

> Shafter Elementary

Melissah Vannatta 

> Shafter Elementary

Jennifer Wasada 

> Shafter Elementary

Paul Wasada 

> Shafter Elementary

Yordi Amelia 

> Solomon Elementary

Joel B ustillos 

> Solomon Elementary

Kimberly Deas 

> Solomon Elementary

Kaila Hymes 

> Solomon Elementary

David Martin 

> Sol omon Elementary

Michele Nakama 

> Solomon Elementary

Lora Okamoto 

> Solomon Elementary

Shelleen Sodersten 

> Solomon Elementary

Melissa Tam 

> Solomon Elementary

Colleen Tsuji 

> Solomon Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 30 of 35 

Sierra Wenner 

Solomon Elem entary 

Christine Asuncion 

Stevenson Middle 

Hitt Dani 

Stevenson Middle 

Kylee Nakamura 

Stevenson Middle 

Julia Smith 

Stevenson Middle 

Nicole Colello 

Sunset Beach Elementary 

Amy Denzer 

Sunset Beach Elementary 

Julie Keohohou 

Sunset Beach Elementary 

MeganAnn Cappuccino 

University Laboratory PCS 

Douglas Doi 

Universit y Laboratory PCS 

Marisa Hamakawa 

University Laboratory PCS 

Alison Hartle 

University Laboratory PCS 

Katherine Heidelberg -Bourne 

University Laboratory PCS 

Andrea Robles 

University Laboratory PCS 

Sherrie Galdeira 

Volcano Sch Arts -Sciences PCS 

Mara Saltzman 

Volcano Sch Arts -Sciences PCS 

Erin Allan 

Voyager PCS 

Dana Nieto 

Voyager PCS 

Kate Adams 

Wahiawa Elementary 

Wade Balidoy 

Wahiawa Elementary 

Kelcie Luke 

Wahiawa Elementary 

Heidie Motoyama 

Wahiawa Elementary 

Jade Santos 

Wahiawa Elementary 

Rachel Tsutsui -Keuma 

Wahiawa Elementary 

AJ Clifforde Alcover 

Wahiawa Middle 

James Au 

Wahiawa Middle 

Adri Castro 

Wahiawa Middle 

Gerald Dar 

Wah iawa Middle 

Jhaneen Kealalio 

Wahiawa Middle 

Mindy Miyamoto 

Wahiawa Middle 

Linda Seals 

Wahiawa Middle 

Cleota Brown 

Waiahole Elementary 

Richidette Directo 

Waiakea Elementary 

Jenny Fujiyama 

Waiakea Elementary 

Kristi Hashimoto 

Waiakea Elementary 

Terilyn Hayashi 

Waiakea Elementary 

Jill Igawa 

Waiakea Elementary 

Kara Iopa 

Waiakea Elementary 

Joy Ito -Carver 

Waiakea Elementary 

Crystalyn Ivey 

Waiakea Elementary 

Mona Saiki 

Waiakea Elementary 

Hunter Santos 

Waiakea Elementary 

Deanna Spain 

Waiakea Elementary 

Merlynda Uekawa 

Waiakea Elementary 

Jenny Dabalos 

Waiakea High 

Mireille Ellsworth 

Waiakea High 

Hennrie Enriquez 

Waiakea High 

Heather Fomenko 

Waiakea High 

Eric Hagiwara 

Waiakea High 

Clemente Julian 

Waiakea High 

Elisa Junqueira 

Waiakea High 

Johanna Kaupu 

Waiakea High 

Audrey Kelly 

Waiakea High 

Thomas Murphy 

Waiakea High We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 31 of 35 

Melanie Santos 

Waiakea High 

Ronald Santos 

Waiakea High 

Piper Selden 

Waiakea High 

Clifton Silva 

Waiakea High 

Mineko Todd 

Waiakea High 

Adrel Vicente 

Waiakea High 

Jaimie Y onemoto 

Waiakea High 

Deborah Anderson 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Promise De Reis 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Ana Garland 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Annie Kitamura 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Kristen Miyazono 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Maile Nihipal i

Waiakea Intermediate 

Candace Paul 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Jonathan Peralto 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Sandra Sato 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Anita Silva 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Amy Var 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Wendy Wells 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Leilani Yamauchi 

Waiakea Intermediate 

Myongshin Bolema 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Naomi Calistro 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Kristen Faford 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Tarah Green 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Ruby Hakoda 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Lauren Higa 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Loke Hill -Higgins 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Amy Hirai 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Stephanie Ichinose 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Erika Kaneo 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Cassie Lee 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Abel Maldonado 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Sharon Masuyama 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Wanda Cheryl Materne 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Lane Matsuura 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Leah Matsuura 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Taryn Napoleon 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Kahanu Nguyen 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Terry Sever 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Jennifer Shimizu 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Nani Yanagi 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Todd Yanagi 

Waiakeawaena Elementary 

Leah Cornog 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Corie Dela Pena 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Natalie Dotseth 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Macarmela Dulog 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Chanel Ellison 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Sarah Ferguson 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Dian Hermes 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Marissa Johnson 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Heather Kwiatkowski 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Stephanie Muneno 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Saba Polakovic 

Waialae Elementary PCS 

Sarah Yee 

Waialae Elementary PCS We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 32 of 35 

Ilana Ashmore 

> Waialua Elementary

Mia Beatty 

> Waialua Elementary

Tiffany Eason 

> Waialua Elementary

Cammeryn Lloyd -Vene gas 

> Waialua Elementary

Dustin Pacleb 

> Waialua Elementary

Cynthia Chun 

> Waialua High -Inter

Elizabeth Fris bie 

> Waialua High -Inter

Tyler Hill 

> Waialua High -Inter

Barbara ann Kauwalu 

> Waialua High -Inter

Denise Kusumoto 

> Waialua High -Inter

Kevin Lee 

> Waialua High -Inter

Taylor Marsha 

> Waialua High -Inter

Lisa Ann Morisako 

> Waialua High -Inter

Tk Muraki 

> Waialua High -Inter

Tracie Muraki 

> Waialua High -Inter

Stephanie Oshiro  

> Waialua High -Inter

Victoria Pescaia 

> Waialua High -Inter

Sheila Reyes 

> Waialua High -Inter

Christopher Casti llo 

> Waianae Elementary

Wanda Hasegawa 

> Waianae Elementary

Nuikal ā Koerte 

> Waianae Elementary

Melanie Po kakaa 

> Waianae Elementary

Whitney Dawson 

> Waianae High

Aaron Day 

> Waianae High

Kaiea Ebanez 

> Waianae High

Rhea English 

> Waianae High

Rena Ganotisi 

> Waianae High

Muranaka Kathleen 

> Waianae High

Michael Loscalzo 

> Waianae High

Moses Magno III 

> Waianae High

K-Cel Mamane -Tapeni 

> Waianae High

Joseph Martinez 

> Waianae High

Charla Wilcox -Molina 

> Waianae High

Morning Williams 

> Waianae High

Anne Alves 

> Waianae Intermediate

Dion Bacon 

> Waianae Intermediate

Joseph DeMarco 

> Waianae Intermediate

Phyllis Gurlen 

> Waianae Intermediate

Claudette Humphrey 

> Waianae Intermediate

Carmen Jones 

> Waianae Intermediate

Leilani Roberts 

> Waianae Intermediate

Kileigh Sanchez 

> Waianae Intermediate

Justin Szmodis 

> Waianae Intermediate

Jholena Uila 

> Waianae Intermediate

Kwai Daugherty 

> Waiau Elementary

Taylissa Lehano 

> Waihee Elementary

Erin Mickelsen 

> Waihee Elementary

Kariane Park Toyama 

> Waihee Elementary

Paige Soares 

> Waihee Elementary

Melanie Teraoka 

> Waihee Elementary

Jaymie Viela 

> Waihee Elementary

Claudia Wethall 

> Waihee Elementary

Brianna Wianecki 

> Waihee Elementary

Robyn Aki 

> Waikele Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 33 of 35 

David Higa 

Waikele Elementary 

Jenna Ho 

Waikele El ementary 

Nannette Ganotisi, NBCT 

Waikiki Elementary 

Laurie Tam 

Waikiki Elementary 

Heather Al dridge 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

James Altergott 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Lauren Au Hoon 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Sylvie Bright 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Amy Carlson 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Susan Groff 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Maria Hector 

Waikol oa Elem & Middle 

Mark Jeffryes 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Robert Lozano 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Maegan MacGregor 

Wai koloa Elem & Middle 

Cindy Martin 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Theresa McClary Jeffryes 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Sarah Michaelis 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Elizabeth Texeira 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Mary Zuiderveen 

Waikoloa Elem & Middle 

Maureen Duffy 

Wailuku Elementary 

Alysia Flowers 

Wailuku Elementary 

Denise Gima 

Wailuku Elementary 

Debra Lynn Ho 

Wailuku Elementary 

Kim Holokai 

Wailuku Elementary 

Shahinaz Nassar 

Wailuku Elementary 

Colleen Okuda 

Wailuku Elementary 

Jennifer Rule 

Wailuku Elementary 

Ryan Towata 

Wailuku Elementary 

Lisa Yamada 

Wailuku Elementary 

Chloe Chong 

Waimalu Elementary 

Kris Estes 

Waimalu Elementary 

Colin Kanemoto 

Waimalu Elementary 

Doreen Tabe 

Waimalu Elementary 

Krystle Takushi 

Waimalu Elementary 

Christine Hernandez 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Anne Marie Ho 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Nicholete Ito 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Marie Leska -DuPont 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Maria Sack 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Margaret Takahama 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Miki Yamamoto 

Waimanalo Elem -Inter 

Howard Hurst 

Waimea Canyon Middle 

Beth Ann Kauwe 

Waimea Canyon Middle 

Ryan Kishida 

Waimea Canyon Middle 

Matthew Snowden 

Waimea Canyon Middle 

Joyce Vea 

Waimea Canyon Middle 

Cristy Athan 

Waimea Elementary 

Darice Carvalho 

Waimea Elementary 

Jayne Heinze 

Waimea Elementary 

Susan Ho 

Waimea Elementary 

Summer Pila 

Waimea Elementary 

Kelsey Rasmuson 

Waimea Elementary 

Laura Robertson 

Waimea Elementary 

Pamela Walton 

Waimea Elementary We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 34 of 35 

Sigrid Wilson 

> Waimea Elementary

Pete Mitsis 

> Waimea High

Linda LoBue 

> Waimea Middle PCS

Nauileiilima Murphy 

> Waimea Middle PCS

Joy Lynn Fujikawa 

> Waipahu Elementary

Kristyn Kruse Akana 

> Waipahu Elementary

Christy Ann Sanders 

> Waipahu Elementary

Desiree Arcalas 

> Waipahu High

Jenn ifer Arre 

> Waipahu High

Crystal Burdick 

> Waipahu High

Kelsey Coleman 

> Waipahu High

Mar yLou DePondicchello 

> Waipahu High

Caroline Encomienda 

> Waipahu High

Erika Mae Espiritu 

> Waipahu High

Teri Horiuchi 

> Waipahu High

Kellen Inafuku 

> Waipahu High

Mary Julie Madarang 

> Waipahu High

Jiamin Ruan 

> Waipahu High

Jean Sandy Villanueva 

> Waipahu High

Getald Wong 

> Waipahu High

Kirstie Akag i

> Waipahu Intermediate

Donna Lyn Baguio 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Geraldine Batangan 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Charmane Joy Belleza 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Yuko Beutler 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Christine Bush 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Ester Chang 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Deborah Clevenger 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Terimel Cristobal 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Kimberly Cullen 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Michael Englar 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Keith Ishihara 

> Waipahu Interme diate

Melanie Ishihara 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Gayle Loui 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Garin Miyaji 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Precila Muramoto 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Elfie Rosario 

> Waipahu Intermediate

Frances Teruya 

> Waipahu Int ermediate

Sheri Falls 

> Washington Middle

Taryn Imai 

> Washington Middle

Kristen Kimura 

> Washington Middle

Joanna Lee 

> Washington Middle

Jolyn Lee 

> Washington Middle

Anne McKnight 

> Washington Middle

Sara Ricer 

> Washington Middle

Neal Takamoto 

> Washington Middle

Lani Watanabe 

> Washington Middle

Hanlan Bowler 

> Webling Elementary

Patricia Lukzen 

> West Hawaii District Annex

Kristen Bennett 

> West Hawaii Exploration Academy PCS

Katherine Gopaul 

> West Hawaii Exploration Academy PCS

Gizelle Buchta 

> Wheeler Elementary

Maria Gordon 

> Wheeler Elementary

Jaycie Ige 

> Wheeler Elementary

We, the undersigned, urge you to join us in finding solutions that acknowledge the reality of our 

current conditions as we support our keiki through this difficult time. 

The Safety Our Students Deserve related to COVID -19 Page 35 of 35 

Jan Mori 

> Wheeler Elementary

Roddriann Ocier 

> Wheeler Elementary

Cheryl Sanico 

> Wheeler Elementary

Leilani Vila 

> Wheeler Elementary

Brittany Vimahi 

> Wheeler Elementary

Mark Alsber gas 

> Wheeler Middle

Michelle Lee 

> Wheeler Middle

Shirley Mori 

> Wheeler Middle

Sunshine Badua 

> Wilcox Elementa ry

Angela Cain 

> Wilcox Elementary

Lani Gokan 

> Wilcox Elementary

Monique Kan -Souza 

> Wilcox Elementary

Kathy Takiguchi 

> Wilcox Elementary

Edene Nagai 

> Wilson Elementary

Julia Chen 

> Windward District Office

Marcie Waki 

> Windward District Office

M Yoneda 

> Windward District Office Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Alexandra Obra <alexandra.obra@k12.hi.us> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:03 AM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Alexandra Obra, Principal 

General Business Meeting (full Board)); 

Agenda item - VI A - Presentation on Opening of Schools 

Dear Board of Education Members, 

My name is Alexandra Obra, Principal of Waiāhole Elementary School. One of my priorities this school year 

and every school year is ensuring that I keep students, teachers, and staff members healthy and safe. This 

is a monumental task that keeps intensifying as the numbers of COVID-19 cases increase throughout the 

State of Hawaiʻi. I’ve been putting my own health and well-being at risk, and sadly I asked myself recently, is 

this all worth it? I’ve spent years educating myself to teach and support our keiki. I’ve made it my life’s 

mission to support our school’s community. When will our schools and communities get the support that we 

need? We are constantly getting asked to do more and more without any additional support. 

In addition to educating our keiki and running a school, I’m now being asked to also become an expert in 

Public Health. We are being asked to contact trace, verify vaccinations, determine quarantine days, track 

COVID-19-like-symptoms, and much, much more. The list grows weekly. I want students and teachers back 

to school in person, but I also want to ensure that I can keep everyone healthy and safe.  With Covid 

numbers continuing to increase and with hospitalizations on the rise, I fear we could once again be heading 

into a distance-learning only model. 

State leaders and epidemiologists are saying that we are currently in a dire situation. At the end of the day, 

who is going to make sure that we can continue to do the job of educating our keiki while keeping teachers 

and staff healthy? Who is supporting our schools and educators? We are educators, but we are not super-

human. We need help. We need resources, and we need guidance. Our keiki need us now more than ever 

before. 

Sincerely, 

Alexandra Obra 

Ms. Alexandra Obra 

Waiāhole Elementary School Principal 

> --
> ʻIke aku, ʻike mai, kokua aku kokua mai; pela iho la ka nohana ʻoha
> "Recognize others, be recognized, help others, be helped, such is a family relationship"
> Mary Kawena Pukui

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

John Johnson  <john@onebreathphoto.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:06 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Name: John Johnson 

General Business Meeting, Item VI a 

I'm writing in regards to the opening of schools. I am a parent of three children, two of which are school-age in 

separate schools. I had wanted to put my children into a distance learning option, but my daughter's school doesn't offer 

it. Nor does the complex area. And we were told the complex area didn't opt to participate in the state's DL program. 

Furthermore, the state program would have required a one-year commitment whereas we simply wanted the students in 

DL until they get the chance to be vaccinated in a couple months(we hope). As for my son, his school also doesn't offer a 

DL option. He just started middle school in a new area and we are concerned with uprooting him with a GE to send him to 

another school where he can DL. Even if we sent one child to DL and the other was sent to class because there was no 

DL option, they will share whatever illness they acquire at school at home. My daughter has already gotten a Covid 

notification letter from her school. One of her classmates, additionally, is absent because her brother just tested positive 

after a classmate got ill. 

We have been told that we have to send the children back in for their mental health. This overlooks the mental 

stresses that are incurred every time a classmate tests positive and the whole class is sent home to quarantine for a 

week and a half and has to get tested. I think many of us saw the lines of small children at Aloha Stadium this last 

weekend getting tested after being exposed in class. Roughly 45 of them got the call telling them they had Covid. How 

many thousands of kids are being traumatized with the worry of catching Covid in class and the heightened awareness 

they have to maintain on a regular basis? Imagine the effect it has on parents who are worried their kid is going to 

contract Covid at school. All of this negates the idea that the mental health benefits outweight  the negatives for returning 

to in-class learning. 

Furthermore, there is a myth of "layers of protection" that simply do not exist. We are told that kids magically need 3ft 

of separation instead of the 6ft needed in the real world. Many kids are in overcrowded classrooms where even the 3ft 

separation is not possible. We are told that masking is another layer of protection. Except that most kids are wearing 

masks that provide at best 20% protection against the delta variant. We are told that kids will exercise good hygiene and 

wash hands regularly, but there aren't sinks in most classrooms and hand washing really comes down to the mindfulness 

of young kids. We were also told that a layer of protection is "bubbles" or "pods", but my kids have a few classes mostly 

with the same kids, but then other classes with other kids mixed in. That isn't a pod. Furthermore, they go to three 

different teachers, each of which has been breathing the air of several other classes of kids. So the concept of pods 

sounds great on paper, but seems to be a happy myth. One of our schools reassured us that they do regular testing to 

identify infections proactively, but since the start of school there has been ZERO testing and then we heard that the DOH 

didn't even bother to solicit bids for testing until the week before the teachers returned to school. In total the concept of 

layers of protection laid out by the DOE is a farce. 

And then there is the reality of the delta variant of Covid. This variant, which makes up 80% of our cases, contains up 

to 1000x the viral load of the original virus. It's much more transmissable then anything the DOE experienced in their 

"successful" summer of only 1100 infections. We shut down the entire school system and put everyone on DL when there 

were few cases in Hawaii at all. Now that we are seeing average case loads of over 600 cases a day with the current 

strain of Covid capable of sickening children much easier than before, Why are we forcing kids back into often 

overcrowded classrooms? Why are we making the DL options as odious as possible in order to compel parents to send 

their kids in person? This makes no sense on any level. The hospitals are at capacity. Mainland pediatric hospitals are 

filling up. We know what is going to happen here. 

Kids too young to be vaccinated should be at home with DL options. I could understand sending them to school if 

everyone involved was properly vaccinated. Then I feel the mythical layers of protection could provide minor benefit to 

those who are vaccinated. But until then we need to keep the unvaccinated children at home or at least provide them with 

a reasonable DL option that bridges the next couple of months until kids can be vaccinated and safely returned to class. 

That's all I, and many of my friends with unvaccinated kids, want. We want the BOE and DOE to put our kids' safety first 

and foremost. 

Mahalo nui loa, 

John Johnson To  whom  it  may  concern, 

I am  a teacher  at  ʻAiea  High  School,  and  I would  like  to  testify  on  discussion  item  VI-A: 

Presentation  on  opening  schools  for  2021-2022  school  year.  I also  signed  the  letters  from  HSTA 

and  the  Hawaii  for  a Safe  Return  group,  so  I won’t  repeat  the  data  that  they  already  provided. 

Rather,  I will  endeavor  to  share  my  firsthand  experience  of  what  it  has  been  like  back  in  the 

classroom  these  past  couple  of  weeks.  First,  I would  like  to  reiterate  my  testimony  from  last 

week  because  I am  not  sure  if  it  was  considered  in  time  for  last  week’s  meeting: 

I write  this  letter  after  the  fifth  day  of  having  students  back  in  the  classroom. 

Throughout  the  day,  dozens  of  students  cycle  through  my  90  degree  classroom  as  two 

tower  fans  desperately  try  to  circulate  the  heavy  air  in  the  classroom.  It  doesn’t  look  too 

much  different  from  my  classroom  in  2019,  except  that  I have  shifted  my  seats  to  face 

the  same  direction.  If  I stagger  the  seats  to  align  diagonally  across  the  room,  I can  just 

barely  arrange  them  so  that  there  is  three  feet  between  each  of  the  25  student  desks  in 

my  28  by  28  feet  classroom.  I spent  several  hours  of  my  personal  time  in  the  afternoon 

last  week  placing,  measuring,  and  relocating  the  furniture  in  the  room  to  arrive  at  the 

current  configuration.  On  my  roster  for  my  largest  class,  I technically  have  26  students, 

but  there  have  been  many  absences,  so  I have  managed  to  get  by  with  this  seating 

arrangement  for  the  past  few  days.  However,  if  that  26th  student  ever  does  show  up,  I

will  have  to  locate  another  student  desk  and  spend  several  more  hours  of  my  personal 

time  rearranging  my  classroom  furniture  to  figure  out  how  to  safely  fit  26  student  desks 

in  my  sparsely  furnished  classroom  while  still  allowing  all  students  to  see  the  whiteboard 

and  TV  at  the  front  of  our  class.  And  yet  I am  one  of  the  lucky  teachers  who  happens  to 

have  small(er)  class  sizes  this  year.  Other  colleagues  of  mine  have  smaller  classrooms 

that  must  accommodate  as  many  as  30  students  at  once! 

Even  with  all  of  the  windows  and  doors  open,  the  afternoon  heat  has  been 

unbearable  for  the  students.  Yesterday,  I did  manage  to  pick  up  a box  fan,  which  was 

generously  donated  to  our  school,  but  with  just  the  one  box  fan  that  rests  on  the  floor,  I

am  left  to  determine  for  myself  where  to  place  it  to  cool  and  ventilate  the  room  safely  and 

effectively.  To  make  space  to  distance  the  desks,  I can’t  have  any  furniture  along  the 

windowed  side  of  the  room,  so  I cannot  prop  the  box  fan  up  to  bring  in  outside  air. 

Currently,  the  box  fan  sits  on  the  floor,  circulating  the  air  around  my  students’  feet.  What 

frustrates  me  is  that  individual  schools  and  teachers  are  being  left  to  their  own  devices  to 

figure  out  how  to  create  safe  classrooms.  We  are  not  health  experts,  and  so  we  are 

spending  hours  of  our  own  time  researching  proper  distancing,  ventilation,  masking,  and 

sanitization  protocols.  Leaving  safety  protocols  up  to  the  interpretation  of  individual 

schools  and  teachers  has  created  massive  inconsistencies.  Even  on  my  campus, 

students  have  wildly  different  experiences  as  they  move  from  room  to  room.  There 

should  be  a consistent  message  for  creating  safe  classrooms  from  the  top  down. As  I mentioned,  there  have  been  many  absences.  13  of  my  students  were 

identified  as  close  contacts  in  the  past  few  days,  and  many  more  were  absent  for  various 

reasons  of  which  I was  not  made  aware.  That  means  that  potentially  10-15%  of  the 

students  on  my  roster  are  missing  up  to  two  weeks  of  school.  What  happens  when  they 

are  once  again  identified  as  close  contacts?  How  many  weeks  of  school  will  be  missed? 

How  much  disruption  to  learning  is  justified  in  a push  to  have  schools  100%  reopened? 

These  students  are  missing  critical  first  days  when  they  typically  get  to  know  their 

teacher  and  fellow  classmates.  Wasn’t  part  of  the  rationale  for  reopening  to  allow 

students  to  interact  with  one  another  again?  At  least  when  we  were  in  distance  learning 

mode,  students  could  interact  with  their  classmates  and  teacher  online  in  real  time 

versus  being  stuck  at  home  with  minimal  contact  from  school. 

And  if  a parent  does  not  feel  safe  sending  their  child  to  school  under  these 

circumstances?  They  are  put  onto  a waitlist  of  students  wishing  to  receive  distance 

learning  from  a digital  program  - a solution  that  offers  little  to  no  teacher  interaction.  But 

even  this  subpar  option  is  not  guaranteed.  For  those  students  stuck  on  the  waitlist,  time 

ticks  away  as  they  miss  more  and  more  school.  Parents  need  more  options  to  keep  their 

children  safe  while  supporting  their  education.  It  is  unconscionable  that  students  who 

want  to  protect  their  health  are  simply  thrown  onto  this  online  program.  I would  much 

rather  instruct  students  in-person  and  online  simultaneously.  I would  feel  safer  with  the 

reduced  number  of  students  in  my  classroom,  and  students  could  still  have  a live 

teacher  giving  them  the  best  learning  opportunity  possible  under  today’s  difficult 

circumstances. 

Today,  a week  after  I sent  the  above  testimony,  I got  the  dreaded  phone  call  in  the 

middle  of  my  first  period  of  the  day:  “please  provide  the  names  of  the  students  who  were  within 

six  feet  of  so  and  so  for  more  than  fifteen  minutes.”  I had  to  stop  in  the  middle  of  the  lesson  and 

ask  my  class  to  occupy  themselves  for  a few  minutes  while  I pulled  up  the  seating  chart  my 

administrators  had  asked  us  to  make  to  assist  in  contact  tracing  in  the  event  of  a positive  case.  I

was  in  the  middle  of  teaching  a lesson  on  how  to  ask  good  questions,  and  so  many  questions 

spun  around  in  my  mind:  Did  she  say  three  feet  or  six  feet?  Is  that  spacing  enough  considering  I

had  to  keep  reminding  this  student  to  pull  their  mask  up  over  their  nose?  Did  I have  any  new 

students  who  had  not  been  included  in  my  seating  chart?  How  many  days  of  school  has  this 

student  already  missed  because  they  were  quarantined  for  the  first  several  days  of  school?  Do 

they  have  a computer  at  home  so  that  they  can  continue  to  access  their  education?  Do  I include 

myself  on  the  list  because  I had  to  stand  near  this  student  while  catching  them  up  on  work  that 

was  missed  from  their  first  stint  in  quarantine?  Should  I get  myself  tested,  even  though  I’m 

vaccinated,  to  ensure  that  I am  not  spreading  illness  to  my  family  members?  Then,  when  a

student  arrived  late  to  my  next  class  with  a severe  cough,  more  questions  came.  I didn’t  want  to 

embarrass  the  student,  but  they  continually  coughed  over  a period  of  several  minutes,  and  this 

student  has  a habit  of  lowering  their  mask  in  class,  even  with  repeated  reminders.  I eventually 

just  had  to  make  a judgement  call  and  send  this  student  to  the  health  room.  But  they  came  back during  their  other  class  with  me  at  the  end  of  the  day  with  no  explanation.  Suffice  it  to  say,  I did 

not  do  my  best  teaching  today  because  I was  so  concerned  with  mine  and  my  students’  safety. 

I asked  my  students  to  share  how  safe  they  felt  being  back  to  school  in-person.  Just 

about  50%  said  they  feel  safe.  This  isn’t  a terrible  number,  but  it’s  also  not  great.  NO  STUDENT 

SHOULD  FEEL  UNSAFE  AT  SCHOOL.  If  students  don’t  feel  safe  in  their  learning 

environments,  they  can’t  learn  effectively.  Many  remarked  that  they  feel  uncomfortable  because 

they  have  classmates  who  take  their  masks  off  or  let  them  fall  beneath  their  noses.  We  teachers 

are  doing  our  best  to  enforce  safety  protocols,  but  it  is  difficult  to  manage  on  top  of  our  normal 

teaching  duties.  Some  students  noted  that  campus,  especially  the  entrance,  feels  crowded  with 

the  whole  school  back  (as  opposed  to  having  half  the  students  at  a time  last  year).  Many  are 

having  a hard  time  learning  because  it’s  just  so  hot.  Some  of  our  windows  can’t  open,  and 

teachers  are  unsure  of  how  to  safely  use  their  fans,  so  some  leave  the  fans  off.  This  creates  an 

unbearable  situation  for  students  wearing  masks,  walking  up  our  hilly  campus,  and  being 

packed  into  rooms  with  25  other  students. 

Last  year,  I pleaded  for  certainty  and  safety,  asking  for  you  to  consider  the  impact  to 

families.  I described  my  intent  to  stay  away  from  my  97-year  old  grandparents  to  avoid  getting 

them  sick,  but  that  I feared  that  I was  squandering  the  little  time  I had  left  with  them.  Well,  in  the 

past  year,  both  of  my  grandparents  have  passed  away,  and  my  biggest  regret  is  that  I did  not 

spend  more  time  with  them.  My  grandpa  passed  away  on  November  13.  On  October  31st,  we 

found  out  that  he  only  had  a short  time  more  to  live,  but  because  my  school  planned  to  welcome 

students  back  to  in-person  learning  on  November  9th,  I spent  several  of  his  last  days 

desperately  trying  to  accomplish  the  impossible  task  of  making  my  classroom  safe  for  in-person 

learning  and  preparing  lessons  ahead  of  time  in  the  event  I would  be  absent.  After  his  death,  I

did  try  to  make  a point  to  see  my  grandma  more  because  she  had  Alzheimer’s  and  I worried 

about  what  his  absence  would  mean  for  her.  This  was  a little  easier  when  I was  given  the  option 

to  work  from  home,  but  students  returned  to  my  school  in  4th  quarter.  Over  spring  break,  I spent 

a long  visit  with  her,  knowing  that  I wouldn’t  really  return  until  school  was  out,  and  I could  be 

sure  I wasn’t  passing  germs  from  school  on  to  her.  In  a rare  moment  of  lucidity,  she  repeated 

the  Japanese  phrase  “kiotsuketene.”  I had  never  before  heard  her  say  this  phrase,  which  means 

take  care,  and  it  was  one  of  our  final  special  moments  together.  She  passed  away  a couple  of 

weeks  into  June,  when  I was  just  starting  to  feel  confident  that  enough  time  had  passed  since 

the  end  of  school  that  I wouldn’t  be  passing  germs  to  her.  All  this  is  to  say  that  when  you  are 

making  these  plans  for  keeping  schools  safe,  please  consider  the  people  actually  in  the 

classrooms,  and  the  family  members  who  are  also  affected  by  your  decisions. 

Since  January,  I haven’t  been  sleeping  well.  I am  so  exhausted  by  the  time  I get  home 

(hours  after  the  school  day  has  ended)  that  I fall  asleep  on  the  floor  for  a couple  of  hours  after 

eating  dinner.  But  then  I have  to  wake  up  and  prepare  for  the  next  day,  so  I often  don’t  go  back 

to  sleep  until  around  2 or  even  3 in  the  morning.  My  mind  is  consumed  with  worry  about  the  next 

school  day.  There  are  many  more  questions  that  I have  not  mentioned  yet.  How  can  I convince 

students  that  they  have  to  keep  their  masks  on  in  class?  How  can  I make  my  class  engaging and  different  from  last  year’s  distance  learning  experience  while  still  maintaining  social 

distancing?  How  can  I ask  students  - without  embarrassing  them  - to  project  their  voices  so  that 

we  can  hear  them  through  their  masks?  How  will  I catch  up  the  students  who  are  missing  weeks 

of  school  because  they  are  being  quarantined?  These  questions  keep  me  up  at  night.  I can  feel 

the  interrupted  sleep  schedule  and  general  lack  of  sleep  beginning  to  affect  me.  Where  I once 

prided  myself  on  having  a keen  memory,  I now  find  myself  trailing  off  in  the  middle  of  a train  of 

thought.  I’ve  never  experienced  dizzy  spells  before,  but  last  week  while  welcoming  students  to 

the  last  class  of  the  day,  I experienced  a bout  of  light-headedness  so  bad  that  I actually  went 

next  door  and  told  the  teacher  to  keep  an  ear  open  in  case  I passed  out  in  class.  While  students 

can  more  freely  step  out  of  the  classroom  to  take  their  masks  off  and/or  drink  water,  I do  not 

have  that  same  freedom.  It  was  hard  enough  trying  to  find  time  to  use  the  bathroom  during  the 

school  day  before,  and  now  I struggle  to  find  time  to  drink  water  because  it  requires  me  to 

completely  pause  the  lesson  so  that  I can  step  out  of  the  door  to  remove  my  mask.  For  safety 

reasons,  I can’t  give  my  students  the  same  kind  of  self-directed  hands-on  activities  as  I have  in 

past  years,  so  when  I take  a break,  the  whole  class  grinds  to  a halt.  I’m  only  26  years  old;  I

should  not  be  experiencing  these  kinds  of  health  issues,  but  whether  due  to  lack  of  sleep, 

dehydration,  or  simply  stress,  I am. 

What’s  funny  is  that,  when  schools  first  shut  down  in  March  2020,  I was  actually  excited 

by  the  challenge  of  distance-learning.  I was  used  to  online  and  hybrid  classes  from  my  teacher 

education  program  at  UH,  and  I thought  they  were  taught  very  effectively.  But  in  the  past  year 

and  a half,  I have  become  increasingly  weary  from  the  lack  of  planning  by  education  officials, 

the  lack  of  support  and  resources  offered  to  teachers,  and  the  red  tape  preventing  us  from 

innovating  and  creating  a better,  safer  learning  experience  for  students.  I am  exhausted,  but  I

return  to  work  every  day  with  the  hope  that  some  positive  changes  will  be  made.  So  once  again, 

I am  pleading  with  you  for  the  following: 

● Create  clear,  specific,  and  consistent  safety  guidelines  for  each  school  and 

classroom  to  follow. 

● Provide  resources  such  as  fans  to  every  classroom  (and  guidelines  for  where  to 

place  them)  to  create  safe  classroom  spaces. 

● Provide  teachers  with  appropriate  PPE  because  it’s  becoming  increasingly  clear 

that  our  homemade  cloth  masks  are  not  cut  out  to  protect  us  from  the  highly 

contagious  Delta  variant. 

● Either  buy  more  licenses  for  the  online  learning  platforms  OR  (and  this  would  be 

preferred)  allow  students  to  join  classes  from  the  safety  of  their  own  homes  and 

be  taught  by  a highly  qualified  live  teacher. 

Thank  you  for  your  consideration, 

Jacie  Miyashiro Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony - - Schools must allow parents to 

## temporarily distance learn 

> 1 message
> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:34 AM
> Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov>

General Business Mee  ng 

Re: I do not support current school year opening plans 

Hello board members, 

I'm a very concerned parent that would like to be able to help the schools have a successful school year 

with the safety and heatlh of our keiki, sta ff  and community as the number one priority. To do this, the 

board should take as many steps as possible to  keep everyone safe. The current approach is NOT enough. 

One simple measure is to allow parents, who can and willing, to keep their kids at home un  l this COVID 

surge is over. It's a commonsense approach to immediately minimize the number of kids in school that 

could poten  ally infect others or be infected with  COVID. It will allow for more distancing in person as there 

are many families who have no choice but to send their kids to school. 

Our schools should have been prepared for the in-person/distance learning switches that will happen 

throughout the school year due to all types of disrup  ons, like COVID exposure, illness, trips, etc.  Allowing 

parents to keep their kids home should be seamless  and easy. If it's not, you must analyze the current 

situa  on and implement steps to make it seamless. This will be a process that will reap bene fi ts much 

beyond just this school year. I hope it will be implemented permanently so that should disrup  ons happen 

in the future, it's easy to transi  on. 

I'm sure you will hear many other requests, and hope you consider them all, but the bo  om line is you 

must act now! Are you monitoring the number of cases? What about the number of PICU and NICU beds 

available? 

Please protect the lives of our kids before anything else. Despite others saying the risk is worth it, no one 

can speak for me or my family, or a family who is a ff ected by COVID. If my child (or any child/person) 

becomes seriously ill, and you, as board members,  did not take steps to allow parents like me to make the 

choice to keep my child at home during this surge, you share the blame. The risk for me is NOT worth it. 

Thank you, Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 1

Board of Education August 19, 2021 

GBM 

Testimony 

IV.A. Oppose  

> IV. Discussion Items
> NOTE: Testimony relevant to each agenda item will be taken before the Board considers the
> item.

A. Presentation on opening schools for the 2021 -2022 school year 

Issue 1 . High levels of infection i n schools, during a full one week per iod, there were 325 cases. 

I’m going to start off with the numbers. These numbers come from the weekly 

report from the Department regarding COVID cases in school. These reports 

come out on Fridays. Then taken down, never to be seen again. This is public 

information. 

Week one of reporting data, July 10 -16 there were a total of 8 COVID cases. 

Some schools had opened in July. 

The second week from July 17 -23 there were a total of 9 COVID cases. Again, 

some schools were back to in -person learning. 

Week three, July 31 -August 6 there were a total of 105 COVID ca ses. August 3 

was the first day back to in -person learning for the majority of schools. Some 

schools started on the 4 th or the 5 th . So it wasn’t a full week of in -person learning. 

During the 4 th week, when all schools opened for in -person learning, there were 

325 COVID cases. As the Governor and Dr. Char said on several news casts, 

“Positive cases will happen in the schools, this is worth the risk to reopen for in -

person learning. There are no thresholds or metrics for closing schools. We will 

monitor the situation.” 

Week four 325 cases: 

Elementary School : 181 or 55.69% 

Intermediate : 57 or 17.53% 

High School : 80 or 24.61% 

Our elementary students are the most vulnerable. But “the state will monitor the 

numbers. ”

See PAGE 4 for triggers? Press conference with the Governor and Dr. Char: no t hresholds, we 

will be monitoring. 

Science :

R(0) naught for the Delta variation is for every one person that is infected, can infect 7 others. 

So using the elementary cases: 181 x 7 = 1, 26 7 close contacts required to quarantine for 14 

days after their last contac t. Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 2

Issue 2: The Department posts weekly. Website does not show prev ious weeks reports. 

All reports need to be available to the public at all times. 

The school’s weekly reports do not disclose how many close contacts had to 

quarantine. We do not know if they are students or teachers. That is probably not 

what is most important. 

During the August 5 th meeting of the Senate Special Committee on COV ID, Senator 

Kidani told the interim superintendent and deputy superintendent, “There was no 

plan B, those that were doing well in distance learning should’ve been 

allowed. The expectation for all the students coming back to in -person 

learning with the numbers we are seeing was a mistake. You have done a big 

disservice to the students, parents, the whole community. You need to put 

more effort into this.” 

That says it all. But here’s mor e. The Department’s presentation today is a bit 

different from th e one presented at the Senate Hearing. 

Because we are getting ALMOST the same presentation as the Senate, let me 

share some of the due -outs for the DOE to provide the Senate. 

Senator Kidani asked for the COVID reports to come out daily rather than late F riday 

afternoons. 

a. Response from DOE: We’ll check into it and do our best to get it to you. 

Senat or Favella asked why are the schools exempt from social gathering limits? 

a. We’ll check into that. 

Senator Favella asked why there aren’t any exemptions for families to attend sporting events 

since the exemptions are being made for inside the classrooms? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: That’s a great question. Spectators are a mixture of the 

community, families and toddle rs. It is hard to control spectators. Controls of the venues 

depends on the county. 

Follow up : Senator Favella: Find out what is the allowance for spectators? 

Senator Mercado -Kim asked, “What about the locker rooms, the showers? 

a. DOE relies on the national response to these types of situations. 

Resource: DOE Athletic Guidebook. 

Senator Dela Cruz (DC) asked what resources do you have for Distance Learning? Are you 

prepared? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: Every school has a contingency plan. 

Follow -up (DC) : Do you have that number in mind , when to return to another level of 

teaching (distance learning)? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: We are watching the rest of the state’s triggers. We look to 

DOH. Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 3

Follow -up (DC): Triggers will change due to variants. Is there a timeline to establish the 

triggers? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: DOH will establish the trigg ers. 

In a news broadcast, Doctor Char said, “We are not going to set triggers, we are going to 

monitor the situation.” 

Senator Dela Cruz : We want the statistics on Distance Learning. This information needs to be 

made public. What is the increased demand? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: “ We’ll get back to you.” 

Follow -up (DC) What are the triggers, what are the resources? 

Senator Mercado -Kim asked about rural areas and what are the plans for these students? And 

the Wi -Fi and Hot Spots? 

a. Deputy Superintendent: Like last year we would set up vans for rural mobile hubs. We 

are also using Enterprise rentals. 

Senator Mercado -Kim began a d isc ussion on the Distance Learning (DL) Wait List , requests 

from families for DL were told they missed the deadline. How many are on the wait list? 

a. Interim Superintendent: Not sure of the number on the wait list. We need to hire teachers 

for the demand. 

b. Deputy Superintendent stated there were 146 on the wait list. 

Senator Kidani asked them to find out what the students on the wait list are doing while they 

wait? No work, no teacher, nothing to do, just at home. How do you know if students have kept 

up, there is no accountability for them to move to another grade? 

Senator Kidani suggested the Department reach out to those teachers who recently retired for 

distance learning. Or offer afternoon classes? 

Last question from Senator Favella: Is it true the reason you pushed to open schools 

because you were worried about losing funding, lose money ?

a. Interim Superintendent: We need to see the kids in school. Mostly for social, 

emotional learning. Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 4

Presentation to the Senate Special Co mmittee on Covid: August 5. I guess 

this one is expired!! 

> Presentation to the Board of Education August 19

Totally unreadable: Public must be able to read the slides !! Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 5

Comments on the Special Meeting of August 12 , 2021 

Presentation on National Association of State Boards of Education 

(“NASBE”) boardsmanship training to esta blish the foundation for 

recognizing full board authority, developing an understanding of working 

cohesively as a board, and Leading for Lasting Change 

As presented in The Board ’s training on pages 47, 51, 53 

• Without a strategic plan, selecting a new superintendent is critical. 

• Currently the interim superintendent has been selected. This superintendent has not 

been able to create a rapport with the State Legislature based on his testimony at the 

latest Senate Committee m eeting on August 5 th .

• His inability to anticipate questions to adequately answer their questions was evident. 

The answers were available but “he’d have to get back with them.” 

• As stated by Senator Kidani, “You have done the public a great disservice.” Relying 

on the Senate to only ask questions related to the presentation is a mistake. 

So go back to the drawing board on the selection of a new superintendent, and you are 

capable of doing that by Spring of 2022 using the key skills and attrib utes related to the Five 

Forces of Leadership by Thomas Sergiovani. Take Robert Hull’s offer for subsequent 

sessions. Hawaii wants to get this right this time. Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 6

Board of Education 

Special Meeting 

August 11, 2021 

Testimony 

Discussion Items 

NOTE: Testimony relevant to each agenda item will be taken before the Board considers the item. 

A. Presentati on on National Association of State Boards of Education (“NASBE”) boardsmanship training 

to establish the foundation for recognizing full board authority, developing an understanding of working 

cohesively as a board, and Leading for Lasting Change 

Aloha Board Members 

I find it hard to believe that none of you have read the papers, heard the new s casts or read the daily report s of 

COVID Cases in our Schools. I believe you get a daily report of positive cases. Of course , what we don’t know are 

the n umber of contacts that one case could put into quarantine for 14 days after their last contact. In a classroom, 

that could be as many as 30 students, 1 teacher and their families. 

This is exactly how community spread occurs. 

Due to the rising numbers or f ear of infection, many families opted for distance learning. What a fiasco! I can’t 

believe you are unaware of what is going on. 

Below are two stories telling how Distance Learning Is going to occur in our schools. They provide two distinctly 

different messages. 

As you read the two stories, the first one that touts 5,000 licenses was presented to the Board by then 

superintendent Kishimoto. 

Then the second story there is a LARGE DISCREPANCY between 5,000 licenses and 390 seats.                     

> 1. Hawaii Schools Will Offer Distance Learning Options But With Limited Resources
> The state education department said it would also partner with complex areas that don’t have
> the resources to offer virtual programs at this time.
> By Suevon Lee /July 21, 2021
> Reading time: 4 minutes.
> The Hawaii Department of Education has unveiled schools’ plans for distance learning
> options in the new school year but not al l schools are offering one. Those that do will
> largely rely on an online program purchased by the DOE where families will serve as adult
> facilitators for the children since most teachers will only be doing the grading.
> The department posted all of the dist ance learning plans by school and complex area on
> Wednesday to meet a Board of Education directive to make it easier for families to access
> the information. A table with those options indicates how each distance program will be
> facilitated , how much teacher participation will be offered and whether the school will
> accept “geographic exceptions” from families outside that district who wish to opt in.
> For the most part, these plans will involve “a teacher of record for grading only” and will
> require a “caring/responsible adult at home who provides main facilitation.” But some

Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 7

schools may still have teac hers offering live or recorded lessons or providing instruction 

for core content areas. 

The superintende nt has said all schools will open for full in -person instruction by the Aug. 

3 start of the new school year. Cory Lum/Civil Beat/2021 

But not all of the 257 campuses will offer a school -based distance plan “due to low 

demand or capacity,” according to DOE. That appears to include at least 98 schools 

around the state. 

The superintendent  said in May  that Hawaii’s 257 public schools will reopen for full in -

person learning when the new academic year begins on Aug. 3, with distance learning 

provided only in extremely li mited circumstances. Exceptions may include families with 

medically compromised children, for example. 

That  restricted the options for many families  whose schools weren’t planning to offer a 

virtual plan to switching schools or home -schooling. 

Only those 12 and over are currently eligible for the COVID -19 vaccine. The state is also 

currently experiencing a spike in new coronavirus cases, partly due to a new contagious 

variant that has been circulating largely among those who hav e not had a shot. 

“We’re in this conundrum,” said Marika Bertram, a parent to a rising second grade son and 

a daughter in kindergarten who attend a Kailua school. Her son is eligible to enroll in K -

12/Stride — the DOE’s new choice of online curriculum — be cause he is medically 

compromised, but she doesn’t want to send her daughter to campus for fear of bringing 

COVID -19 home. 

“Until he’s vaccinated it feels irresponsible to put them back into school. We don’t want to 

risk it,” she said. 

The DOE purchased 5, 000 student licenses from K12/Stride Inc. for an online 

curriculum approved for grades K -8. It will replace the Acellus Learning Accelerator 

this year as the go -to online learning option for families who prefer it. 

“It could be either school/teacher -design ed, especially if a school has a dedicated teacher, 

or, a curriculum via K -12/Stride,” DOE spokeswoman Nanea Kalani said of the schools’ 

distance learning plans. “I don’t have a breakdown readily available.” 

Not all of the DOE’s 15 complex areas have the c apacity or demand to offer a distance 

program within their school sites, so in those cases the DOE will partner with these areas 

to pool resources and expertise and provide some kind of statewide option. 

But even within those complex areas, distance learni ng might only be available to select 

students in select grade levels and families will have to work with school principals to see 

if their child is eligible to enroll. 

2. Hawaii Education Department Releases Statewide Distance Learning Plan 

The options are limited to 180 elementary schoolers, 90 middle schoolers and 120 high 

schoolers, for a total of 390 seats. 

By  Suevon Lee  / July 29, 2021 

Reading time: 5 minutes. 

Several days shy of the start to the new school year, the Department of Edu cation sent notice 

to school leaders Wednesday outlining a new statewide distance learning plan for families with 

pandemic -related health and safety concerns or those who want distance learning for other 

reasons. 

Coordinated by the central administration, the plan will be extremely limited in both enrollment 

and scope. The number of distance -learning seats is capped at 390 total — 180 for 

elementary schools, 90 for middle schools and 120 for high schools — in a tot al DOE 

student population of roughly 161,000. Susan Pcola -Davis GBM Aug ust 19 8

As parents have gone through the process of requesting Distance Learning, they must show proof of a medical 

condition, meet with the principal, and then a decision will be made. When did parents find out about this 

process? The week that school was to start. Some children are still at home waiting for a decision to be made. 

Some have been told there is a wait list and they could go ahead and send their children to school until a slot 

becomes available. The ONLY way a slot becomes available is when one student leaves. 

At the Senate Special Committee on COVID, our new superintendent testified that “he did not know how many 

were on the wait list.” I personally do not believe there is a waitlist. As the Senate continued one of there 

statements was “you have let the state down.” What a way to start, new interim superintendent, not prepared to 

testify in front of the Senate. 

On top of that, students that were approved have not started the program yet because their school doesn’t have a 

license. 

Department of Education Guidelines distributed, again, just before school began. Here is one erroneous portion of 

the guidelines. You are intelligent enough to know that this is BAD ADVERTISING. 

• Teachers and students who are vaccinated and have a close contact with in 3 -6 feet over a 

period of 15 minutes or up to 24 hours DO NOT HAVE TO ISOLATE OR QUARANTINE . As 

stated in the DOE Gu idance for Schools  

> Shout out to

Kili Namauʻu . You have always had your eyes and ears open. I believe you are  

> well aware of what is occurring. Please speak for our children.
> Board Members, it is appalling that this agenda was not postponed due to current issues in our
> State. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Jennifer Luke Payne <jennifer.luke_payne@k12.hi.us> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 11:10 AM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Testimony for general meeting from Jennifer Luke-Payne for Agenda item 6-A 

Dear Board of Education Members, 

My name is Jennifer Luke-Payne, I am the principal of Ka`a`awa Elementary School.  I am writing 

this letter with reservations, because as of lately any request seems to end up adding more work 

for me.  Despite my fears I felt it necessary to share some of the problems that school level 

leadership are dealing with.  Just so I donʻt keep rambling on, I will limit my focus on the three 

biggest roadblocks in my daily experience of running a school. 

First, the rush to transition from the old FMS system to Aukahi has caused challenges in doing the 

simple task of paying bills.The new financial system “Aukahi” was not ready to be used.  It is not 

flexible enough to meet our needs. I would guess most DOE schools are behind in paying bills.  My 

SASA has two bills that she cannot pay because she needs to add one dollar to the PO and the 

system will not let her.  This bill is from last school year so if we recreate the PO we will lose the 

money that pays for the bill.  They say they are working on a way to fix it but so far nothing. As of 

yet I havenʻt been able to do my portion of this because Aukahi is too sensitive to what is in a 

browser. These problems are two of the many issues Aukahi has caused. I know some problems 

will be solved with practice and time but some of it is just ludicrous. If things are not fixed soon it 

will cripple the system. 

Second, time to do our job.  Today a student asked me what I do when they are in class and for 

once I had a hard time answering.  You see, everyday is completely different for me.  Since COVID 

started I have had difficulty developing relationships with my students, supporting my teachers, 

and reflecting on practice. My students are in person but I am stuck doing DOE COVID health and 

safety measures, requests by requests from the board, district, and state. There are so many 

things that I deal with on a regular school year, but with COVID-19 it has brought my 

responsibilities to a whole new level. As of lately there are many days I have felt defeated.  I spend 

so much time dealing with requests and mandates from district, state, and CDC that there are 

many days where I have felt like I havenʻt really worked on my job. One close contact, one positive 

case on or off our campus requires hours and upon hours of work.  If that wasnʻt demanding 

enough the governor's new vaccination mandate requires me to do a fourteen step verification 

process for each of my employees.  I might sound a little crazy talking about things of this sort 

during a pandemic.  But my students missed a lot of learning time, I have my own school protocols 

to complete each day, and I am the back up sub for everybody.  The extra responsibilities get in 

the way of me doing my job.  I understand why I am being asked to do these mandates and requests.  I just am not sure why assistance is not being given.  Why is so much being asked with 

no consideration of the person who has to do the work.  It is easy to make a request off of data, but 

can people start looking at how it will be done without burdening the school level?  Are not school 

level personnel closest to the students and should then be supported? 

Lastly, respect and consideration towards teachers.  I know you will be listening and reading a lot 

of people asking for distance, hybrid or in person learning.  Some will share stories of safety 

concerns and so forth.  But before you take action or make a request, try to understand what it will 

take to do what you are asking and give the time necessary for schools to be successful in 

accomplishing it.  Teaching is an art, it is done with careful planning, it is not something that can 

shift over night.  Last school year school level people were yanked around without being consulted 

or listened to. Decisions were made too late to properly be implemented where it really matters.  If 

you see that we will go to 100% distance learning in the near future give a date with a warning. For 

example, if things do not get better we will go to distance learning and give a date.  With that kind 

of warning we might be better able to prepare.  To not give schools the time needed to prepare for 

change is disrespectful and diminishes the skills and art that it takes to teach our children. 

I am an educator, I am the leader of my school. I love my faculty, staff and students. I place them 

first.  I am also overwhelmed by the demands that have been placed on me.  People say “thatʻs 

why you get paid the big bucks.”  But that is not true.  There is no pay scale that gives permission 

to abuse a person.  My teachers do not deserve to be yanked around.  My families do not deserve 

to be unsure of what the government will do with schools and their childʻs education.  And I do not 

deserve to continually have every initiative dumped into my work responsibilities like I have room 

to take on more. 

So work with DOE leadership to improve Aukahi, set a system that does not add to school level 

responsibilities, and lastly set a standard of operations to give schools time to adjust and plan for 

changes.  Our students need us to work and support one another to succeed.  If you need 

clarification or have questions please call me at (808) 305-6650 or email me 

jennifer.luke_payne@k12.hi.us .

Sincerely 

Jennifer Luke-Payne 

Principal Ka`a`awa Elementary School  

> This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District. This email and any
>  iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they
> are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender.

August 18, 2021 

Board of Education 

State of Hawaii 

Regarding August 19, 2021 BOE General Meeting at 1:30 a.m., Item VI. A. Presentation on 

opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year 

Honorable Chair Payne and members of the Board: 

I am writing as a member of Hawai’i for a Safe Return to School to share stories from the group. 

Hawai’i for a Safe Return to School is made up of parents, teachers, school staff, and community 

members, who are concerned with the health and safety in our schools during this pandemic. 

The group provides a space to share information on COVID-19, education, and our schools, and 

to ask questions and seek advice about the challenges people are facing. 

Collecting the stories. Parents, teachers, and others often post about their experiences. Their 

stories provide insight into what is happening in our schools. We are collecting these stories to 

share so that there can be a better understanding of our schools at this time. 

Why these stories are important. Policies made at the upper levels of the DOE, DOH, and the 

State impact the schools and the families they serve. Yet, often, and particularly during this 

pandemic, decisions are made without consulting the teachers, staff and administrators who must 

implement th ose decisions, and th e students and families who are impacted by the decisions .

And at times, there has been a disconnect between what is reported by the upper levels of the 

DOE and what is experienced by parents , staff, and others in the schools .

There has been no place for people to tell these stories , n o ombudsman, no phone line to report 

issues. Yet, the se stories provide the kind of information that is needed to determine how our 

schools are doing. This data can help us understand where we are with our schools, and what we 

need to do to get to where we would like to be .

What these stories show. While a sample, the attached stories are representative of others 

posted on Facebook. Some stories express appreciation , where schools have seriously considered 

the risk of COVID-19 to address co ncerns and have communicated with families .

Many stories , however, illustrate the stress and worry that families and school staff are 

experiencing at this time. They underscore the need to address shortcomings in DOE and DOH 

health and safety guidelines and the implementation of those guidelines . They demonstrate why 

we should revisit the DOE’s decision to focus solely on in-person learning rather than develo p

more meaningful options for distance learning in this pandemic. 

There has been a tragic loss of the opportunity for the DOE to bring the community together by 

openly shar ing information and work ing with stakeholders to find solutions to the issues 

presented by COVID-19. As these Board of Education meetings have become the only venue for 

public input for many people, please listen to the stories and the testimony from parents, 

teachers, and the community. The stories support the petition submitted by the Hawai’i for a Safe 

Return to School. We ask for your help in improving the health and safety and the trust in our 

schools. Thank you for your consideration. 

Sincerely, 

Lynn Otaguro 

Oahu, Hawaii 

Note: The names of most of the individuals who have shared their stories are not included at 

their request. The stories are attached. Experience with DL and the necessity of it now 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I was the Distance Learning teacher for grades 3, 4, and 5 in the SY20-21. Because I'm a cancer 

survivor, I knew it would be best for me to be at home for that year. I was lucky to have had help 

from 2 part-time teachers: one taught math and the other helped with building social emotional 

lessons and following up with the students who were struggling to get all of the work done in 

Google Classroom. I created a schedule where each student received about 12 hours of 

instruction in a week. The 3 of us planned for the DL students and hit the ground running. I 

learned how to integrate technology with teaching, and I was able to foster relationships with the 

students too. I was willing to repeat teaching that way this year - even though it was difficult and 

not the most efficient because I had 3 different grade level curricula to consider. I was joyous to 

receive the vaccine, but was willing to teach DL again because of CoVid's persistence. I am back 

in the classroom, which I love; but the anxiety of wondering why all of us were sent back knowing 

that one of us would get sick is beyond me. I feel helpless because I don't know that I can protect 

my class of students, or myself for that matter. Our school has 6 cases from the last week alone, 

and I feel like the cases are going to increase because we don't know how it's being transmitted. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

The DoE fails to provide practical and relevant guidelines. For example, with kids missing class 

due to CoVid/illness or parents keeping their kids home because of cases in the school, teachers 

have to provide for those students who are at home, while teaching students in person; which is 

kind of what went on with half the class on campus and the other half at home. This variant is 

different from its' predecessor, and the DoE should pivot and make plans for Delta instead. 

Having half of the kids on campus at a time - especially since I have the kids that cannot be 

vaccinated due to their age - makes the most sense for now. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

Thank you for allowing us to share our stories here. Distance Learning 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

Last year, my children's school was able to do and offer full distance learning. Due to my 

youngest son having a heart condition, my husband and I felt that it would be better for him to 

stay home and not be exposed. With that being said, we couldn't let my oldest go in person either 

so he doesn't get exposed also. Neither could In since I work at the school. This year, there was 

no option, and it was last minute when we found out about any sort of DL options from other 

schools. My kid's both were forced to go in person. My oldest couldn't wait. He loves school. Yes, 

socializing is important, but what socializing is there? My kids aren't allowed to play at recess 

(which is also cut short). By the time they go outside, the bell rings and recess is over! Lunch in 

the cafeteria is also cut short. With all these restrictions, it's hard for kids to experience 

socializing. My oldest said he'd rather be at full distance learning instead of being in person with 

all these restrictions, rules, and rushed breaks that they need during the day. They also don't feel 

safe! Are we waiting for kids to get really sick or even die before they realize schools need DL 

options? 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

All I ask is for a DL option to be offered at each school. Use videos from last year's full distance 

learning and assign work if need be. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Socializing and Mental Health as a reason for full f2f school openings 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I am a teacher- 26th year in Hawai’i. Right now, with all the restrictions and guidelines we have 

been given to implement, the way I am conducting classes is more similar to the way classes 

were being conducted with schools entirely online last year than some might realize. The 

difference is that the students are sitting in the same room with me… The amount of interaction 

we are able to have is very limited and distancing/masking makes communication/socialization 

extremely difficult… Taking these things into consideration, the argument that students are 

benefiting socially and will have much improved mental health by going through this 

experience/experiment begins to wear thin in places for me. I DO believe that there is no 

substitute for f2f learning, but with what is happening around the world, the fear factor, the 

inconsistency of information, the heat, the inability to breathe comfortably and countless other 

daily occurrences- the benefits of what f2f is really like this school year are questionable to me. I 

fear that those who are not actually in our classrooms have an incomplete view of what is 

occurring in many classrooms in our state. I am finding it hard to justify such risk for the 

perceived social and mental health benefits. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

We should be in Hybrid mode in schools at the very least. I would like to know how we can 

change the fact that schools are “exempt” from the safety protocols that are established for the 

rest of our communities- THEY SHOULD NOT BE 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Contact tracing and Notification of Cases 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

By the 4th day in school with my students we were notified that one of our students was positive 

and had to stay home to quarantine. They also said that they were not infectious when on 

campus as well as no close contacts. Although the name was not shared with us, I could narrow it 

down to 2 students who were last on campus on the date of the letter. Both of those students 

were in 7 classes for 2 days before it was the weekend were they tested positive and stayed 

home. During those 2 days and 7 classes they sat next to at least 5 people surrounding them (but 

some how the 20 other kids in the class would not be considered close contacts) those kids were 

not notified, I assume, because I, nor any of the other teachers were asked for a seating chart to 

identify who they were near. When I asked about the protocols, our VP said, if they have their 

mask on then they are fine and don’t need to identify close contacts! I was shocked! Now that kid 

could have also used a bathroom during those days and the bathroom use is no longer being 

tracked at my school so it would be impossible to see who used a bathroom after the student. 

The kids are sitting anywhere on campus with anyone they want during recess and lunch and as 

much as my school may try to encourage mask wearing and social distancing during those times, 

it’s almost impossible to enforce 100% of the time. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Bathroom use- we used to have a Google form that tracked use last year but this year was 

abandoned Social distancing and masks- we really should be on a blended schedule to make 

schools the “safe space” the Governor and DOH claims it to be. My students are about 1-1.5 feet 

away from each other since that is what the physical space allows for in my class and the number 

of kids per class. Positive cases- the school is not a child’s parent and should not decide for a 

parent if a child was exposed or not. If a child is positive in a class, the entire class should be 

notified (more than the generic letter sent to the entire school) and the parent can be the one to 

decide if they want to continue sending their child or have them tested. We can not say “they 

were wearing a mask so it’s fine” It seems they are just saying that the one positive case will stay 

home but until anyone else tests positive, everything will continue like normal. No quarantining, 

switching to blended or going distance. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

I am also a mom if 4 with kids at 3 different schools (elementary, intermediate and high school) 

including the school that I work at, in the 4 days of school so far this week I have received 5 

different letters informing us of a total of 7 cases (one being a student in my class) at all 4 

schools we are at! Schools are always over crowded and unsanitary to begin with. It is asking the impossible for it to be sanitized to virus killing levels with the facilities we have, the physical 

space, the supplies provided (I got one small canister of sanitizer (almost gone) and one small 

canister of wipes (looooong gone already) and the amount of students we have to have in each 

class. I really support a move to full distance or blended learning and as much as I hate 

synchronous teaching, I think it was the safest option for all people involved. I also want to share 

a story of an elementary principal not informing a teacher’s class that there was a positive case in 

the class. The class only got the generic letter stating there was a case on campus! Those 

parents were never informed that for 3 days, their child was in class with a Covid positive person! 

The principal’s excuse? They were all wearing their mask right???? 🙈 Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Contact tracing and notification of cases 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

Sent a kid to the home room because student was complaining of a sore throat and runny nose. 

Student was sent back because student did not have a fever and health room card stated “mom 

says to keep in school”. I checked with the VP and principal about procedures - they told me that 

the health aide makes the final call on who is sent home. This same student also shared with me 

that their (same age) cousins were visiting from the mainland. At school, masks are worn below 

the nose by students AND staff. I was emailed by the health aide before the first day of school to 

excuse a student from wearing a mask because student’s parents wanted medical exemption. I 

had to ask the principal if they had the paperwork - apparently they hadn’t turned in any forms!!! 

They did NOT have medical exemption. Wondering if they would’ve shown up to school with just 

a face shield if I hadn’t asked. Very disturbing. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Have clear answers about procedures and follow through. If the health aide makes final call, then 

she can chose to send home NO ONE. Schools only get covid positive if they require parents to 

test, but if they don’t test then no one will be positive for covid. It’s crazy. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

Mahalo for collecting responses. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I emailed teacher and principal to ask what we can do to get outdoor seating for lunch, no reply. I 

pick her up for lunch everyday. I’ve had to not work to be able to do this. If she could eat outside I 

wouldn’t have to miss work to keep her safer. I may homeschool and get her a sitter when I work. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Outdoor seating for lunch 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

I’d like a mandate that all schools offer outdoor eating. Everywhere worse I’ve lived ate outside at 

school even in the cold winter. Contact tracing and notification of cases 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I work at the front registration at a hospital adjacent to my child’s school . On Thursday morning, 

three different parents came directly to our hospital looking for covid testing because they had 

just picked up their children from school because they had been exposed to a positive case on 

campus. I work at the hospital and fully understand HIPAA violations. Knowing this had happened 

in the morning before 9 am, I thought that at least by the end of the day we’d get a notification of 

a positive case on campus. My son came home on Thursday stating that his teacher was telling 

them there was a positive case on campus. Friday came and went and no notification. No email 

or no standardized robotic voicemail. So I emailed the principal and to my dissatisfaction, she 

replied that they had “snail mailed” us the notification and contacts of contacts are not considered 

a safety issue. My whole issue is the communication and transparency for me as a parent. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

We should have gotten a notification within 24 hours of a positive case on campus and when that 

child was tested and when that child was last on campus and was it during an incubation period 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Quarantining 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

My class is being quarantined for 10 days because one of my students tested positive. But myself 

and my aid were told we did not need to quarantine because we were vaccinated. Also siblings 

did not need to quarantine. I am concerned about this protocol and why teachers or siblings aren't 

quarantined.... I realize we have less of a risk if we have been vaccinated but it's still a risk, not 

only of catching it, But also carrying the virus and spreading it... 🙏 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

We should have held off starting school for a couple of weeks to try to nip this in the bud. I don't 

know the answer, because I do know many of our parents have no child care and need to go to 

work 😢 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I teach kindergarten so masking properly is a challenge. The curriculum that they have chosen 

requires lots of changing of partnerships etc. I do my best to keep students masks on and we do 

frequent hand washing but it takes 20/30 min for all students to wash their hands as I have 21. 

Some teachers have as many as 27! In the cafeteria we have students spread as far as we can 

and facing the same direction but the cafeteria cannot be considered well ventilated. Since 

grades 1-5 switch reading classes I feel like this is a ticking time bomb waiting to go off. We are 

short staffed in all areas so we are doing the best we can but we know things are just going to get 

worse. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Eating outdoors, smaller class sizes, support from admin around masking. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

Thank you Contact tracing and Notification of Cases 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

My child started middle school on Thursday, Aug. 5. He continued to attend classes (6 mixed 

periods/classes per day) until Wednesday Aug. 11. I received a call from the principal that my son 

was considered as a close contract with another child who had tested positive. Here is the series 

of events in sequential order: -The mystery child was on campus 8/5 (but had not returned to 

campus). -The mystery child started experiencing symptoms on 8/6, therefore s/he remained at 

home. -The mystery child tested positive on 8/10. -The school was notified on 8/11 and they 

conducted their internal contract tracing. - My son was identified as close contact (By schools 

definition, “someone who was within 3 ft. distance for at least 15 minutes”). It was shared with me 

that the child sat directly next to my son in one of his 6 periods. - I was called to pick up my son 

from school immediately. Once I arrived at the office, I was taken to principals office for a 1:1 

meeting where the Principal explained to me the protocols. My son would need to be out of 

school for 10 days from the date of contact. That means several things: 1) My child could have 

been positive for the last 7 days, brought it home and had us infected. 2) He could have spread it 

to all of his classmates within the last 4 school days that he was there: 6 periods, 30 kids per 

class, everyone mixed and matched and not always in the same cluster. You do the math. 3) 

He’d be missing school to no fault of his own, regardless of how safe our family is. So.....I arrive 

to the office...it’s 3rd period....a staff member paged my son’s teacher. The teacher asks the class 

“which one of you is so&so? *my sons name*”. My son raised his hand. Teacher simply says: 

“You need to go to the office”. I was done talking in the principals room so the principal i escorted 

me back to the front counter area of the office . My son is standing on the other side of the 

counter looking at me in shock. Like, “WHAT ARE YOU DOING HERE MOM? WHAT DID I 

DO?!?!” I look back at him and say: “What do you mean?!? You don’t even know why I’m 

here?!?” 😡😡 Apparently, they gave him no heads up. They didn’t pull him from earlier classes 

and separate him from other students to protect the other kids just in case. They didn’t even tell 

my son ANYTHING!! They left it up to me to tell him in the parking lot when we exited the 

building!!! I HAD TO TELL him why he just got pulled. He has anxiety. One moment he’s in class, 

5 minutes later he’s in the car. Fast forward: Once at home, I ask my son what work he has. He 

has no idea. Of course not, he didn’t even have a chance to get his work...he was surprise 

attacked. I called the school. School says that it would be his responsibility to email all of his (6) 

teachers to ask for his work! 😡😡😡😡 He would still be responsible to hand in work on time -

EVEN WITH NO INSTRUCTION. No I’m class instruction, no online instruction, nothing. Got his 

test results today. He tested negative. But here he is, at home...paying consequences. Lacking 

instruction. Getting absent days marked. And still unable to attend school....to no fault of his/ours. 

Sorry for the long essay. I appreciate all that you folks do. If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

The teachers need to be prepared to have some type of instruction for children who are pushed 

out of class. If not, work should be given an automatic “A” grade. Schools should start contact 

tracing notification as soon as a child is reported “ill”...not 6 days later. By then, it’s too late to 

save anyone. All classes should have online broadcasting (at least), so that children who aren’t in 

class can still get the same quality instruction, especially if they are expected to complete the 

same work. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Distance learning 

Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Contact tracing and notification of cases 

Communication 

Absences for quarantined students 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I am a parent of a 2nd grader and 6th grader at EB DeSilva Elementary School in Hawaii County .

I received the school wide notice that there was a positive covid case on campus on Thursday 8-

6-2021, 3 days after the first day of school. The notice stated that if you were NOT contacted by 

school administrators, your child was NOT considered a close contact. I watched my phone and 

email; nothing. I called the school that day and spoke with the Principle about my concerns with 

areas that may not have a lot of adult supervision; specifically on the bus and during breakfast. I 

was assured there are mitigation efforts in place and the school is safe. The following day on 

Friday, ANOTHER school wide notice is issued...we nervously wait by the phone...nothing. Being 

in a small neighborhood, we hear that the second notice is a sibling of the first case. OK, that 

makes sense. We continue with our sleepover plans with cousins over the weekend. On 

SUNDAY NIGHT at around dinnertime, I get a call from the Vice Principle that BOTH of my 

children are close positive contacts and must test and quarantine! And that their date of exposure 

was on WEDNESDAY the 5th! It took the school 4 DAYS AFTER the 1st school wide notice to 

contact me. When I asked what took so long, I was told they had to wait for rider information from 

the transportation company. I was informed my children needed to quarantine and test and would 

not be able to return to school until Monday the 16th; homework packets would be made 

available to us for pick up. When I asked about distance learning options, I was told I could utilize 

the k12 Stride online curriculum, but it would require me to unenroll my children from the school. I 

also learned my children's quarantine would result in them being marked "absent". In addition, 

our classroom settings are now in direct contradiction of the governor's most recent mandates 

regarding group sizes indoor and outdoor. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

I feel like some kind on DOH liaison for each school might alleviate the pressures on staff who 

already have jobs they have to do.At the very least, it could streamline the flow of information 

between departments and parents, especially where covid cases on campus are a concern. Also, 

assigned seating on the bus should be implemented. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Distance learning 

Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Contact tracing and notification of cases 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I’m a first year high school English teacher. I have. a total of 135 students on my roster. My 

largest class is 32 students. Dealing being a new teacher and the consequences of teaching 

during this Delta surge is pushing me to the brink. By the second day of school, I had 10 students 

out on quarantine because of 3 positive cases at our school. Although they were missing from my 

classes, I did not know about their quarantine status until our Infinite Campus system was 

updated days later. Some of my students are quarantined for just 5 days, others 10 days with no 

explanation as to why. I’m expected to post all assignments to Google Classroom for my 

quarantined students to access, but so far, only 2 are doing so. I’ve reached out to them by email, 

phone call, but no response. Other teachers are experiencing the same and have asked 

leadership if they can hold Google Meets during classes so that the quarantined students can get 

the day’s lesson. This is basically what we were doing last year during blended learning, except 

we had half the students in the classroom. We were told it’s “up to you”. I don’t know if these 

quarantined students have access to WiFi or computers, and neither do the admin. I’m afraid of 

what I’ll have to deal with the students get back and they’re behind. And there’s no end in sight to 

this. As long as students are in school, there will be students quarantined. And as a new teacher, 

I have not had the time to figure out a plan for how I’m going to handle this. Since I received my 

curriculum maps from the department days before school started, I’m staying up till past midnight 

planning day by day. I was so exhausted yesterday from the stress, I almost passed out while I 

was speaking to my students and had to sit down at my desk to collect myself. In addition, social 

distancing is non existent. Many students refuse to wear their masks properly. They are less than 

3 ft away from each other. Because we need to social distance, I’m not having them do group 

work. I don’t have the ability to distance myself from my students. Everyday, when I walk up to 

their desks and help them, and I’m surrounded by students who I constantly have to remind to put 

their masks on properly, I am worried I’m going to get infected and bring it home to my 5 year old 

daughter. I do not feel safe. It’s demoralizing to go into a situation day after day where I feel my 

health and safety and the health and safety of my family is on jeopardy. I’m not sure how much 

longer I can sustain this and I feel helpless. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Input from the teachers when making decisions. Going back to a blended learning model. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

My sons came in close contact. (Aug 2) was with this person all day. The person started to feel 

sick later that evening and brought the boys home. My youngest went to school the next day. 

Around 3:30 we get a call saying the person the kids were with tested positive. I immediately 

called the school and drs. Both people told me that my kids did not need to quarantine because 

we are all vaccinated and showing no signs. I felt uncomfortable about it. That Tuesday evening 

Aug 3 we all quarantined ourselves in our rooms until we got tested and did not allow anybody to 

go to school or work. We got tested Friday afternoon. No symptoms yet. Saturday my youngest 

was tested positive and started showing symptoms later that day. Had I taken him to school 

Wednesday Thursday and Friday, taking the bus, just imagine how many kids, teachers, and 

family that was exposed to covid. My oldest missed his first day of school. My oldest and I tested 

again few days later just to make sure because it can show up in your system differ from other 

people. So once we got the second negative, we then came out of our rooms but still quarantined 

in our house. My youngest has been in his room since Aug 3. He’ll come out Aug 16 since he was 

tested on Aug 6. Our meals with him is FaceTiming. Pretty much all day is FaceTiming. It’s sad. It 

breaks my heart to see him like this. And I can’t be near him and hold him when he’s feeling sick. 

He’s 12 and a huge mamas boy. If anybody comes in close contact with a positive case, do your 

part and isolate. You can be asymptomatic and not knowing you are spreading it. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Change the guidelines. Because we are vaccinated and not showing any signs we didn’t have to 

quarantine 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

My main concern is the bus that picks these children up. My granddaughter mentioned that the 

bus driver is making everyone sit 3 to a seat. If they are in the same household, example 5 of my 

grandkids should sit together and not apart. Instead the drivers are letting the kids sit where ever 

they want without keeping at least 3 feet distance. She also mentioned that the driver told them 

they will be adding to other streets. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Why is the school bus system not following the rules? 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Distance learning 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

I was already concerned with the school year beginning as the numbers started to climb. I knew it 

would start to go higher. Sure enough the week before they were to start on 8/4 a letter was 

already sent home about a positive case (assuming) it was a faculty staff or someone) Thursday 

8/12 I got a call about a “possible” positive case and the class was dismissed to return in 8/23. 

The next day it was confirmed. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

All in all I believe the school is doing what they can to protect themselves and students. But let’s 

be real kids will be kids and these are full classes. I believe other things could be done. The state 

or DOE has to think about the students that cannot be vaccinated. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Distance Learning 

Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

My child is on track schedule and school started in July. I feel schools should not start without a 

safe health plan.School should not have started without proper planning. Many DOE decisions 

were made after my children's school started and before everyone else started. The decision for 

GE to be excepted for other school that provides DL was made after oir school started. As a 

confused parent, no idea where to turn, bought uniforms and school supplies, while researching 

about homeschool and looking for sometjing affordable. When school first started my child said 

he was sitting right next to other students with no social distancing during lunch. Lunch is a time 

when facemask is off. Sheilds on the table protects your childs food not their bodies. Every week 

there is a letter saying someone was infected. I am terrified and pray to GOD that this person was 

not anywhere near my children (not just 1 child). Vaccines are not FDA approved and children 

under 12 are unvaccinated. Taking care of your health should be #1 priority. These children do 

not belong in an environment that has over 100 people. Vaccinated people on campus may carry 

covid not even knowing. Scary enough to pass it to our children. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

School should not have started as planning for the school year is still on-going. If money is going 

to be spent on sheilds, then it should be protecting a child front and sides. Table sheilds are 

waste of funds as students should not only be protected when leaning forward into desk sheilds 

but also protected when sitting straight up. Every school should have a DL option. Maybe even 

help with homeschool program tuition. An option would be providing a homeschool curriculum 

and be a homeschool program. Under 12 years old should not be in person at school at this time. 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

No matter how sanitized a school maybe, someone can still bring covid to school and from school 

bring it to other homes. Teachers may argue that DL is hard to teach, but if you are a good 

teacher, you find different ways to teach an individual and make learning fun and worthy rather 

than throwing huge amounts of assignments at kids. Parents also need to work with teachers and 

adjust together. Sometimes some parents just need to take a step back from their jobs and assist 

with their child's learning/education. Distance learning last school year was a very good 

experience for my children as well as me and my Kindergartener and it was one of the best 

opportunities. My children got to utilize their thinking skills by figuring out how to follow directions 

and complete assignments online. My Kindergartener was able to get 1 on 1 help from me which 

from not knowing anything to mastering everything. Rather than a teacher throwing an 

assignment saying practice this and try your best, instead I was able to build his confidence in learning how to right on his own. I had the opportunity to see where my child was falling behind 

and execute it right away instead of waiting and monitoring and finding solutions at the last 

minute. Not only could I focus on my Kindergartener, but I could quickly get on top of my 

highschoolers because I know what they are doing as well as what their teachers are doing. With 

that being said, I was able to make sure all assignments were completed. Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Communication 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

> Waikiki Elementary School has done an AMAZING job bringing all the keiki back safely. A huge
> kudos for all the work they have done.

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

We welcome any comments or feedback. Communication 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

Both our kids' two teachers and our principal have been phenomenal communicators thus far. 

Our principal responded to an email of concern about an after-school program not meeting 

required numbers by sending out a school-wide notice with links to register within just a few 

hours. The program then met registration requirements and was able to start, thanks to the 

principal's quick response. Both teachers have provided platforms for parent communication 

(ClassDojo and Classtag, respectively) and lots of information sent home as well on expectations 

and hopes for the new year. 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Keep it up. Go Falcons! 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

Thank you HFSrS for providing this platform for parent and teacher voice! Distance learning 

Health and safety measures (masking, distancing, lunch, etc.) 

Communication 

Please share about your experience with your school during this 2021-2022 school 

year. 

Wish the school has optional for non vaccinated kids to stay at home and the ones who 

vaccinated should be at school. (Middle and high schoolers not sure about elementary) 

If you feel that an improvement could be made to address your concern, what might 

have made your experience better? 

Wish the high school principal communicate better 

We welcome any comments or feedback. 

Wish that the Governor and mayor listen to our voice than worrying about tourists They need to 

do something what they can do with the school. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for Thursday, August 19, 2021 BOE General Meeting at 1:30 a.m., Item VI. 

## A.   

> 2 messages
> Lynn Otaguro <lmotaguro@yahoo.com> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 11:12 PM
> To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

To the Board of Education, 

I am attaching my testimony as a member of the Hawai'i for a Safe Return to School.  I apologize for its 

length, but it includes the stories of parents, teachers, and others. 

Thank you, 

Lynn Otaguro   

> BOE testimony 8-19-21 Safe Schools.docx
> 41K
> Lynn Otaguro <lmotaguro@yahoo.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 11:26 AM
> To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

August 18, 2021 

Board of Education 

State of Hawaii 

Regarding August 19, 2021 BOE General Meeting at 1:30 a.m., Item VI. A. Presentation on opening schools 

for the 2021-2022 school year 

Honorable Chair Payne and members of the Board: 

I am submitting this in my personal capacity. 

“Better dumb than dead.” 

I am borrowing this quote from a Facebook comment.  I don’t remember who wrote it, but it was probably a 

parent.  And no, no parent wants their child to be dumb.  But in this pandemic, parents would choose a child 

who has suffered “learning loss,” over having them become very sick, having long term chronic conditions, 

or dying.  They know that children can recover the missing lessons, but not from some of the consequences 

of catching and possibly spreading COVID-19. 

Safe and healthy schools as a goal.  Thinking about this brings to mind the purpose and mission of our 

schools and the implicit promises we make when we invite children onto campus.  While most would agree 

that schools should be places where students learn and develop the skills so that they can do well in this 

world, even more fundamental is that in fulfilling this goal, schools should be places that are safe and 

healthy for students. When our schools open their doors to students for in-person instruction, we say that we are providing this 

place.  It is our responsibility to make it so. 

This goal of having a safe school should determine our decisions and our actions.  If we place 

importance on keeping students safe during this pandemic, then our health and safety guidelines should 

reflect that.  For instance, they should reflect the fact that the Delta variant spreads more quickly in a room, 

and they should provide the protocols to contact the families of all students who spend class periods in a 

room with a positive COVID-19 case. 

This goal of having a safe school should guide our interpretation and implementation of health and 

safety guidelines.  If those in our schools know that health and safety is our goal, then we would expect 

them to apply the guidelines in a way that best promotes safety.  As an example again, in contacting families 

of students who are in a classroom with a positive COVID case, there should be less concern about parsing 

the provisions on distance between students or the time period spent together.  There should be more concern 

about letting families know about the risk, so that they can watch over their children. The guidelines should 

be taken, not as rules to be implemented in a way that avoids responsibility, but as guidance to be applied in 

a manner to better protect health and safety. 

Some schools are approaching health and safety in a way that looks to the purpose of the guidelines.  Those 

principals carefully look at logistics and develop systems and plans to make things safer.  They enforce mask 

wearing and other protocols.  They communicate information and expectations to their families and 

communities.  They are proactively planning for increased distance learning, should the need arise. 

However, we know this is not true for every school.  Unfortunately, for example, there are reports that at 

some schools, mask wearing is not enforced and that sick students are not sent home.  Guidelines are 

implemented in a mechanical way, that does not appear to consider the reason for the guideline or the 

consequences of such a mechanical approach. 

With these issues, however, rather than only looking at the individual administrators or schools, we should 

be looking at things systemically.  Responsibility for implementing health and safety protocols, throughout 

this pandemic, has been pushed down to schools without adequate training or support.  Systemically, more 

support needs to be provided and additional help needs to be given, for example, in the form of additional 

professional development, training, consultation on school plans, walkthroughs to check plans and 

implementation, review of and consultation on ventilation, and the sharing of checklists and exemplars. 

Making schools safer at this moment should be paramount.  As the message of values often travels top 

down, it needs to be made clear that making our schools safer is paramount at this time. For instance, we 

should not be looking at COVID case counts in schools like a student with a bad report card to be explained 

away, but as information to be used by us all to work on dealing with those cases.  The importance of health 

and safety at this moment must be communicated by this Board and by the DOE, in message and action. 

To address the issues of COVID in the schools, it is time to include the community, school staff, families, 

and all the people who anxiously want our schools to be safe and to succeed, and to provide information, 

frank assessment of the circumstances, and education, so that our schools can receive input and help.  In that 

way, we can work together to make things better, so that no parent will need to say, “Better dumb than dead.” 

Thank you for your consideration. 

Sincerely, 

Lynn Otaguro 

Oahu, Hawaii August 18, 2021 

## To DOE Board Members: 

## I was an elementary school counselor in the DOE for over 20 years. My Ph.D. 

## is in marriage and family therapist I am now retired. I did the research, 

## testified before the legislature and wrote the bill that changed the 

## kindergarten cutoff date that has put Hawaii’s public-school students on a 

## more even footing with the rest of the students in the country. I have always 

## been a child advocate. I have been a child advocate for children in Hawaii 

## since 1975 when I first took a job with the DOE. 

## The current situation with the delta virus requires decision makers to realize 

## this is a new pandemic. You must act now to save lives and prevent the any 

## further suffering of our students. 

## At the very least steps must be taken to protect elementary school students 

## immediately starting with suspending school for those students who are 11 

## and under until they have been vaccinated. I just saw Dr. Peter Hotez 

## (https://www.bcm.edu/people-search/peter-hotez-232290 on television who 

## reported that Louisiana and Texas 2 weeks ago there were 1 or 2 children in 

## pediatric ICU’s now there are 30+ and soon once school starts in Texas there 

## will be many more. 

## A 16-year-old student in Florida died of the delta virus last Thursday. We 

## need to learn and learn quickly from the mistakes that others have made 

## before we put our children at further risk. Stop treating this new variant as 

## the same old covid 19 virus. I can’t imagine the pain a principal or parent has 

## as they have a conversation about a student who has become infected with the 

## delta variant or a student who has died. Are you willing to have that 

## conversation with a parent? 

## The local news last week reported that 30% of the cases in Waianae are now 

## children. There will be significantly more if you don’t act now. 

## Current data shows vaccinated people who are asymptomatic can transmit 

## the delta virus without knowing they are infecting others. That’s why wearing 

## a mask is so important at this time and why the surge is so dramatically large. Please disregard the noise from the right and do what is right for the students 

## of Hawaii strongly advocate for the suspension of school until all students can 

## be safely vaccinated and the delta surge has passed. 

## At the very least steps must be taken to protect elementary school students 

## immediately starting with suspending school for those students who are 11 

## and under until they have been vaccinated. 

## The data are pouring in everyday to support suspending school until all are 

## vaccinated and the delta variant surge has passed. I realize that in order for 

## the Board of Education to take this position it will take courage but that is 

## why you are there, you have the power please lead. 

## Regards, 

## Dean R. Liskum August 19, 2021 

PARENT TESTIMONY 

Dear Board of Education, Chairpersons, and Superintendent, 

I am a parent of a middle schooler and two high schoolers in the Central District area. I 

am writing on discussion item A. Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 

school year. 

We have seen a surge in cases recently and there has been no action taken to keep our 

kids safe. No change in guidance, no change in protocols, no talk about switching back 

to distance learning, nothing. This has been extremely discouraging and disappointing. 

We will not be sending our kids back in person and risk their lives or ours. Employers 

are being urged to work from home if possible, meetings are being held virtually 

because it’s not safe, the unemployment office just announced they will not be opening 

up as planned for in-person appointments due to the rise and concern for their director’s 

health. Why are we being forced to send our kids into school when the environment is 

much worse than the places above? 

We got our fourth letter sent home yesterday from one of my kid’s schools. Three of 

those letters were sent within 5 days. Multiple cases. And these numbers were not 

included on the DOE’s weekly covid reporting website. In fact, many schools were 

missing or case counts were not correct. What are they hiding? 

Everyone in my family eligible for the vaccine was vaccinated as soon as we became 

eligible. My youngest is only 11 years old and will not be eligible for the vaccine till the 

end of October. 

The decision to fully open schools was a total shock to us. Schools shut down for less 

cases and now we are told we must send our kids back to 100% in-person school. We 

have been doing our part since March 2020, following the safety guidelines 

recommended by infectious disease experts. Staying home and only going out for 

essential needs, not hanging out with others, not gathering, wearing our masks properly 

indoors and outdoors, washing our hands, staying away from crowds, not being indoors 

with others unless it’s essential, etc. There have been many tough decisions we have made over the past 17 months and 

now we are supposed to just go from our safe bubble to sending our kids back to 

in-person school in mass crowds with other students and adults. Schools do not have 

the capacity to follow all of these guidelines we’ve been taught to keep us safe. Why are 

schools exempt from not gathering or being indoors for extended periods of time? Why 

are we sending our children into an environment that we have been told to avoid? The 

decisions being made and what is being allowed is appalling. Teachers are already 

overwhelmed and the burden of making sure 20-30 kids in a class are following these 

rules is not fair. This is not a regular back to school type of situation. This is a life or 

death situation and once the virus spreads it’ll only get worse. 

When will those making the decisions to send kids back to school visit all the schools 

while classes are in session to see for themselves what a typical day looks like? I keep 

hearing things like schools can control spread because of the layers of mitigation 

strategies. Really? I’m sure you can imagine what recess looks like at a high school. All 

students are released for recess at the same time. There is no separation or designated 

areas for grades, ALL the students are free to roam wherever they please. It’s crazy! 

Why are adults urged to work remotely if possible and holding meetings virtually 

because it’s not safe but kids are being sent to school like there is no pandemic? 

My freshman came home from school the first two days crying. The first day she was 

shaking. She was furious at the lack of care and from what she witnessed. My 

sophomore couldn't sleep last night because she didn’t want to go back. She doesn’t 

feel safe. They were as shocked as we were going back to in-person learning but they 

trusted what was being told to everyone and thought it would be safe and controlled but 

it wasn’t. The first day I dropped off my freshman to her orientation day and the crowd to 

check in was crazy! It was a mob of people with no social distancing and no markings or 

signs on the ground or posted anywhere. There were no adults monitoring the crowd. 

They were excited to return to school and get interaction with teachers and classmates 

but not like this. My girls do not like to miss school so for them to come to me and tell 

me they couldn't sleep because they just can’t set foot on campus under those 

conditions, it was very hard. I am heartbroken that no one is speaking to the wellbeing 

of children going into this type of environment when COVID-19 is spreading with the 

DELTA variant. The health and well-being of children should be a priority over academic 

gains. Who cares if they are behind academically if they end up dead?! This makes no 

sense. Please do something! We are fortunate that my youngest daughter’s school is providing distance learning for 

her by using packets and google classroom. They even let us borrow a device so she 

can do her work. 

I have two kids with an IEP and two with a GE. The decision to choose distance 

learning is a no-brainer but hard because no IEP services if they are not on campus full 

time. Homeschooling is an option we may need to seriously consider soon but I would 

hate to detach from our schools and lose my kid’s IEP”s and GE. 

We should not be in this situation having to make these decisions. Those in charge of 

keeping our kids safe during a pandemic that is killing people or leaving those infected 

with long covid and lifelong organ damage should be the ones making the call to not 

open schools. Again, why are we being forced to send our kids into an environment that 

we have been told to avoid since March 2020? Things are opening up because people 

are demanding it, but is it essential? Money over lives is not right, especially risking the 

lives of our children when they have no choice or say in the matter. Up to this day, no 

one has asked us as parents or our children how we feel or what we want or if we feel 

safe sending them back to school. Why don’t we get a say? 

Please consider the children. How many of their lives need to be sacrificed before 

anyone does anything? Some parents are waiting for leaders to step up and switch all 

kids to distance learning. They are afraid of pulling their kids out and keeping them 

home. This will result in sick kids bringing home the virus to their families and some of 

them will die. Please take action now. 

Respectfully, 

S.L. 

Mother 

Central District 

O’ahu, Hawai’i August 19, 2021 

STUDENT TESTIMONY 

Dear Board of Education, Chairpersons, and Superintendent, 

My name is Dakota, 13 years of age, and I am a freshman enrolled at Mililani High 

School. I’m writing this letter as a concerned student for both my peers and me. I 

understand that there have been COVID-19 safety precautions set by both the state and 

school. I have witnessed precautions not being followed with the right amount of 

attention. I’ve seen multiple holes in this sheet of "protection" you try to put over us. 

Multiple students not wearing their mask correctly, no proper social distancing methods, 

desks not 6ft apart, not even 3ft apart, no proper sanitation methods, etc. 

With this, I believe I have a right to speak my mind, as I've said before, in concern for 

my fellow peers and me, I can't understand the amount of stress you feel in these hard 

times, but I can understand that there can be better ways to make Mililani High School 

safer. 

These ways being multiple supervisors during both lunch and recess. Properly setting 

up classrooms, having proper sanitization methods for every class - for humans and 

objects, educating staff and students properly on COVID-19, if possible, etc. There are 

so many ways we can be sure to keep our school safe and protect the ones we love. 

In reality, my family is at high risk of getting the virus. We have health and cultural 

disadvantages at this time, and there are so many others like my family and me. People 

who have health problems (cancer, asthma, etc.), cultural disadvantages, age 

disadvantages (12/younger), health care problems, trouble with proper safety in these 

times, etc, all these people fighting for their lives. If you have students or students with 

families with struggles such as some named above, it's your duty to step forward and 

protect them. And at this point, it feels like it's my duty to protect them too. These kids 

are defenseless against the words of the upper hand, but you need to understand that 

some of us understand too. We all want to protect ourselves, our families, our friends, 

and our fellow citizens/beings, but we can't do that if we don't protect ourselves first. So 

please, and this isn't a plead anymore it's a stand, take control. There were 1,167 cases 

last Friday. A THOUSAND. Those victims of COVID-19 being grandparents, parents, 

wives, husbands, mothers, fathers, workers, and most of all children. Those children 

being kids, grandkids, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, they could be workers, even 

mothers, and fathers, but also students. So many students, and some yours. Some of those students are fighting for their lives, but you can prevent that. Make our school 

safer, their school safer, and make us feel at home again. 

With these words, I hope you can understand my worry for the students of your school. 

Thank you for reading this letter, all you have to do now is take action. 

Sincerely, 

Dakota L. 

13 years old 

Student 

Mililani, HI O'ahu 

Freshman at Mililani High School 

Central District Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Our Schools are so Fragile! 

1 message 

John Fitzpatrick  <john.fitzpatrick@k12.hi.us>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:24 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha Honorable Board of Education Members, 

I am a teacher at Maui Waena Intermediate School and am so happy to have my students back in person learning 

because it is so meaningful and engaging. Their personalities are expressed and they love being with their friends 

learning here at school. 

That said, our schools are extremely fragile and if 80% of teachers were not vaccinated I imagine many more would be 

closed. We have a serious teacher shortage crisis that needs to be addressed. I would suggest you put pressure on the 

governor to use Federal Rescue funds to put all teachers on the step that they should be at. This way we can attract and 

retain teachers. I would also encourage you to increase substitute teacher pay and make the process to become a 

substitute an easier process because of our substitute teacher shortage. Here at our school all our subs are filling long 

term vacancies and we barely have subs to fill in if we are sick or need to quarantine. 

I would encourage the BOE to make the DOE provide a standard for telling teachers and students if they are close 

contacts. At some schools like mine our principals come in and ask us for a seating chart and if we are vaccinated. That 

is our notice that we were likely within 6 ft. for 15 minutes or more. At other schools entire classes are shut down. I know 

there are different situations with different solutions, but having more guidance would be extremely helpful. 

At our school our administration is really strict on masking and I really appreciate it because our students are amazing. 

They wear their masks all day for 7 hours and we have no crazy Karen's that refuse to wear their masks. 

It would be really nice if there were testing options at school. If we are vaccinated and we find out we are close contacts I 

would like the opportunity to take a rapid test here at school. This would also be beneficial for our unvaccinated teachers 

that now need to take tests weekly to insure the safety of our students and fellow faculty members. 

The last thing I ask is that you tell principals to do virtual staff meetings until the community  spread of covid 19 is under 

control. At our school 80 staff members meet in the library. Many of our teachers feel uncomfortable and that it is not wise 

to meet with all teachers in the library at this moment because the delta variant spreads so easily. We let our principal 

know and the only option she would give us was to meet in the cafeteria which I do not think will ease the nerves of those 

staff members. 

We love doing what we do best, teaching in person. We want to be here taching but we just want safe schools that our 

students deserve. Mahalo for listening to our concerns and taking action to direct the DOE to listen to their educators, 

respect their educators, and create a safe learning environment for our students and faculty. 

Mahalo, 

Fitz 

This is a staff email account managed by Hawaii Department Of Education School District.  This email and any 

 iles transmitted with it are con  idential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they 

are addressed. If you have received this email in error please notify the sender. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Open schools 

1 message 

D. MULLEN  <ddmullen@mac.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:49 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

General Business Meeting Aug. 19, 2021 

Diana Mullen 

To all, 

Please keep our schools open. Our children need to continue their education. Both of my children claim they feel they 

didn’t learn or retain much online learning this past year and a half. 

It was a waste of their precious learning years. 

I would also beg that you not include the ridiculous liberal narrative that I am hearing is coming out in the classroom now. 

Stop telling our children that it would be in their best interest to take a shot that has not been approved by the FDA. And 

not a hastily approved one either. These are our children, not yours. 

Our children should not have to be penalized for the mistakes of our Governor. Had they begun testing incoming tourists 

and residents in June of 2020 as Alaska did we could have kept the outbreaks to minimums. The current mistake of not 

testing the vaccinated to come into our state on July 8th is the obvious reason our numbers have doubled every week 

since. Please advocate to our Governor to revert back to testing All incoming tourists and residents now, so that we can 

reduce our cases and continue with in person school. 

It is disheartening to see how far left the DOE is leaning. The liberal addenda should not enter our school systems. 

Aloha Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

4 messages 

michael montoya  <mikeym.girl@hotmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:28 PM 

To: "testimony.BOE@boe.Hawaii.gov" <testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Hi, my name is Mikey Montoya. I am a parent of an elementary school st udent here in Hawaii.  I feel that even with the 

COVID numbers going up, our kids really need face to face edu cation. With masks and  social distancing I feel our kids 

are safe in the classrooms. Please keep the kids in class! Thank you  so much. 

Get  Outlook for iOS 

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:42 PM 

To: michael montoya <mikeym.girl@hotmail.com> 

Thank you for contacting the Board of Education.  This email address is specifically designed to receive public testimony 

for upcoming Board of Education meeting agenda items. Attached please find the links to the most recent agendas for the 

Board's Human Resources Committee, Finance and Infrastructure Committee, and General Business Meeting scheduled 

this Thursday, August 19, 2021. Please identify what agenda item your testimony is related to or it will not be included in 

public testimony. 

August 19, 2021 Human Resources Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 Finance and Infrastructure Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 General Business Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

Mahalo, 

Board of Education Staff 

> [Quoted text hidden]

michael montoya  <mikeym.girl@hotmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:02 PM 

To: Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

General business meeting ( student achievement) 

Get  Outlook for iOS 

From:  Tes  mony BOE < testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov >

Sent:  Wednesday, August 18, 2021 12:42:50 PM 

To:  michael montoya < mikeym.girl@hotmail.com >

Subject:  Re: Tes  mony 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:20 PM 

To: michael montoya <mikeym.girl@hotmail.com> 

Mahalo for your email. 

> [Quoted text hidden] Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Agenda item School safety   

> 4 messages
> Cheryl B <burgharc@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 9:03 AM
> To: Testimony BOE <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov>

## As a retired educator, it is deeply concerning to me how rapidly the community has begun personal attacks 

## on educators for what is a systemic issue.  There should be no sides on the paths to making sure ALL 

## people on our islands are safe and have the resources needed to take care and live their lives.  It is 

## important that the BOE and DOE have clear guidelines and paths, which up until now there have not been. 

## HOW can we be two years into this situation and still not have a better path for our keiki?  Take down the 

## lens of the system and think about what we can do as humans. 

## Realizing that there are no paths to please everybody, I would hope that the  BOE will be supportive of the 

## individual teachers who are working under extreme conditions while trying to take care of their own families 

## along with those families who are making positive efforts as well in difficult situations. 

## Educators have always been on the front lines of every societal issue that occurs.  As you know, safety 

## doesn ʻt just come from protecting against Covid, there are all the other  ʻsafety ʻ protocols as well.  Imagine, 

## working so hard on all of these pandemic issues,  and the emotional  toll of having parents single you out 

## for a systemic decision while having to watch an active  shooter drill in which you ʻre told to use a mask to 

## stop bleeding.  Preparing lessons, seating charts and having some students who are  hungry or have 

## special needs in some way without proper sanitary conditions and ventilation (because it was that way 

## before Covid), this is the real world of today ʻs educator. 

## There are so many people with the resources, time and energy who want to help forge forward with new 

## paths, lens (example the Pineapple Academy), yet here we are again. 

## My heartfelt plea is that you do something before someone is physically hurt.  People are receiving 

## harassment and threats.  This should not be an individual ʻs responsibility to take on, it should be their 

## employer who has put them in the situation.  Don ʻt wait until something horrible happens.  Our community 

## is divided and it ʻs affecting every aspect of the educational community.  When we no better, we have to do 

## better. 

## C. Burghardt 

## Retired educator    

> Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:03 PM
> To: Cheryl B <burgharc@gmail.com>
> Thank you for contacting the Board of Education. This email address is specifically designed to receive public testimony
> for upcoming Board of Education meeting agenda items. Attached please find the links to the most recent agendas for the
> Board's Human Resources Committee, Finance and Infrastructure Committee, and General Business Meeting scheduled

this Thursday, August 19, 2021. Please identify what agenda item your testimony is related to or it will not be included in 

public testimony. 

August 19, 2021 Human Resources Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 Finance and Infrastructure Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 General Business Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

Mahalo, 

Board of Education Staff 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Cheryl B  <burgharc@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:07 PM 

To: Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

VI.  A

Thank you 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:29 PM 

To: Cheryl B <burgharc@gmail.com> 

Mahalo for your email. 

> [Quoted text hidden] Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony for 8/19 BOE Meeting 

> 4 messages
> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:43 PM
> To: "Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov>

Dear Board of Educa  on, 

I am a high school teacher, and I am very concerned about the current situa  on that all students are back to 

school in person, but we do not have strict and clear protocol and guidelines in our school to protect our 

students and teachers. I do not feel con fi dent  telling parents that we are doing our best to protect their kids 

when they called me to express their concerns. 

First, we do not have a consistent protocol when we have positive diagnostic students with COVID. 

Not all closed contacted teachers were informed by admin. I received information from colleagues, 

but not admin about my students got positive diagnostic.  To be sad to say, I stayed with those 

students for more than 45 minutes every day, and yet, I was not informed and considered closed 

contact.  Importantly, no one asked me for a closed contact list when I knew who those students 

sat and hung out with. Importantly,  it is impossible for my classroom to have a minimum 3fts sitting 

arrangement. Therefore, students are sitting right next to each other. This is very disappointing for 

teachers, and we can't trust our admin to protect us and creating a safe working and learning 

environment for students and employees. 

Second, there is no strict guideline during passing and recess. Students take off their masks and 

hang out in the hallway, and surprisingly, they are allowed to do that when we have at least 500 

students try to get to their classroom at the same time.  Our school hallway is indoor and has poor 

ventilation. I am very concerned about this because students can be infected by passing through 

the hallway to their classes. 

Third, our mask-wearing policy is not consistent with each teacher. Some teachers allow their 

students to take off their masks in their classroom during class time, but some strictly follow the 

policy. The inconsistency of the mask-wearing policy opens  up gates to students feel it is fine not 

to wear a mask in the classroom. This is extremely dangerous for everyone in the classroom. 

As teachers, we can try out best to protect our students, but we need strict and clear guidelines and policies 

to follow. This is a war that requires everyone's e ff ort! We need the DOE to set strict and clear rules that 

require all schools to follow to protect  everyone. 

Best    

> Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:46 PM
> To:
> Thank you for contacting the Board of Education. This email address is specifically designed to receive public testimony
> for upcoming Board of Education meeting agenda items. Attached please find the links to the most recent agendas for the
> Board's Human Resources Committee, Finance and Infrastructure Committee, and General Business Meeting scheduled
> this Thursday, August 19, 2021. Please identify what agenda item your testimony is related to or it will not be included in
> public testimony.
> August 19, 2021 Human Resources Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov)

August 19, 2021 Finance and Infrastructure Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 General Business Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

Mahalo, 

Board of Education Staff 

> [Quoted text hidden]

To: Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Sorry for the inconvenience. 

Agenda: August 19, 2021, General Business Mee  ng 

Tes  mony BOE < testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov >

Re: Tes  mony for 8/19 BOE Mee  ng 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:29 PM 

To: 

Mahalo for your prompt response. 

> [Quoted text hidden] Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## TESTIMONY General Business Meeting Aug. 19, 2021   

> 2 messages
> Mireille Ellsworth <ellsworthhsta@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:31 AM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Aloha Chair Payne, Vice Chair Uemura, and Board members, 

My name is Mireille Ellsworth, teacher at Waiakea High School in Hilo and a public education activist as one 

of the leaders in the Hawai’i for a Safe Return to Schools Facebook group, the Hawai’i Teachers for 

Change, and the Hawai’i Badass Teachers Association. 

I am currently on leave, which is the unfair and discriminatory “accommodation” given to me under HIDOE’s 

Office of Civil Rights Compliance as I have underlying health conditions that put me at extreme risk if I were 

to catch COVID-19. As a person who may very well need my accumulated sick leave in the future because 

of my health conditions, I am being forced to “burn through” my sick leave to keep myself safe from the risks 

of teaching in-person. 

Last year, my principal kindly granted me telework, and I taught from home the entire school year. I had 

extraordinary success teaching 10th and 11th grade English, speech, debate, and acting. My acting class 

performed two plays live online, which I was able to record on Zoom, and I had the least failures 

percentage-wise in all my classes with the distance learning mode of instruction mostly because my 

principal trusted me to be present for my students in creative ways, like individual and small group 

conferencing during class time, which enabled me to work with struggling learners who really needed the 

extra help and very much appreciated the one-on-one attention I was able to give them. When teaching 

classes face-to-face, it would be impossible for me to give those struggling students that same level of 

attention since it would require (and has required in the past) that I keep the rest of the class occupied while 

I focus on one student (or a small group). In the face of the restrictions required in the classroom with 

COVID protocols, I would be unable to monitor mask compliance to focus on individual students with the in-

person model; and therefore, struggling learners would not get the attention and help they deserve. 

This year, I am appalled by the lack of preparation the HIDOE has done to keep students and education 

employees safe. Air conditioned indoor spaces in schools were not equipped with the recommended MERV-

13 filters that help prevent transmission of the virus. Teachers were not given training on how the Delta 

variant is so much more transmissible than the original coronavirus, nor were they trained in how to place 

fans in their classrooms to maximize air circulation while at the same time minimize blowing aerosolated 

COVID particles across the room increasing transmission of the virus. A fifth grade teacher told me that her 

custodian came in her room and took a CO2 reading BEFORE students came to class! That defeats the 

purpose of a CO2 monitor, which is to measure the concentration of exhalations when the class is full! 

Where is the training for custodians and others given these tools that HIDOE has invested in? 

Another point of concern is the use of ceiling fans, which are common in school cafeterias and are also in 

some classrooms. Experts recommend that if ceiling fans are to be used that they be put in a “reverse” 

setting. Otherwise, the aerosols just get “swished” around and pushed downward where children are eating, 

MASKLESS! Ceiling fans used improperly defeats the purpose of physically distancing and the use of 

plexiglass or plastic partitions can actually HINDER the natural flow of air which is optimal for the prevention 

of spreading the virus. What is even more scary is when schools are having students eat in classrooms! This must STOP immediately! Taking off masks indoors is a recipe for disaster (as we are seeing in our 

communities now). 

The federal ESSER III funds were MEANT to be used to make our schools safe, not just to “address the 

learning loss” (which is a concept I reject since kids learned OTHER things, like technology skills, resilience, 

appreciation for school, that may not entail traditional academic subject matter). However, air conditioned 

spaces on school campuses have not been fitted with the recommended MERV-13 filters that help prevent 

the spread of COVID. There are “do-it-yourself” versions simple to make with duct tape, MERV filters, and 

box fans. Instead, many teachers are finding box fans delivered to their classrooms with no guidance as to 

how to use them. 

Finally, I’m getting tired of receiving reports of principals trying to cut corners (not MY principal). One 

horrifying example is shortening recess in an elementary school to 14 minutes so that if a student were to 

get infected, the other students wouldn’t be considered “close contacts” using the outdated CDC definition 

of “close contact,” which is being within 6 feet of a person who has COVID for 15 minutes or more over a 

24-hour period. Trying to use LOOPHOLES to reduce reporting of exposures is just simply unconscionable. 

This kind of thinking will lead to deaths or cases of long COVID, adverse medical conditions for life. 

I am begging the BOE to do the following: 

Expand distance learning opportunities for students. 

Create a temporary reassignment mechanism for teachers (like me) who are taking leave as part of 

their ADA accommodations (Beth Schimmelfennig, head of the Civil Rights Compliance Office will 

have those names) so that we can teach online from home (telework). 

FUND the Office of Facilities and Operations so that they can purchase and contract upgrades in 

indoor spaces with ventilation challenges and air filtration needs to meet ASHRAE standards (Mr. 

Randall Tanaka should know what this is!). 

Purchase mass amounts of quality KN95 masks in childrens’ sizes and distribute daily, especially for 

our low income, unvaccinated keiki. 

Mahalo, 

Mireille Ellsworth   

> Mireille Ellsworth <ellsworthhsta@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 25, 2021 at 1:18 PM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov
> Resending
> [Quoted text hidden]

My name is , and I teach high school in the central district in Honolulu. I am speaking to Discussion item IV, A. 

Every week there are COVID cases at my school, which results in the afflicted students and those exposed to quarantine. When students are in quarantine, there is no instruction. Students are out for ten days, and some may get cleared early. At one time, we had 52 students quarantining; this is insane. 

The students are back as if there is no pandemic. There is no social distancing and no safety. I am concerned about my unvaccinated students. Last week I took two COVID tests to ease the stress. 

Governor Ige announced on August 10, 2021, limiting social gatherings to 10 people indoors and 25 outdoors. How are we, as educators, expected to interpret this executive order? I show up every day to teach under conditions that violate the governor's executive order when there are 28 and more students in the classrooms and no social distancing coupled with unvaccinated students. The perfect setting for the Delta Variant. Our lives matter! 

Our educational leaders and the governor insists on in-person learning, and the message that resonates is for folks to get vaccinated. Yes, that is fair and well, but we have no control over when high school students get vaccinated. What we can control are the learning platforms. 

The distance learning platform for many families remains cumbersome. It doesn't seem very easy for the parents to navigate the distance learning choice. Why is it so difficult for students to get this option? Our principals and teachers are tasked with so much already. Please give the schools the resources to create their own distance learning department. Providing this option will create smaller in-person class sizes, and teachers and students can breathe again. Thank you Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony to BOE for 19 August 2021 meeting: Open Letter from HfSRS 

2 messages 

Burke Burnett  <burkeburnett@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:02 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Dear Chairperson Payne and Hawaii Board of Education members, 

Please an Open Letter from our group Hawaii for a Safe Return to Schools, signed by 463 Hawaii residents, attached 

here in PDF. 

We are respectfully submitting this as written testimony for tomorrow’s BOE meeting, under Agenda item VI.A 

“Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year”. 

Mahalo, 

Burke Burnett and members of Hawaii for a Safe Return to Schools 

Open Letter to BOE from Hawaii for a Safe Return to Schools - 18Aug21.pdf 

293K 

Lynn Otaguro  <lynno1177@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 11:17 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov, boe.hawaii@boe.hawaii.gov 

Cc: burkeburnett@gmail.com, Dianne L <dlimtam@gmail.com>, Lynn Otaguro <lmotaguro@yahoo.com> 

To the  Board of Education and  staff, 

I am writing because I was looking at the posted testimony and noticed that the testimony of Hawai'i for a Safe Return to 

Schools, an open letter and petition, was not included,  even though it was sent at 12:02 p.m. yesterday.  I am forwarding 

that letter to you here.  Please let me know when you have received it or if you need anything more. 

Thank you, 

Lynn Otaguro 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Open Letter to BOE from Hawaii for a Safe Return to Schools - 18Aug21.pdf 

293K An Open Letter from Hawaii for a Safe Return to Schools 

August 1 8, 2021 

An open letter* to: 

Hawaii Governor David Y. Ige 

Hawaii State Department of Education Interim Superintendent Keith T. Hayashi 

State of Hawaii Board of Education Chairperson Catherine Payne 

Members of the State of Hawaii Board of Education 

From: Members of the Hawaii for Safe Return to Schools group 

Subject: The Safe and Healthy Schools Hawaii Deserves 

* Adapted in part from ‘The Safety Our Students Deserve’ open l etter from the Hawaii State Teachers 

Association, August 12, 2021 

The first weeks of the 2021 –22 school year have been extraordinarily alarming as COVID -19 cases soar to 

record levels. Our total cases have doubled in Hawaii approximately every 10 to 11 day s, and our hospitals 

are already overwhelmed. Unless bold steps are taken immediately, this trend will continue. Continued 

inaction by our state government will soon be seen as morally, socially, and politically disastrous. To put it 

bluntly, your current Covid policies are untenable. 

The Hawaii Department of Health (DOH) has acknowledged that Covid transmission will happen in schools. 

We are aware of hundreds of reports of health and safety guidelines, including proper masking and social 

distancing, not b eing enforced in our schools since the school year began. Reporting and notification from 

schools remains inconsistent. Furthermore, a lack of personal protective equipment, improper ventilation, 

and other outstanding issues have not been addressed, nor ar e there apparent plans to address them. 

The frequent, seemingly across -the -board, failures by schools to adhere to DOH protocols for COVID -19 

ultimately hurt the education we all believe is essential for our keiki, but it will also, inevitably, contribute 

to increased community spread of the disease. A scientific study in the journal Science estimated that in -

person school opening “is indirectly associated with a 26% increase in SARS -CoV -2 transmission”. 1

Among the immediate steps that need to be taken, we express our strong support for the Hawaii State 

Teachers Association (HSTA) and the Hawaii State Department of Education (HIDOE) to negotiate a new 

memorandum of understanding (MOU) that will ensure safer practices in public school classrooms. Because 

teachers are on the “front lines,” monitoring student health and safety protocols, we believe they must be 

empowered to fight for the health and safety of our keiki. And because schools are a likely source of 

disease transmission, by extension, teachers are also critical guardians of the health of our wider 

community. The previous MOU that expired on June 30, 2021, provided critical protections that helped 

ensure safer classrooms in the first COVID -19 wave dur ing school years 2019 -2020 and 2020 -2021. We are 

dismayed that the State has refused to bargain a renewal and update of this MOU for the 2021 -22 school  

> 1M. Monod et al., Science 371, eabe8372 (2021). DOI : 10.1126/science.abe8372

year. We call upon our state leaders to direct DOE to meet HSTA, without preconditions, to renegotiate t he 

document and address these urgent concerns. 

# Parents and educators know that our schools are not safe 

In a recent survey conducted by HSTA, over 80% of responses by educators expressed “serious concerns” 

about how unsafe conditions were and continue to be in public schools. Parents have also echoed the same 

concerns about the lack of safety protocols in the public schools, especially with the removal of previous 

mitigation strategies like 6 ft. of distancing or the previous thresholds for when the school s should move to 

an alternative learning mode (namely Hybrid or full Distance Learning). These thresholds, with the same 

metrics, should be reinstated immediately. 

Further, we are aware of numerous pleas from teachers and parents about inadequate PPE supp lies in our 

schools, despite the fact that Major General Kenneth Hara of the Hawaii Emergency Management Authority 

(HIEMA) has said that nearly $100 million has been spent on PPE, and that they have ample supplies. It is 

both inexplicable and unconscionabl e that those PPE have not yet been allocated and distributed to our 

schools. 

We are also aware of hundreds of parents who are extremely frustrated with the scarce number of 

Distance Learning slots that are available --only 390 initially allocated for a popu lation of over 175,000 

students enrolled in HIDOE. These are often working parents who don’t want to put their children’s or 

family’s lives at risk by sending them to in -person classes, and yet they don’t wish to undermine our public 

school system by withd rawing their children from enrollment to homeschool them. However, an increasing 

number of parents are left with no other choice than to submit Form 4140 to their schools and stay at 

home with their children in order to keep them safe. How is it that Dista nce Learning options that existed 

from March 2020 to May 2021, when the pandemic was less serious and threatening than it is today, are 

even less available now? This failure to provide a safe option for families is outrageous and completely 

unacceptable. 

Governor Ige must order HIDOE to immediately offer Distance Learning options to any parent who wishes it 

for their child. Anything less is unacceptable, and a violation of equitable access to educational 

opportunities funded by taxpayers. 

# Guidelines for so cial distancing, masking, and sanitation are 

# not followed 

We are particularly dismayed by DOE’s lack of leadership and clear guidelines with regards to safety protocols. 

Each principal is essentially forced to make his or her own decisions, which may or may not adhere to DOH 

recommendations. This has created numerous examples of staff, teachers, and students not all being on the 

same page with those DOH protocols. Safely opening schools requires a unified message about what 

procedures are required of ALL classrooms and ALL students. 

Unsafe cafeterias and classrooms 

An example of how the safety of students is endangered is the lack of DOE guidance for how schools must 

devise and adhere to safe protocols for meal times, which are often held in inadequately v entilated 

cafeteria spaces when students are by definition maskless and often unable to socially distance themselves 

from others. This violates every known mitigation protocol to prevent the spread of this disease. Another common complaint from teachers an d parents is the fact that social distancing is often impossible 

under current mandates. From classroom arrangements where students have no choice but to sit shoulder 

to shoulder at the same table to crowded cafeterias and impromptu gatherings to socialize with friends, the 

potential for transmission has risen significantly with all students back on campuses. Returning to hybrid or 

blended learning models, while imperfect, would at least allow less classroom density (and thus a modest 

mitigation of transmis sion risks). 

Uneven adherence to mask wearing is another critical problem. There are numerous reports of students 

who repeatedly refuse to wear them correctly (or at all). There are even a few anecdotal reports of 

teachers who refuse to wear masks, and whe n students and their parents protest, the principal simply 

reassigns them to another class. This is obviously completely unacceptable. 

There are also many reports of students coming to school with symptoms consistent with Covid, yet when 

teachers report i t to their school administration they are told that “the student had a doctor’s note for 

allergies from last year, so it’s fine”. In other cases, nurse aides are given the sole authority to either send a 

student who is ill home or to make them return to th e classroom, simply because their parents requested 

it. Further, students who are ill have reported that they were asked by their parents to lie in order to pass 

the morning wellness check. Just saying that “schools are safe” does not make it so. 

Lack of notification, inconsistent response and reporting 

As cases in Hawaii rise, so too are the cases being discovered in our schools. Yet we are seeing inconsistent 

responses when these cases occur. For example, one school might quarantine an entire class while another 

school might only quarantine a tight radi us of students, even though both sets of students may have had 

multiple interactions inside and outside the classroom during the school day. One parent said: 

“Yesterday our school let one of the siblings of a Quarantine child come to school. I thought thi s made 

no sense. They live in the same Household they should both be quarantine.[sic.] I feel like there are 

not a lot of guidelines in school keeping our kids safe. What is there [sic.] Definition of close 

contact???.” 

Numerous parents and educators have also pointed out that known positive cases in their schools (as 

confirmed by individual principal’s letters or voicemails) are not accurately reflected in the weekly 

reporting of cases on the HIDOE website, as is now required by law. 

Poor ventilation 

Des pite DOE’s empty assurances that classrooms are adequately ventilated, there is ample evidence that 

this is not even close to being an honest or factual assessment. There are countless reports of classrooms 

being stifling spaces with poor airflow. Moreover there is little guidance from school administrators, who 

often leave ventilation at the discretion of teachers, but without any resources to do so. Given that most 

students are not wearing N -95 grade masks but only cloth or surgical masks that do not prov ide adequate 

protection, the poor ventilation and lack of HEPA -grade filtration in our classrooms is a guaranteed recipe 

for classroom transmission of Covid. We understand that major capital improvements would be required 

to fully comply with improved airf low for all classrooms, but without at minimum providing MERV -13 (or 

higher) filtration units for every classroom , Covid spread via classrooms is absolutely inevitable. We ignore the flashing warning signs at our peril 

When COVID -19 first hit Hawaii’s pu blic schools, former Superintendent Christina Kishimoto signed a letter 

of commitment with HSTA to ensure continuity of education through the crisis by addressing the changed 

working conditions. This agreement was later extended for the 2020 –21 school year . Perhaps thinking that 

the Covid epidemic would soon wane, Kishimoto declined to allow a renewal of this MOU for 2021 -22. 

We understand the optimistic thinking that COVID would disappear in the second half of 2021, but that 

optimistic stance was based on a poor and uninformed understanding of the nature of pandemics. More to 

the point, it was extremely ill -advised for DOE to decline to renew and update the MOU for the 2021 –22 

school year. Superintendent Kishimoto made it clear in the Spring of 2021 that sh e expected all students to 

return to in -person learning for 2021 -22 and insisted that safety concerns would be addressed through the 

HIDOE’s own health and safety guidance. This was a dreadfully poor decision. 

The Delta variant is now spreading like wildfi re in Hawaii. The Delta variant is two to three times more 

contagious than the original COVID virus, and doctors and nurses are noting that Delta is creating “younger, 

sicker, and quicker” patients, because it hits younger people, makes them sicker, and ma kes them sick 

more quickly than the original virus. Infections among children have also grown and a recent study 

published in JAMA Pediatrics shows that younger children are more likely to spread COVID within the 

household. 2 Even people who are fully vaccinated are susceptible to breakthrough infections. Children 

under 12 years old still have no access to vaccinations, and some percentage of them who get Covid will go 

on to develop “Long Covid.” Director of the National Insti tute of Health, Dr. Francis Collins, recently cited a 

study suggesting that perhaps as many as 11 -15% of children who are infected may “end up with this long -

term consequence, which can be pretty devastating in terms of things like school performance.” 3 Children 

under 12 years old still have no access to vaccinations, and so in what moral universe is it sensible to 

subject our under -12 children to such possible risks? 

Furthermore, the HIDOE and the Department of Health have removed the learning mode thres holds and 

any contingencies that would be triggered by an explosion of cases, helping to mitigate the rocketing 

spread of this disease. 

The current lack of guidance and enforcement of DOH health protocols in our schools is a recipe for a public 

health disa ster of epic proportions. DOH has acknowledged that COVID will spread in schools. Given DOE’s 

poor enforcement of DOH directives, it seems very likely that they are seriously underestimating how 

widespread the amount of transmission will be. Current DOE po licies will have lethal consequences on 

individuals and their families, as well as immediate and lasting impacts on our health care system, our 

economy, and social and political institutions. We ignore the flashing signs at our individual and collective 

pe ril. 

# We need leadership, not wishful thinking 

It is time for us to come together to make smart and moral decisions that will help keep our communities 

safe and healthy. But this requires your political leadership and the moral courage to do the right thing . We     

> 2Paul LA, Daneman N, Schwartz KL, et al. Association of Age and Pediatric Household Transmission of SARS -CoV -2 Infection.
> JAMA Pediatric. Published online August 16, 2021. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2021.2770
> 3‘This Is Really Scary’: Kids Struggle With Lon g Covid , By Pam Belluck, New York Times, August 8, 2021.

implore you to take immediate, proactive steps, as suggested in this letter, including working with HSTA to 

renegotiate their MOU, and to direct HIDOE to require schools to follow health protocols, and for DOE to 

immediately offer distance learning op tions to all parents. 

We need practical decisions, and without delay. Our current emergency won’t be solved by wishful 

thinking; if we remain on our current path, things will get worse, quickly. We call upon you to act now and 

display the leadership and c ourage we know you are capable of showing in order to protect the health and 

safety of our keiki and our fellow citizens. The loss of even one keiki , one teacher, one parent, or one more 

kupuna - when those deaths could have been prevented with better lead ership - is one too many. 

Sincerely, 

Burke Burnett 

Dianne Tam 

Lynn Otaguro 

Brandon Cha 

Piper Selden 

Mireille Ellsworth 

GB Hajim 

Laurel Haserot 

Faith Carter 

Melissa Kreutner 

Lauren Selden 

Clarice Smart 

Chelsea Cohen 

Jamie -Sue West 

Jaimie Yonemoto 

Dr Bruce Oatway 

Salena Lee 

Valerie Robinett 

Delaney de la Barra 

Johnny Rivera 

Barbara Kauwalu 

Jennifer Baltero 

Lela Joseph 

Bridget Hogan 

Desiree Gomez 

Robyn Trivette 

Cassie Favreau -Chung 

Christopher Howard 

Maxine Broad 

Marshall Lum 

Sheela Castro 

Cheyenne Chavez 

Shanae Hatchell 

Kayla Lim -Tam 

Michael Press 

Valerie Maluchnik 

Aaliyah Castro -Abrojina (student) 

Dennis Castro -Abrojina (student) 

Kira Cheng 

Iris Ruan 

Renesmee Cheng 

Maha Weeks 

Katie Robinson 

Anita Silva 

Diane Favreau -Chung 

Dakota Lee (student) 

Chris Obedoza 

Joni Kamiya 

Aleshanee Lee 

Keoni Dunn 

Brian Selden 

Carrie Demott 

Anastasiya Burnett 

Hayden Lee (student) 

Trisha Pimenta 

Yvonne Watarai 

Johanna Kaupu 

Shirley Yamauchi 

Traci M. Kanoa 

Jenny Nakagawa 

Tanya Park 

Avian Hill 

Owen Nakagawa (student) 

Christopher castillo 

Jennifer M. Stefko 

Janice Eala 

Maelan Azevedo 

Chasity -Lynne DeVera 

Deanne Cha 

Yardley Roberts 

Caitlin Amatore 

Juliana Romero 

Wesley Lum 

Denise Grayzell 

Lisa Lessing 

Rudy Lee 

John Johnson 

Nathan Amatore 

Nicole Grove 

Melody Murata 

Joanne Robinson 

Lisa Johnson 

Monica Nakahashi 

Brandi Perez 

V Kulesa 

Michael Ng 

Kehauonalani Moncriffe 

Cleora Logan 

Enriques 

Leslie Okoji 

Rhea Olsen 

Frederick Nakama 

Dayle Liu 

Suzanne Braun 

Cabreira 

Elizabeth Baclayon 

Ilima Long 

Kanaele 

Katie Minkus 

Julie Anne Lewis 

Shannon Tanabe -Clark 

Duchess Aranaydo 

Sloane Kealalio 

Audrey Wolz 

Emi Takeuchi 

Lynn Byrnes 

Cara Flores 

Katherine Alarcio 

Allison Jackson 

Jacob Jackson 

Ryley Jackson 

Max Jackson 

Calvin Jackson 

Allan Lowe 

Marie Jackson 

Cheryl Goethe 

Justin Delos Reyes 

Laura Tomasello 

Jessica Horiuchi 

Kalelani Ogata Heidi Soriano 

Jeremy Soriano 

Dr. Sheri Yasuna 

David Barry 

Teresita Fuentes 

Jasmine Mathew 

Chanel kaeo 

Candice Aoki 

Kelly E. Duell 

Sarah K. Hofstadter 

Catherine Fernandez 

Kristi Dabin -Moniz 

Dreena Baisa 

Bobbie Seguerre 

Kolina Paaluhi 

Marvie Fernandez 

Ryan Ishizu 

Eric Schrager 

Kris Shirota -Hong 

Kai Duponte 

Stacey Schrager 

Lucie Schrager 

Leah O'Brien 

Brandy Domingo -Naehu 

Ronald Ryan 

Jaynie Moon 

Taylor Ryan 

Judith Ryan 

K Arakaki 

Jenny Shimabukuro 

Carl David Wright Jr. (Teacher )

Ann Hassler 

Tami Sego 

Z. Timtim 

Terez Amato 

Daryl Hiwatashi 

Jessica McFall 

Shanelle Pagan 

Lorraine Yuen 

Mayumi Fukuoka 

Lisa Rafanan 

Dez Akau 

Callie Doan 

Pono Nui 

Maile Murphy 

Raschell Kahele 

Nichole Aea 

Michelle Ito 

Rhonda Ferrer 

Robyn De Leon 

Nomi Carmona 

Lisa Thomas 

Danielle De Longe 

Donna Yamamoto 

Jayne Bush 

Connor Piper 

Taraiah Collins 

Leslie Rosehill 

Lindsey Borg 

Tara Geiman 

Carrie Staiget 

Tiffany Copperfield 

Gisele Prescott 

Alyssa Balderas Silva 

Jenni Clear 

Donna Walker 

Wendy Dagdag 

Del Dagdag 

Trystan Sarono 

Gail Takushi 

Jessica Lee Loy 

Tyla Woods 

Claudia Lockerby 

Janice Avellana 

Tina Taniguchi 

Jen Magoon 

Kandice Kartchner 

William Butler 

Sharlene Teraoka 

Stefanie Serrao - Rezentes 

Andrew Carter 

Dennis Robinson 

Kirstie Campbell 

Casey Awai 

Laurice Panaligan 

Leilani Koshimizu 

Chablis Kekua 

Mike Brown 

Heiki K Wolf 

Matthew Souza 

Jaime Tateyama 

Alyssa Masuda 

Daniela White 

Crystal Gayle P Asuncion 

Jennifer Corpion 

Christine Cosio 

Ania Wood 

Caranthia White 

Denise Cady 

Mike Landes 

Mahana Kaawa 

Gail Norris 

Anastasia Olsen 

Justin Hughey 

Jolynn Grimes 

Reynolds 

Antonio Reynolds 

Robin Hammett 

Saundra Moriyasu 

Gina Kim 

Vanessa Humphreys 

Emily Vacchelli 

Holly San Miguel 

Gladys Baisa 

Stepen O'Neal 

Jacie Miyashiro 

Jason Toya 

Bonnie Palos 

Lorrie Smith 

Kevin Morita 

Ashley Chang 

Jennifer Ueno 

Brettlyn Jameson 

Melinda Fasel 

C Navarro 

Kelli Nakama 

Paige Javie r

Candy Mendoza Soria 

Kaliko Amona 

C. Kuroiwa 

CB 

David Baugh 

Elicery Baugh 

Rebecca Hadley -Schlosser 

Erika Sakamoto 

Teresa Bennett 

Jocelyn Mira 

Erin Trask 

Mauna Kea Trask 

Kim Kaili 

Glendaile Llamelo 

Grace Tan 

Elizabeth Frisbie 

Nicole Ames 

Amy Zolotow 

Jason Zolotow 

Austin Ames 

Bonnie Ames 

Roger Ames 

Jason Ames 

Ashley Pieklo 

Jennifer Bailey 

Danielle Delise M.Ed. 

Brooke Trotter 

J. Chung 

Angel Oasay Phill Russell 

Amber Drake 

Stacy Miyashiro 

Susan A. Pcola -Davis 

Charissa Duff 

Jane Marie 

Dee Dee 

Mitsue Okamura Eldredge 

Julie Morioka 

Danny Morioka 

Ashley Soares 

Rachel Velez 

Karly Kanehiro 

Tina Fukumoto 

Kristin Kealoha 

Jamie Listman 

Keala Nordmeier 

Mark Prazoff 

Eliberta Harbottle 

Leilani Blankenship 

Shane Blankenship 

Rhian Campbell 

Maria Lla mido 

Belinda Dolor 

Catherine Sophian 

Carrie Keike 

Gary Hultquist 

Douglas Moises 

Vanessa Duterte 

Roy Asher 

Katherine Barthels 

Kanani Elaban 

Michele Nakama 

Cheryl Orallo 

Kimi Ramos -Valdovinos 

Triana Baclayon 

Charmaine Moises 

Angeli Peneyra 

Susan Rubenstein 

Ronson Sahut 

Melissa Alfiler 

Gloria Bandsma 

Christine Bandsma 

Serina Souza 

Russ Josephson 

Tiffany Reynolds 

Tammie Pacek 

Melissa McCormick 

Ivee Yamada 

William Showalter, MD 

David Settlow 

Jocelyn Mira 

Tiffany Reynolds 

Ta'Niyah Reynolds (Stud ent) 

Antonio Reynolds Jr. (Student) 

Thomas Croly 

Anastasiya Kamaletdinova 

James Torres 

Lynette Troutner 

Darin Ujimori 

Emi Sakamoto 

Juliana Higa 

Mary Medeiros 

Akiko Fujimoto 

Joey Delima 

Marina Gamatero 

Duane Dantiago 

Doris Dantiago 

Sage Santiago 

Trudilynn Contrades 

Melissa Fletcher 

Kourtney Pfoor 

Kristen Young 

Pamela Walton 

V Shimamura 

Kevin Johnson 

Kamuela Kalai 

Michelle DuBach 

Laura Smith 

Teri Wilkinson 

Christian K Christophersen 

Melody Hall 

Natasha Arquines 

Yiping Hashimoto 

Teri Horiuchi 

Cori Webb 

Ku’ulei Ka-ne 

Jennifer Nill 

Kimberly Lauzon 

Matthew Lauzon 

Valerie Harjo 

Corinne Mokiao 

Susan Ryan 

Amanda Kaahanui 

Tia Moeai 

Cheryl Caffrey 

Dayna Mann 

Brianna Enriquez -Cabalis 

Carrie Sutherland 

Jane Torricer 

Wendy Kagawa 

Maile Freitas 

Summer Holwegner 

Kelli Bolger 

Jennifer Ann Morrison 

Hermenigildo Tesoro, Jr. 

Yvonne B. Banogon 

Patrick O'Reilly 

Natalie Haneberg 

Tsesume Ocana 

Nichelle Obar 

Marie Domingo 

Richard Harder 

Doris Kenui 

Ryan Haneberg 

Robyn Kalauli 

Rick Kalauli 

Richard Fernandez 

Kristel Wilkinson 

Ileana Carreno 

Joy Kaaz 

Claudia Imperato 

Barbara Goodman 

T Engleman 

Joyce Lazaro 

L. Quisano 

Adele Johnasen 

Colleen Yago 

Althea Shiotsugu 

Kanani Dutro 

Lorraine Keohuloa 

Jonelle Davis 

Dolly Andrade 

June Norris 

Ashley Matsuno 

Dulcie Yano 

Shannon A. Martinez 

Sharyl Seino 

Sabrina A. Martínez (student) 

Keoni E. Martinez 

Zoe M. Martinez (student) 

Janet Banasihan 

Mrs. Judy Ann Vegas 

Lesley Rabot 

Marie Gonsalves 

Stephanie Block 

David Contreras 

Sarah Glendon 

Mary M Horwitz 

Paula Ninio 

Tanya Figueroa 

Wade Hashimoto 

Lisa Fernandez 

Tiffaney Brooke 

Holly Kristiansen 

Linzy Hashimoto Rene M. Muraoka 

Mara Hanson 

Ihilani Buffett 

Shelly Marcello -Vina 

Cruz Vina III 

Jennifer Lynn (Primary Health Care   

> Provider &Parent )

Pam Lake 

Denise Robinson 

Dionisia Robinson 

> Valerie Janikowski

Brandi Chanthathep 

Maile Hayashida 

Philbert Seguerre 

Doug Seelig 

Mary Sullo 

Nicole Souza 

Kristen Schiffman 

Reynold Marcello 

Ken Farm 

Rianna Castro 

Kathy Kawabata 

Alex Oasay 

Euclid A. LoGiudice 

Kiyomi Abut 

Teresa Evangelista 

Jeffrey C. Goodman, M.D. 

Jamie Yabes 

Amanda Contreras 

Helena K Costa 

Shelby Furtado 

Malia Vasallo 

TOTAL: 46 3 signatures as of 

Wednesday 18 August 2021 at 

11:59am. We will be accepting 

signatures until Friday 20 

August. 

Cc: Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission Interim Executive Director Yvonne Lau 

Hawaii Senate President Ronald D. Kouchi 

Hawaii Speaker of the House Scott K. Saiki 

Hawaii House Education Committee Chairperson Justin H. Woodson 

Hawaii Senate Education Committee Chairperson Michelle N. Kidani 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Chairperson Donovan Dela Cruz 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Senator Jarrett Keohokalole 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Senator Michelle N. Kidani 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Senator Donna Mercado Kim 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Senator Sharon Moriwaki 

Hawaii Senate Special Committee on COVID -19 Senator Kurt Fevella Distance learning option needed: 

> The day before schools opened face to face, a majority of my cases involved children and
> school staff, with a lot of vaccine breakthroughs. The day before that, I was running all over
> town to get my child approved for a GE, since my ENTIRE complex offered no DL option.
> We got in but they’re using k12Stride. That is not an option. It is homeschooling.
> The program describes itself for young kids,”

As a parent, you …. serve as your child's 

Learning Coach. You'll work with your child's teacher to help record student attendance, 

monitor mastery of online lessons and assessments, and in some grades, review 

student work. 

Younger students need considerable Learning Coach support.” 

That is homeschool with a DOE curriculum. Are you putting parents on payroll? 

We need a safe, fair, equitable option for all children. This is in no way acceptable. 

The core essential strategies used by the DOE, and recommended by DOH are 

ineffective if all mitigation layers aren’t in place. Still missing in a majority of schools is 

real and timely contact tracing, appropriate ventilation, testing availability, enforcement, 

or accountability. DOE says it looks to the DOH for guidance. DOH defers to the DOE or 

schools but does no guidance. 

My child's school reported several cases last week. They are still waiting to be 

contacted by the DOH for guidance, as they were instructed to do by their CAS. We 

need safe schooling and a safe work environment for our teachers and staff. We need 

action on the kids’ behalf. No more lip service. 

Give us real options, such as hybrid learning, distance learning involving a class and a 

live teacher, Public TV broadcasting lessons. Do something. Get creative. Shut the 

schools while our numbers are so high and tourism isn’t stopped. 

Sincerely, 

Covid Frontline Worker, Temporary elementary school teacher, Mom General Business Item VI.A 

Aloha Chair Payne and members of the board, 

My name is Christine Russo and I’m a teacher at James Campbell HS. I’m testifying on Item 

VI.A. I’m concerned about the implementation of safety mitigation measures at our schools and I 

want the board to know what’s happening on our school campuses. 

While generally students are doing a great job masking up, even during their breaks, there are 

exceptions. For some students, constant reminders are needed for them to pull up their masks 

or wear their masks properly over their nose. Additionally, there is inconsistency in universal 

masking due to the fact that masking enforcement is up to the teacher in the classroom. If the 

teacher doesn’t perceive it being important, then it is not enforced and thus there is an absence 

of universal masking. For myself, even if students want to remove their mask to drink water they 

must step outside. As far as I’m concerned, universal masking means constant, 100% masking 

all the time while in the classroom or when around others in geneal. However, as mentioned 

above, this policy is not enforced consistently. 

On that note, teachers are often still being asked to attend in person meetings and the option to 

attend virtually is not explicitly provided. Some of the meetings we’ve been asked to attend 

involve potlucks or snacking and thus disregarding universal masking, one of the most crucial 

mitigation measures the CDC, DOH, and DOE have insisted will keep the school setting safe. 

In addition to concerns regarding discrepancies in universal masking at school, I’m also 

concerned about the lack of ventilation in classrooms and the impossible task of distancing 

students. Most classrooms are sealed up due to air conditioning. For classrooms that are 

completely closed due to air conditioning, there has been no assessment that I know of on 

indoor air quality and no air purifiers have been provided. This is the guidance statement from 

the CDC: 

Make sure your ventilation systems are serviced and meeting code requirements. They 

should provide acceptable indoor air quality, as defined by ASHRAE Standard 62.1, for 

the current occupancy level for each space (Ventilation in Schools and Childcare 

Programs). 

Also, distancing is non-existent due to lack of space. For example, my desks are only 1.5-2 feet 

apart. 

Finally, we’ve had a number of cases on campus already among students and staff. Not only 

that, I have several students quarantined due to being a close contact which means they are 

missing out on their education while at home without access to a teacher. If this continues to 

repeat itself, the in-person education we are aiming for will be thwarted regardless. As the delta variant continues to spread throughout our community and as long as a portion of 

our population does not have access to vaccination, we must move cautiously to keep our 

students safe. It is crucial that the DOE bargain an MOU with HSTA so that parameters can be 

put in place to ensure safety and triggers to move to hybrid or distance learning. 

Continuing business as usual is not appropriate in the midst of the worst surge our state has 

seen since the pandemic began. Please take into consideration the safety concerns I’ve 

outlined above. Mahalo. 

Christine Russo Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## COVID testing 

3 messages 

Joseph Adorno  <joeadorno@mac.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 6:43 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

I am a 73 yer old classroom teacher with severe drug allergies and am a diabetic on insulin.  Taking the “vaccine” is a 

risk for me!  I am willing to be tested weekly but I would like the same courtesy you show those who can be and want to 

be “vaccinated”; Time off to go to a testing site.  Not granting me the same courtesy is discrimination!  Granting time off to 

those who can be vaccinated and denying it to those with health issues that prevent it IS discrimination! 

Please rethink your policy and make it fair for all! 

Thank you, 

Joe Adorno 

Kapa’a Elementary School, Kaua’i 

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 11:05 AM 

To: Joseph Adorno <joeadorno@mac.com> 

Please identify what agenda item you are providing testimony on.  If you do not identify the agenda item, you written 

comments will not be included as testimony. 

Thank  you. 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Joseph Adorno  <joeadorno@mac.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 3:30 PM 

To: Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Sent with Aloha from my iPad 

On Aug 18, 2021, at 11:06 AM, Testimony BOE < testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov > wrote: 

Please identify what agenda item you are providing testimony on.  If you do not identify the agenda item, 

you written comments will not be included as testimony. 

Thank  you. 

On Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 6:43 PM Joseph Adorno < joeadorno@mac.com > wrote: 

I am submitting testimony on the State mandate for vaccination/testing 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony- COVID and schools- No personal information please 

1 message 

Kristin Wolfgang  <mskriswolf@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 3:00 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha e esteemed Board members, 

We understand that HSTA has requested an MOU about COVID for the school year 2021-2022. We support this proposal 

so that we teachers have some expectation of when (or if) we will be shifting to and back from distance  learning. The 

MOU for the last school year clearly defined the expectations for in person school and what teachers should and should 

not be responsible for. It clearly defined nearly everything that schools had questions about. The BOE cannot expect all 

schools uniformly to "do the right thing" in these difficult pandemic days. We must have clear guidelines that can be 

followed by schools and the MOU is what provided that last year. 

That being said, we wanted to give some positive words about how things are going at the school where we work. We 

agree that we want to be in person and to that end we need to follow COVID mitigation strategies. We have strong 

COVID-19 mitigation strategies at our school. We all wear masks at all places on campus and require masks on our 

students. They cheerfully wear them as well, since they know we must do what we can to protect our entire 'ohana. We 

maintain small one class size bubbles as much as possible. We keep the windows and doors open and use our fans and 

air purifiers. We physically distance 6' across class bubbles and to the extent possible within bubbles. 

We wash our hands and make time for students to wash before eating. We utilize outdoor spaces whenever possible. We 

have meetings on zoom so we don't have to worry about physical distancing at meetings. We don't know if it will be 

enough, but we do  know we remain diligently persistent with Covid mitigation protocols, and  we haven't had any positive 

cases. 

From what we experienced last school year, we believe the risk to many of our students' health and well-being is equally 

significant if they are not able to attend school full-time. 

Please create an MOU with HSTA that follows the Hawaiʻi Department of Health Guidance for Schools requiring  schools 

to follow all Core Strategies and allowing schools to apply a formula for implementing Mitigation Strategies that work best 

with each school's unique situation. 

Mahalo nui for all you do, 

Kristin Wolfgang, Barbara Sarbin, Hoku Keli'ikuli, Star Carlin, Taj Gunter, David Wells, Erica Jensen, Davina Pomai 

Ka'aihue, Anna Aoki, Karen Costales, Tamara Morrison, 

Lisa Barnard, Joan Patton, Kim Miller, Aziani Ismail, Matt Warholic, Michelle Chambers, Mara Saltzman,  Laura Warner, 

Lydia Menses Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for a safe return to school   

> 1 message
> Kini Kaawa <kinikaawa@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 2:22 PM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Aloha to whom it may concern, 

I’m a DOE high and intermediate school teacher.  I’m testifying to share some of my 

experiences that concern me this school year thus far. 

Covid preventatives and safety protocols were not a high priority during staff meetings 

prior to the start of school. 

There is no social distancing amongst students… on the bus, before and after school, 

during passing time, recess and lunch. 

Theres not enough classroom space to provide a 3ft distance between students in 

class … admins response is “all we can do is try our best … the priority is to get all of 

the students in there face to face. And if we cannot provide 3ft distance, then we 

cannot, at least we can say we tried!”  There’s no other option to scheduling that 

would help keep classroom sizes safe. I.e. A/B schedule .

My classroom was not disinfected the entire first two weeks of school. Admins 

response blamed the lack of hiring classroom cleaners. Solutions included having the 

teachers and students clean and disinfect tables and chairs. 

There’s not enough security on campus. This is very concerning, jeopardizing 

everyone’s safety. 

All teachers should be tested weekly, not only the unvaccinated. Vaccinated teachers 

should not be discriminated on and left out of the testing requirement. They can still 

catch and spread the Covid just like the unvaccinated. 

Since testing is mandated by our employer, testing and vaccines should be provided 

either on campus or teachers should be allowed to go get tested during work hours 

which will change our schedule.  The employer should pay for tests of individuals who 

are not able to receive free testing.  Some of us teachers have multiple 

responsibilities including but not limited to second jobs, children and family members 

to tend to, etc. By the time I am done with my normal daily responsibilities, testing 

clinics are closed. I will have to request leave from my work to go get tested…I will run 

out of paid leave and will have to request leave without pay just to get tested. 

Ultimately, everyone is trying their best with the directions given. The most common 

response admin provides is having their hands tied…not having the authority to make 

decisions that is best for their own school community. As for our school, it is my opinion 

that we should have not opened our doors until we were ready for a safe return to school. 

The safety of everyone in our school community should be the highest priority. 

Thank you very much for your time. Sent from my iPhone Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony Ref. General Business Meeting discussion item VI-A 

1 message 

Mia-Pia Cummins-Van Herreweghe  <seppaloha@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 2:20 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Mia-Pia Cummins-VanHerreweghe 

Science Teacher at Konawaena Middle School, Kealekekua, Big Island 

Opening of schools SY 2021-2022 

To Whom it May Concern, 

I am a 7th grade science teacher at Konawaena Middle in Kealakekua. 

Since the return of students for SY 2021-2022, we've had several students test positive for CoVid-19 and have had on 

average 8 students out on top of that for close contact. 

In each incident, Admin handled the situation very differently. We were only told who was going to be quarantined of our 

students, we were not informed of anything else. 

When I asked a question if our classrooms were treated, I received a vague answer back from one on our T.A. VPs to go 

look in the protocol guidelines, and when asking for very specific  information, I was given a vague answer  to go look on 

page 22 of the protocol. 

We have 1 principal, 1 HICISL intern VP, and 2 TA VPs, and none of them give the same answer when we ask each of 

them the same question, All together, they don't even have an answer. 

Custodians are not informed of where positive students have sat in classrooms, they are not asked to do any cleaning 

when a confirmed  case is on campus. 

There is no transparency from admin, nor the office staff. 

Currently we are asked to cover classes with no substitute teachers (Subs are not willing to be exposed), make 

assignments for students who are quarantined and stick that in the folders in the office, and teach in-person lessons, 

while the office staff questions what we do and complains about their extra work having to hand the folder to the parents 

when they pick up. 

Common sense, honesty, and transparency is what we are asking for. OUR safety needs to count to Admin too, not just 

having their i's dotted and t's crossed (and okoles covered). 

Thank you for your time, 

Mia-Pia Cummins-Van Herreweghe 

--

“When you eliminate the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the 

truth.”  - Mr. Spock.  Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country , 1991 Lima No ʻeau Career Academy 

August 19, 2021 

Hawaiʻi State Board of Education 

P.O. Box 2360 

Honolulu, Hawaiʻi 96804 

Statement of Lima Noʻeau Career Academy on Agenda Item VI.B., 

“Update on the timeline for and evaluation team tasked with conducting 

the performance evaluation of the State Public Charter School Commission” 

Aloha Chair Payne and Board Members, 

The Lima Noʻeau Career Academy strongly supports the process of conducting a performance evaluation 

of the State Public Charter School Commission, and we encourage you to be thorough in evaluating 

whether the Commission is upholding its statutory mission, whether it is following the law, and whether 

the Commission members and staff are meeting their obligations to the charter school community through 

transparency and public trust. 

When reviewing the material for this agenda item, one thing stood out to us: the Commission was given 

three month’s notice to prepare its performance evaluation response form, and yet the Commission sent a 

letter with two weeks left on the clock to ask for another three months to do the work. 

We hope that the Board of Education will recognize that this request from the Commission is indicative 

of far greater problems within the agency, and we appreciate Chair Payne’s letter to the Commission 

granting only one additional month. Because of the Commission’s history of missing Board-mandated 

deadlines, we encourage the Board to consider what actions to take if the Commission were to not comply 

with the deadline in Chair Payne’s letter. 

According to state law, the Commission’s mission is “to authorize high-quality public charter schools 

throughout the State.” We note with dismay that no new public charter schools have been authorized in 

the past five years. 

This is not due to a lack of applicants. In April 2020, Lima Noʻeau Career Academy was one of 12 

applicants to start new charter schools and meet the growing needs of Hawaiʻi’s students and in the case 

of our school, the workforce needs of our islands. 

Instead of judging these applicants on the merits, the Commission has repeatedly blocked eligible 

applicants from advancing in the process. In three separate appeals, the Board of Education has reversed 

the Commission, finding a pattern of problems and abuse, including violating state law, acting in an 

arbitrary and capricious manner, abuse of power, fabricating reasons, disguising bias, and contriving 

technical errors to reject applicants, and misrepresentations, disingenuousness, and abuse by Commission 

staff. As mentioned earlier, the Board also took the Commission to task for failing to meet the Board’s 

firm deadlines on remand – a deadline issue that the Commission is still experiencing today. 

One would hope that the Commission has corrected its ways and is now focused on its statutory mission. 

However, the Commission suspended the review and approval of charter school applications last year, 

claiming that the Governor’s executive order during the pandemic required the Commission to stop doing 

its only statutory mission – to authorize high-quality public charter schools. While the Governor did not, in fact, give the Commission such an order, the Commission hid behind this 

façade, and circumvented its statutory obligations. Still today, after Hawaii lifted restrictions and the 

Governor ended various executive orders, the Commission has still failed to do its job – to authorize 

charter schools. The suspension of the charter school application process has not been lifted. As one 

Commission member aptly stated during a meeting, they have nothing but time. While high-quality 

applicants come to the Commission to receive an impartial and meritorious review of their application, 

the Commission continues to shirk its responsibilities and block any new charter schools. 

The Commission has also failed to meet its obligations under the Uniform Information Practices Act to 

properly respond to multiple requests for public records and to provide transparency into its proceedings. 

Simple requests such as publicly released documents, Board minutes and agenda, and Board meeting 

recordings have gone unfulfilled. Requests for manuals and rubrics used in the evaluation process for 

charter school applications, which should be publicly available and add to transparency, have also gone 

unfulfilled. The Commission has contended that it does not maintain certain records, which reveals yet 

another area for the Board’s review – whether the Commission is properly maintaining all public records, 

including electronic communications, and responding to UIPA requests in a timely manner. 

To this point, the extension letter from the Commission claims that if they are granted additional time to 

prepare its performance evaluation response form, they will be able to “compile the numerous 

attachments and documentation requested and share and work with the full Commission on this effort.” 

We would like to request the Board to ensure that said “attachments and documentation” will be publicly 

available in a transparent way. 

Moreover, a review of the Commission’s meeting minutes and standing committee meeting minutes will 

reveal to the Board of Education that the Commission does not meet its statutory burden of providing 

transparency into its public meetings. The Commission goes into executive session frequently for reasons 

that are not permitted under state law and further makes decisions and deliberates towards a decision in 

the closed meeting. It then comes out of the meeting to announce its decision without any discussion or 

deliberation on the record. The Commission’s lack of transparency has caused the charter school 

community to lose faith and lose confidence in the Commission. 

As a final point, in one of Lima Noʻeau Career Academy’s appeals, the Board “advise[d] the Commission 

to treat applicants fairly and objectively to avoid any real or perceived retaliation in the future.” While we 

have been vocal in pointing out issues, we are aware that many other applicants have been reticent to 

speak up due to fear of real or perceived retaliation. As such, we also request that the Board consider 

setting up a process to accept public testimony in an anonymized manner during the “public forum” 

process to allow more candor from a broader set of stakeholders. 

In summary, the Board has checked the Commission three times in the past year when the Commission 

violated the law and the rights of applicants. The Board of Education now is tasked with providing a fair 

assessment of the performance of the Commission. Let the record reflect that based on its record over the 

past five years, the Commission has failed to meet its statutory mandate by authorizing zero charter 

schools, by repeatedly violating the rights of applicants and abusing the process, and by failing to meet 

specific directives from this Board of Education, including meeting deadlines such as appeals on remand 

and the three-month deadline to complete the performance evaluation response form. 

Mahalo to the Board of Education for being a sign of hope for the charter school community. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Jennifer Grant  <msgrant2014@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:19 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To: Honorable Catherine Payne and members of the board 

From: Jennifer Grant, Social Studies Teacher/Farrington H.S. 

Subject: Testimony on item VI-A: Presentation on opening of schools for the 2021-2022 school year. 

First off, I would like to say that I have enjoyed seeing my students in person as a teacher this year, I have missed them 

greatly. Last year was so hard for students, teachers, families, admin, etc. Being in-person is of course ideal. 

I am writing you today to express my concerns with the number of kids on campuses, rise in cases, and lack of 

transparency with the number of potential cases that DOE reports out every week. 

Our campus has over 2300 students coming every day. I have almost 30 kids per class. There is no way they can be 

spaced enough. Even if they were, they are kids and once they leave the classroom, they are not socially distancing. Our 

school has been good about enforcing mask wearing but once school is over, we obviously have no control. 

With the rise in the number in cases, it is alarming to me that the higher ups in DOE don’t seem to have a plan in place to 

go virtual. They are going full steam ahead in person even though our numbers are way worse than this time last year. 

Our administration has been forthcoming with any updates they have had which is just keep doing what we are doing no 

matter the cost. To my surprise, I saw our Complex Area Superintendent Rochelle Mahoe on the news saying that our 

complex has a plan. Why is this plan not being shared with administrators at our schools? Why do the teachers who are 

on the frontline not know what the plan is so we can prepare? This is extremely frustrating for all people involved to have 

this lack of communication. The libraries are shutting down temporarily but schools with packed classes can stay open 

this makes absolutely no sense. Why wouldn’t we pause for a couple weeks on cramming our classrooms to get this 

surge down. Why is there no threshold yet? Will it take a teacher or student’s death before this is decided? 

The way cases are counted are also very misleading. There are students that test positive for Covid and they are counted 

in DOE’s weekly count but what isn’t being counted are the number of students that are at home being quarantined. If the 

number of students being sent home/kept home that aren’t testing was known the count would be MUCH higher. 

It is time for DOE to step it up and make the plans known. Come to the bargaining table to figure out the next best steps 

for our students and your staff. 

Respectfully submitted. 

Jennifer Grant August 18, 2021 

To: Board of Education, State of Hawai`i 

Regarding: August 19, 2021 BOE General Meeting at 1:30 a.m., Item VI. A. Presentation on opening 

schools for the 2021-2022 school year 

Aloha, Chair Payne and members of the Board: 

I am writing as a concerned parent with a child in our public school system who has an underlying 

health condition. Like numerous parents across our State, I, too, had plans to return to the workforce 

as my child returned to in-person learning this year. However, after listening to what our local experts 

in epidemiology and our healthcare professionals were saying about the contagiousness of the Delta 

variant, I was torn. 

Can I safely send my child back to school, especially when some important mitigation strategies have 

been removed? It was alarming to find out that the 6 ft. of distancing in the classroom used last year 

had been decreased to 3 ft. or just “whenever possible.” For most classrooms, with this full, in-person 

learning model, it is simply NOT possible to distance properly. Teachers in high schools are reporting 

that students sit shoulder-to-shoulder in their classrooms at shared tables. In Kindergarten classes, 

despite teachers’ best efforts to keep students distanced, the little ones are moving their mats on the 

carpet because they want to sit right next to their friends. At all levels--it doesn’t matter if it’s in the 

Elementary, Middle, or High Schools--masks are NOT being worn consistently . And, we now know 

that the quality of the masks being used may not be sufficient even when worn correctly. Do all the 

teachers and students have the recommended N95 masks? Are they double-masking as 

recommended? 

Other questions I had surrounding the safety of my child in school are as follows: 

● What is the ventilation going to be like inside the classroom? 

● Will there be sufficient airflow so that aerosolized virus particles are not lingering inside the 

classroom? 

● Will there be regular sanitizing procedures occurring throughout the school to ensure that 

fomites are not the way in which students will become infected? 

● What if she has to use the restroom or runs out of water in her water bottle? Are those spaces 

clean and safe for her to use? 

● If there’s a positive case in her classroom, will I be notified in a timely manner? 

● Will I be notified at all if she’s seated more than 3 feet away, but still within the distance that 

the virus can travel, since it’s aerosolized? 

● What if she sits more than 3 feet away, but plays with the infected student during recess? ● If she’s identified as a close contact with another student who tests positive and needs to go 

into quarantine for 10 days, why are her siblings allowed to still go to school? 

● If she gets infected, will she end up needing to be hospitalized and will there be space for her in 

the ICU? 

It was a difficult decision, but I knew that I could not in good conscience send my child back into a 

situation where the risks clearly outweighed the benefits. So, we scrambled to get on the waitlist for 

the Distance Learning option . Since the DOE was not prepared and our leaders decided to put all their 

eggs into one basket, i.e., to only push vaccinations, so many parents were flatly denied the Distance 

Learning option. We got lucky. Many other families did not. 

I don’t understand how the Interim Superintendent, Keith Hayashi, can continue to push the narrative 

that schools are safe, when DOE reported 325 cases last week. (Only 45 were cases from other 

DOE-related offices.) I find it insulting that he manipulates the numbers during his interviews to try to 

paint a picture that those numbers are not alarming. He claimed that only 50 students were identified 

as COVID cases in the schools that required disinfecting. What about the 20 educators who also tested 

positive? Do they not matter to him? What about the 210 schools that did not disinfect their facility 

but still had positive cases? 

Currently, there are so many students who were supposed to be back to in-person learning who are 

now at home because they are required to quarantine. How much disruption to their educational 

process is this back-and-forth causing to them and their families? Does the DOE even know how many 

students are out of school due to quarantine right now? Why is that number not being tracked? 

I urge the Board of Education to consider the ramifications of allowing the DOE to continue to present 

a rosy picture of students being safe and happy to be back in school. In actuality, students are afraid. 

Their parents are afraid. Their teachers are afraid. Their grandparents are afraid. Their aunties and 

uncles are afraid. We turn to the DOE for guidance and reassurance amidst such uncertainty and 

instead of providing leadership and decisive actions, we hear crickets. 

Please hold the DOE accountable for providing more equitable Distance Learning options , so that 

those students who have no other choice but to be in-person can be safely distanced. 

Mahalo, 

Dianne Tam 

Parent Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Kim Virtudazo  <kimvirtudazo@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 1:01 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To the Members of the Board of Education: 

Hello, my name is Kim Virtudazo and I am a 10th year teacher at James Campbell High School. I recently tested positive 

for Covid and today (Aug 18h) is actually my first day out of isolation. I am writing to you, to ask you to reconsider the 

Covid guidelines at our schools. I understand the importance of having students return in person, but we shouldn't do this 

until our state has a better handle on Covid. 

I am fully vaccinated and it only took me three days before I caught Covid from school. DOH confirms that I was infected 

on Aug 5th (at school since I didn't go anywhere else on my possible infected days), had my first symptoms on the 7th, 

and received my results on the 8th. I went into isolation in my sister's room and was away from my family until this 

morning.  The scariest part about this situation was whether  or not my kids caught it from me. I have a 6 year old and a 9 

year old and the fear of them catching Covid from me was terrifying, Having their negative test results made my 

isolation  worth it but yet this situation shouldn't have occurred to begin with. I have a class of 31 students and a class of 

32 students. The desks are 2 feet apart but that's the best I could do. 

Our admin team has been incredible during this time, trying to make things work and safe for us but they can only do so 

much. Like so many parents out there, I am asking for safer schools. I don't have a solution or ideas, I just know we can't 

continue doing what we're doing and expecting a handle on Covid. Thank you for your time and consideration. 

Kim Virtudazo 

ELA teacher 

James Campbell High School Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Sean Witwer <sean.witwer07@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:36 PM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Meeting: General Business Meeting 

Agenda Item: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year 

Position: Oppose mitigation strategies of consistent masking, social distancing, and promoting/mandating 

vaccinations 

My name is Sean Witwer, and I am a special education teacher who has taught in the DOE for 23 years. 

I am opposed to the mitigation strategies of requiring masking, social distancing, and promoting 

vaccinations. These strategies are psychologically and physiologically harmful to myself and students and 

they are not useful. I propose that we adopt a more compassionate approach to this crisis, as advocated by 

the Great Barrington Declaration. 

Here we are almost 18 months into this pandemic and we are still having a problem with covid, and 

seemingly are no better off than when we started. I submit to you that this is because we have adopted 

mitigation strategies that are not useful. 

Masking 

Regarding masking, I'd like to first point out that masking creates an unsafe work environment for myself 

and my students. Our air supply is being restricted through these masks and we are being forced to work in 

an oxygen deficient environment. I challenge all of you to take the time to test the oxygen levels within a 

mask within one minute of placing a mask on your face, and you will see that we are breathing air with 

elevated levels of carbon dioxide, which is a toxic gas, thereby weakening our immune systems. 

I wish OSHA would ensure that we were working in a safe working environment and that a respiratory 

standard for our teachers, many of whom are older, and more sensitive to the effects of a decreased air 

supply, was advocated for. 

I'd like to present a table of physiological and psychological effects of wearing a face-mask and their 

potential health consequences. 

Physiological Effects  Psychological Effects  Health Consequences 

Hypoxemia 

Hypercapnia 

Shortness of breath 

Increase lactate 

concentration 

Decline in pH levels 

Acidosis 

Toxicity 

Inflammation 

Self contamination 

Activation of “fight or 

flight” stress response 

Chronic stress 

condition 

Fear 

Mood disturbances 

Insomnia 

Fatigue 

Compromised cognitive 

performance 

Increased 

predisposition for viral 

and infection illnesses 

Headaches 

Anxiety 

Depression 

Hypertension 

Cardiovascular disease 

Cancer 

Diabetes Increase in stress 

hormones (adrenaline, 

noradrenaline and 

cortisol) 

Increased muscle 

tension 

Immunosuppression 

Alzheimer disease 

Exacerbation of 

existing conditions and 

diseases 

Accelerated aging 

process 

Health deterioration 

Premature mortality 

Personally, I suffered a horrible bout of vertigo about a year ago. Any time I rose up, laid down, turned my 

head, walked upstairs to my classroom, or drove out of the staff parking lot after work, everything would 

spin. It wouldn’t be able to see perfectly for about two blocks. These masks cause headaches occasionally 

for me, and are dangerous to me if and when they trigger a minor episode. 

Next, I’d like to point out that the coronavirus and all other respiratory viruses are spread by aerosol 

particles that are small enough to go through the masks we are being forced to wear. These masks are not 

useful and counterproductive. 

The idea that masking or social distancing is going to reduce any of the outcome of covid 19, is not based in 

science. 

Vaccines 

Regarding vaccines, I believe that we should be advocating for building immunity to covid-19 naturally, 

instead of through synthetic, man-made vaccinations. 

There are two primary ways to build immunity to covid-19, naturally or through synthetic, man-made 

vaccinations. 

When this pandemic began, our government locked our economy down and took away our ability to build 

natural herd immunity to this virus. To make matters worse, they are now trying to force synthetic 

vaccinations upon us. 

I ask, how is synthetic vaccinations superior to building immunity naturally? Why are we doing things about 

this that we didn't do for the common cold or influenza? Isn’t it better for our economy and our citizens to 

resume lives as normal and build natural immunity? 

Vaccines were supposedly going to make all of this go away, but I ask, why do we see a covid outbreak, 

during the summer months here in Hawaii, when Vitamin D levels are at their highest? 

I’d also like to point out that, regarding vaccines, that even communist China and Russia are not mandating 

covid vaccinations. What is going on in America and Hawaii, when Vladimir Putin is showing more respect 

for the rights of his citizens than our leaders? 

For myself, I’d rather trust the wisdom of mother nature, than to put my trust in these man-made 

vaccinations that generate billions of dollars in profit for these drug companies. 

A More Compassionate Approach 

Last, I’d like to offer a more compassionate approach to the challenges we face, outlined in the Great 

Barrington Declaration. I ask that all of you read it at  https://gbdeclaration.org/  before instituting ineffective 

health policies in our schools this year. The Great Barrington Declaration was a collection of epidemiologists, pulmonologists, and immune systems 

specialists who met in Great Barrington, Massachusetts in 2020. They issued their set of recommendations 

against strategies, many of which Hawaii is following, that shouldn't be used because they would be 

ineffective and have great side effects. That declaration has now been co-signed by over 43,000 medical 

practitioners and 14,000 health scientists and workers, leading to over 57,000 credentialed individuals who 

disagree with the opinion of the CDC and NIH, and World Health Organization. 

“The premise of the Declaration lies on two scientific facts. First, while anyone can get infected, there is 

more than a thousand-fold difference in COVID-19 mortality [4],[5] between the oldest and youngest. 

Children have lower mortality from COVID-19 [6] than from the annual influenza.[7] For people under the 

age of 70, the infection survival rate is 99.95%.[8] “

Their position is that the most compassionate approach that balances the risks and benefits of reaching 

herd immunity, is to allow those who are at minimal risk of death(students) to live their lives normally to build 

up immunity to the virus through natural infection, while better protecting those who are at highest risk 

(elderly). They call this Focused Protection. 

For the non-vulnerable, who face far greater harm from the lockdowns than they do from COVID-19 

infection risk, the lockdowns should not be instituted or be lifted and – for those who so decide – normal life 

resumed. 

I would also like to point out the wisdom of this approach to this pandemic referenced within their website. 

There was only one major western country that did not close schools during the height of the pandemic. 

That is Sweden, who kept day-care and schools open for children ages 1 to 15. Among its 1.8 million 

children in this age range, there were  exactly zero deaths from COVID-19  during this time-period, and 

only a handful of hospitalizations. During this time, symptomatic children were told to stay home, or sent 

home if they came to school, but there were  no masks used or physical distancing  at school. 

References 

4 Kulldorff M. (2020) COVID-19 Counter Measures Should be Age Specific. LinkedIn Memo. April 10, 2020. 

https://www.linkedin.com/ pulse/covid-19-counter-measures-should-age-specific-martin-kulldorff/ 

5 Chikina M and Pegden W (2020) Fighting COVID-19: The Heterogenous Transmission Thesis. Mimeo. 

Carnegie Mellon University. March 16, 2020.  http://math.cmu.edu/~wes/ covid.html 

6 CDC (2020) Provisional COVID-19 Death Counts by Sex, Age, and State. Nov. 24, 2020. 

https://data.cdc.gov/NCHS/ Provisional-COVID-19-Death-Counts-by-Sex-Age-and-S/9bhg-hcku 

7 CDC (2020) Estimated Influenza Illnesses, Medical visits, Hospitalizations, and Deaths in the United 

States — 2018–2019 influenza season. Nov. 24, 2020. 

https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/ burden/2018-2019.html 

8 Ioannidis JP (2020) Infection Fatality Rate of COVID-19 Inferred from Seroprevalence Data. Bulletin of the 

World Health Organization. Article ID: BLT.20.265892.  https://www.who.int/bulletin/ 

online_first/BLT.20.265892.pdf Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony on Opening of Schools for the 2021-22 school year 

1 message 

Austin Ames  <aames07@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:08 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Board of Education, 

I am writing as a concerned citizen on Oahu regarding Agenda Item VII "Presentation on the Opening Schools for the 

2021-2022 School Year." 

Let me first just say that I understand the importance of in person learning and the overall development of our children's 

mental and physical health. Education is one of the most important things that we seem to continually defund and 

overlook. With that said, something needs to be done. Due to the surging case numbers and the inaction on behalf of our 

leaders, I feel it necessary to voice my opinion and help you understand that members of the community are watching 

and disgusted. You seem to lack the comprehension of forward thinking and planning, and are satisfied with reacting after 

the fact. 

At the beginning of the current school year, despite the recent surge in cases, there seems to have been little information 

or guidance that makes logical sense. Information coming from the DOE/BOE are in direct contradiction to the science 

and available data. Please explain how indoor gatherings are now being limited to 10 people yet classrooms are full of 

25+ students? Schools are exempt from the 6' spacing and number limitation? That makes zero sense. If you are meeting 

virtually and not face to face due to concerns of the spread of Covid how dare you put the rest of our communities at risk 

by insisting on in-person learning with no other options. 

I think the thing that is most disturbing to me is the lack of planning. Someone in your organization must have realized 

that a surge in cases was a possibility and yet you seem taken aback with the recent developments which is shown by 

your complete lack of action. Was it optimistic to hope that things were going back to normal and the school year could 

start as planned? Of course. But surely there were contingency plans that were at least discussed. If not, that is 

absolutely shameful and near-sighted.  Within a week schools are reporting more and more cases. Yet I see consistent 

confusion by parents, students, teachers and staff when it comes to a reported case. Who needs to quarantine? Who 

needs to be tested? Who needs to even be notified of a possible exposure? Why is there not some blanket information 

that covers all schools? 

In short, you should be prioritizing the health and safety of students, teachers, and staff members. If that is not your main 

concern during a pandemic, then you are completely oblivious to the situation and your roles in leadership. Please get 

your act together and put in plans for hybrid or distance learning that can go into effect immediately. 

Sincerely, 

Austin August 18, 2021 

Dear Board of Education, 

With the alarming rise in Covid case numbers, and as a concerned parent of both a high schooler 

and toddler, I am horrified that the DOE and government officials have been sending our kids to 

school in such an unsafe environment. Despite empty assurances that our children will be safe, it 

is apparent our public schools do not have adequate risk mitigation systems in place to ensure 

safe in-person learning. My son has stated that many of his classrooms are incredibly crowded 

(in some instances, he is seated within elbow-distance to other classmates), and certain classes do 

not keep windows and doors open due to air-conditioning. Our hospitals are at critical capacity, 

court trials are getting postponed, the unemployment office cancelled opening in-person, BUT 

YET WE ARE STILL SENDING OVER 100,000 CHILDREN TO CROWDED SCHOOLS. 

Our school only offers an all or nothing choice: asynchronous, virtual learning, with no teacher 

for the whole year —or in-person and assume kids will be getting COVID…and bring it home to 

infect the rest of the family, including my toddler who is not yet eligible to be vaccinated. This is 

UNACCEPTABLE. 

We know how virulent the Delta variant is, and how its exponential growth is already 

overwhelming our hospital and medical systems. Continuing full, in-person, classroom 

instruction now, without adequate systems in place, is a recipe for disaster. Given that all our 

keiki under age 12 are not yet vaccinated, opening full in-person classes now is incredibly 

irresponsible. To state it bluntly, this will cause additional suffering and death - to the 

multigenerational families those children are a part of, but also, quite likely, to some of those 

children. This is just not acceptable. 

Please recognize this fast-deteriorating public health crisis and offer additional distance learning 

options *with live teachers* for any and all parents who wish to protect the health of their 

children and families. Or at the very least, blended learning, so that classes can actually social 

distance. Because right now my son isn’t even sitting 3ft away from his classmates. 

Thank you for your consideration of this urgent matter. 

Best regards, 

Concerned Parent Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## testimony   

> 1 message
> Katherine Tursi Lee <kttursi@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 11:46 AM
> To: testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

August 18, 2021 

Katie Tursi Lee 

277 Komo Mai St 

Dear Board of Education, 

I am writing this testimony on behalf of the children that attend the Hawaii Public Schools.  We are living in 

unprecedented  times.  Everyone has had to adjust to this new way of living.  We shut down our island to 

protect our kupuna and most vulnerable. The students went a whole year without stepping foot on campus 

grounds.  The children sacrificed for the people of the community.  Now I am asking for the community to 

sacrifice for our children and keep them in face-to- face learning. 

The  benefits of in-person schooling outweigh the risks.  Studies showed remote learning led to an increase 

in anxiety, depression, and suicidal thoughts for school age children.  The children are so far behind in 

grade level than the kids counterparts that attended in-person school. The people who you seek to help are 

only further disadvantaged when kids are attending school virtually.  When students fall behind in the early 

stages of education they never catch up to grade level.  Online learning presents so many challenges.  How 

can parents work and have children at home? 

As leaders and educators of the community it is my sincere hope that our children stay in school in person. 

Sincerely, 

Katie Tursi Lee To whom it may concern, My name is and I am a teacher on Hawai’i Island. On a daily basis, I see students refusing to wear masks and overcrowded classrooms. Each day our students come to campus they are exposed to COVID. When I addressed this with the principal, his response was that students can get COVID while out in the community, so of course they’ll be exposed to COVID while on campus. Our principal’s refusal to inform the community of active cases that have been on campus, add to the myth that the DOE is keeping students safe, and this is absolutely dishonest. The truth needs to be told. Every day we have multiple fights on our campus. These fights inevitably include a massive group of students huddled next to one another, all wanting to watch a fight. The security team does their best to stop these altercations before they happen, but with fights happening every day, the safety of our students and teachers is being questioned by many. Each day at lunch our students pile into the school cafeteria, observing zero social distancing while in line, while masks are seldom worn correctly. Does our community know about this? No. Do they need to be made aware of how dangerous campuses are? Absolutely. I recommend the BOE and DOH make a trip to one of the many campuses in your area. What you will see should make you completely rethink the current learning model you are forcing on our communities. If there is an ounce of aloha and respect in your beings, you will make a shift in our learning models for the sake of the safety of our state. Respectfully, Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony on Opening of Schools for the 2021-22 school year 

1 message 

Nicole Ames  <nicoleames12@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:06 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To the Board of Education, 

I am writing as a teacher at a public high school on Oahu regarding Agenda Item VII "Presentation on the Opening 

Schools for the 2021-2022 School Year." 

Based on surging numbers, I believe that continuing in the current plan for schools is blatantly negligent of the health and 

safety of students, teachers, and staff. 

Since the beginning of the school year, I have seen a lack of preparedness, information, and planning on the part of the 

state.  In schools, despite "mitigating strategies" such as mask wearing, ventilation, and spacing (when possible), 

conditions continue to be unsafe despite the best efforts of schools and teachers. 

Cases are surging in the islands so much so that indoor gatherings are limited to 10 people. Yet, in my classroom (and 

those of my co-workers), students are expected to fill into small rooms of 30+ students that do not allow for more that 1-2 

feet of space between students. Students do not reliably wear their masks properly in class (despite multiple reminders) 

and once class is over, it becomes even worse as students gather,  maskless during lunch and recess. Classroom 

ventilation involves opening windows, but due to lack of budget, we don't have any air filtration systems.  How is it 

considered unsafe for more than 10 people to meet indoors in the community, yet perfectly fine to have more than 30 

crammed into a classroom? The mitigating factors that keep being mentioned as reasons why it is safe are not reliably 

implemented or even possible. When cases do occur, contract tracing and informing has been inconsistent.  I go to 

school terrified every day that I will get a call that I was exposed and despite the fact that I am vaccinated, I am terrified of 

exposing my infant daughter. 

In addition, last year, when numbers were MUCH lower than what they are now, we had thresholds and guidance for 

different learning plans for schools. The fact that these are now being disregarded is completely unacceptable and leaves 

schools and teachers without any guidance or preparation as to how to react to rising numbers. 

To keep going as is and hoping for the best is irresponsible and disrespectful of the health of students, teachers, and their 

families. The state knew that there was a possibility of rising numbers before the last school year ended, yet there is no 

plan for blended or distance learning. A plan needs to be made now for ALL schools that can be implemented 

consistently. We need to prioritize the health and safety of our children, even if it means going back to distance/hybrid 

learning until we can guarantee safe conditions in ALL Hawaii public schools. This is your responsibility to the students 

and teachers of Hawaii and you need to do better. 

Nikki Ames Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## testimony 

1 message 

Rose Glad  <missgladiator@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 10:05 AM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

To Whom it may Concern: 

We have so many students absent who are sick or quarantined that each teacher on my team has only single digits of 

students in their classes this morning. There are so many requests for work to be sent home that we are having to use 

Google Classroom to post assignments in order to not be spending extra hours making, sorting, and sending paper 

packets to the office on a daily basis. We are not doing any further service to the few students attending in person, yet 

virtual classes are not being held for the many, many students not receiving instruction. Virtual classes would allow us to 

instruct everyone. We nailed it last year, let us do it again. The sickness levels clearly demand it. 

Respectfully, 

Rose Glad Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## objection to covid testing/shot mandate for teachers 

2 messages 

mariadonell_thomas@lahaina.k12.hi.us  <mariadonell_thomas@lahaina.k12.hi.us>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 9:36 AM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

I oppose the disclosure of health information as it violates our privacy rights. 

MariaDonell Thomas 

Sent from  Mail  for Windows 

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:15 PM 

To: mariadonell_thomas@lahaina.k12.hi.us 

Thank you for contacting the Board of Education.  This email address is specifically designed to receive public testimony 

for upcoming Board of Education meeting agenda items. Attached please find the links to the most recent agendas for the 

Board's Human Resources Committee, Finance and Infrastructure Committee, and General Business Meeting scheduled 

this Thursday, August 19, 2021. Please identify what agenda item your testimony is related to or it will not be included in 

public testimony. 

August 19, 2021 Human Resources Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 Finance and Infrastructure Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 General Business Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

Mahalo, 

Board of Education Staff 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Maui Schools 

2 messages 

D. MULLEN  <ddmullen@mac.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 9:19 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To all, 

Please keep our schools open. Our children need to continue their education. Both of my children claim they feel they 

didn’t learn or retain much online learning this past year and a half. 

It was a waste of their precious learning years. 

I would also beg that you not include the ridiculous liberal narrative that I am hearing is coming out in the classroom now. 

Stop telling our children that it would be in their best interest to take a shot that has not been approved by the FDA. And 

not a hastily approved one either. These are our children, not yours. 

Our children should not have to be penalized for the mistakes of our Governor. Had they begun testing incoming tourists 

and residents in June of 2020 as Alaska did we could have kept the outbreaks to minimums. The current mistake of not 

testing the vaccinated to come into our state on July 8th is the obvious reason our numbers have doubled every week 

since. Please advocate to our Governor to revert back to testing All incoming tourists and residents now, so that we can 

reduce our cases and continue with in person school. 

It is disheartening to see how far left the DOE is leaning. The liberal addenda should not enter our school systems. 

Aloha 

Testimony BOE  <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:15 PM 

To: "D. MULLEN" <ddmullen@mac.com> 

Thank you for contacting the Board of Education.  This email address is specifically designed to receive public testimony 

for upcoming Board of Education meeting agenda items. Attached please find the links to the most recent agendas for the 

Board's Human Resources Committee, Finance and Infrastructure Committee, and General Business Meeting scheduled 

this Thursday, August 19, 2021. Please identify what agenda item your testimony is related to or it will not be included in 

public testimony. 

August 19, 2021 Human Resources Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 Finance and Infrastructure Committee Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

August 19, 2021 General Business Meeting (Virtual) (hawaii.gov) 

Mahalo, 

Board of Education Staff 

> [Quoted text hidden]

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Boe meeting 

1 message 

Monica Caserta  <honoluamassage@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 8:59 AM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

I’m sitting here in complete disarray. Baffled by the choices of our leaders. First of all a mandate of a vaccine for 12 and 

up which is not fda approved, proved to harm (last weeks numbers according to vaers were at 560,000)not to mention 

taking 12,000 lives! In 1999 they put out a rotovirus vaccine it harmed 15 out of 7000 administered they immediately 

pulled it off the shelves. Where is the integrity in this vaccine ??? For a Respiratory virus that has proven to show 99.995 

% of all children infected live!! I’m under the impression  you highly educated leaders did everyone forget how to do 

math? Id have to say the odds are very good . Second to lock down again … I don’t even know where to start. How about 

the kids who are in abusive homes and the only loving interaction was when they went to school or the kids who are 

homeless kids where school 

Was their only tiny bit of piece of normalcy  in their life . In the past 18 months children suic rate have skyrocketed. 

Please dig deeper in your knowledge of this virus , what’s more important, pleasing your elder government officials or 

doing what’s right for your people!! Our children!! Please look into allll of this . This is bigger than all of of . Look into your 

heart and tell me what is really right? 

Mahalo 

Monica Caserta 

Wellness Advocate dōTERRA 

honoluamassage@gmail.com 

(808)870-1266 Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Ventilation 

1 message 

Kelly E Duell, MA, NBCT  <mauitechgirl@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 8:49 AM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

My room is approximately 700 square feet. The data on this model states it is for a 300 square foot room. 

Here is the ventilator I was given. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Rebecca Marsh <rebeccamarsh108@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 8:16 AM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

## Aloha BOE Members, 

## I am writing to express my concerns about the unsafe practices I am seeing in my school. I am a 

## high school teacher on the Big Island. I have seven classes, most of which are about 30 students. In 

## order to fit this many students, they need to be jammed into two seater desks, which are pressed 

## together in rows. Mask wearing is not consistently enforced on my campus. Every day, I see 

## students and adult staff members walking through campus without masks. I have spoken several 

## times to my principal about my concerns, but still, people are just not masking. And hand washing? 

## Half the time our bathrooms don't have basic soap and supplies. I was provided one lousy spray 

## bottle of runny hand sanitizer and I have no sink in my classroom. Hand washing is not happening. 

## I am sick and tired of watching the governor and DOH officials get on TV and talk about the so-

## called mitigation strategies that are happening in the schools. It is BALONEY, and I think they 

## know it. 

## How much disruption and chaos will we watch before we acknowledge the basic truth - this is NOT 

## working? As of today, I have 19 students who are either in quarantine or are positive with Covid. 

## That means 19 students who are missing their first weeks of school and missing out on relationship 

## building, rituals and routines. 

## Please consider making changes to keep us safe and ensure quality instruction. 

## Thank you, 

## Rebecca Marsh 

## Teacher 

## Kealakehe High School Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for BOE 8/19/21 General Business Meeting, Agenda Item VIa 

1 message 

Jennifer Ueno  <jwueno@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 8:01 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To the Board of Education, 

I am writing as a parent of a public high school student on Oahu regarding Agenda Item VI1 "Presentation on the Opening 

Schools for the 2021-2022 School Year." 

I do not believe Hawaii BOE schools have adequately prepared to provide safe conditions for my child's learning during 

the current surge of COVID-19 infections linked to community spread of the Delta variant.  My child returns home from 

school every day suffering from heat exhaustion.  She is trying to learn while crammed into small classrooms with AC off 

(due to COVID mitigation measures) and only one to two small fans/air purifiers per room.  At least two of her classrooms 

have small windows which do not allow for adequate air of light entry.  In addition, some teachers are choosing to keep 

their room lights off to help with the overheated conditions but make it difficult for my child to follow a lesson in progress 

due to limited visibility. 

Passageways between classes are cramped with students.  Water fountains are open, which my child avoids, but she has 

only found one water bottle refilling station.  On the first day of school, the children were not allowed to sit in the cafeteria 

-- lunch is held for the entire school at one time and it would be too crowded to allow social distancing.  The alternative 

offered?  My child was forced to stand in a group of students in the hot sun for 30 minutes monitored by guards and 

consume her lunch standing up.  She was rebuffed by a guard when she attempted to lean against a wall during this 

time.  The school has made no visible attempt to provide guidance to students regarding the locations of "approved" 

eating areas.  My daughter has since found a group of about 30 students (under guard) who are eating on the 

bleachers... which at least allows her to sit down.  Why is my child being treated like a criminal... or worse?  I believe that 

even criminals housed at OCCC are allowed to sit while consuming their meals. 

Why have funds allocated under ESSER grant not been utilized to better prepare schools for educating our children 

safely under the current public health crisis?  Why are there so few options for parents to pursue distance learning for 

children under the DOE umbrella (not homeschool) when we are now a year-and-a-half + into this pandemic?  The 

excuse that Hawaii schools were pivoting the best they could to evolving conditions held water in March 2020 -- they now 

ring false.  The Hawaii BOE has failed in their duty to plan and implement mitigation strategies that are humane and allow 

our children to safely learn in person.  Current conditions are NOT safe and school should return to distance learning until 

such time as safe conditions in ALL Hawaii public schools can be guaranteed for students.  This is your kuleana and you 

need to do better. 

Jennifer Ueno Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Chris Mione  <cmione79@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 7:53 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Testimony Reopening Plan 2021 

Christopher Mione 

Honokaa High and Intermediate 

Due to the delta variant more and more students are testing positive for covid, quarantining due to close contact or just 

staying home for safety or out of fear.  There is no schoolwide plan to teach students who are unable to come to school 

due to these circumstances.  The instability of the situation at school has had a negative effect on students' mental 

health. I am testifying in regards to: VI.A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school 

year. 

Aloha Hawaiʻi Board of Education and Chair Payne, 

I am David Negaard, an English teacher at Henry Perrine Baldwin High School on Maui. I am in 

my tenth year teaching for the Hawaiʻi Department of Education and my sixth year at Baldwin 

High School. I “pivoted” when schools closed abruptly in March, 2020 and “pivoted” again in 

August when the DoE “plan” for reopening school in the fall was inadequate to the situation. I 

“pivoted” when the school shifted from distance learning to so-called “blended” learning, and 

again this August as we transitioned from that to full in-person learning for this school year. I am 

prepared to “pivot” again should it be necessary to protect the health and well-being of my 

students and their families. 

It has been absolutely wonderful to have full classes in my classroom. We are too crowded for 

best safety, but students are trying really hard to keep their masks on properly and otherwise 

mitigate the risk, which helps some . With lots of big windows open and two box fans (and 

sometimes, strong tradewinds), air circulation is, well, the best we can hope for. I do not know if 

it is good enough. 

We are doing the best we can to keep students safe within the dictates of the DoE, but I am not 

convinced that we are doing well . We have had several reports of students (and staff) testing 

positive for COVID-19 and while it is too soon to attribute cases to school spread, given that we 

have had infected students and staff on campus, it is only a matter of time before we see clear 

evidence that school spread is happening. 

Meanwhile across the state, positivity rates are up, caseloads are up, hospital and ICU occupancy 

are up, all the bad things are up despite decent (if uneven) vaccination rates. It is serious enough 

that restrictions on indoor and outdoor gatherings are being imposed, yet I look out my window during recess and see that a hundred kids are gathered. In my 750 square foot classroom, I see 30 

or more students, each separated from the others by at most three feet (head to head). Who in 

their right mind thinks that students are somehow excused from the way contagion works? 

Well, the evidence suggests that the DoE (and Interim Superintendent Hayashi), Governor Ige, 

and Lieutenant Governor Green think that. Or maybe they are just so committed to keeping kids 

in school that they are willing to let kids get sick, let kids pass illness on to vulnerable family 

members, let people who contract COVID-19 through school spread suffer and maybe even die. 

The conclusion I and others inevitably draw is that for whatever reason, keeping kids in 

in-person school is so important that a few (or even many) serious school-transmitted illnesses or 

deaths are just the price that must be paid (notably, not by the policymakers or their children). I 

remember being appalled when I learned of the Children’s Crusades of European history, and 

when I heard this nationwide push to open schools for in-person learning— no matter 

what —called “The Children’s Crusade for Capitalism,” it hit me hard. 

I want my students in my classroom, but not if one is going to sicken or die. I want my students 

in my classroom, but not if one is going to suffer lifelong guilt because they unknowingly 

brought COVID-19 into a multi-generational home and a beloved elder family member died. I 

want my students in my classroom, but not at any and all costs. 

On slide eight of the Department’s presentation for this meeting are listed “Tier Changes and 

Action Triggers.” The chart on that slide shows that all but one of our islands has a “Community 

Transmission Level” of “high,” marked in red. The criteria that trigger that identification are 

listed as: 

● 10.4+ average cases per per 100,000 or 

● 5.1%+ test positivity 

But the only action identified for the highest level of risk identified is: 

“Cancel or hold high-risk sports and extracurricular activities virtually to protect 

in-person education, unless all participants are fully vaccinated.” 

There is no other action planned or published—only “cancel or hold high-risk sports and 

extracurricular activities virtually to protect in-person education …” (emphasis added); nothing 

about the high-risk activity that is (or could be) in-person education. As if the only high-risk activities are sports and extracurricular activities. As if there is no risk (or low risk) with 

in-person education. 

Meanwhile in settings other than schools, the state limits indoor gatherings to 10 or fewer and 

outdoor gatherings to 25 or fewer. Policymakers are failing the most important reasoning test of 

their lives (with kids’ lives at stake) and they are failing. 

The DoE has not offered sufficient distance learning options for families who, for reasons 

ranging from fear for their students’ health to the risk of exposure to vulnerable kūpuna living in 

the household. The DoE has not published plans to “pivot”—either as a district or by complex 

area or school—to blended or distance learning. The DoE has not provided adequate guidance to 

principals who are trying to keep kids safe while abiding by the terms dictated by the DoE. 

It is inarguable that students have struggled academically, socially, and emotionally during 

distance learning. It is likewise inarguable that dead students cannot benefit from our efforts in 

the classroom, however well intentioned. 

For now, I am deliriously happy to have students in class, but I can read a chart and would not be 

surprised if things get a lot worse before they get better. It is disturbing and frightening that the 

DoE has presented no plan to safeguard our students should things in fact get worse. None of 

us—not students, not teachers, not school staff—signed up to be sacrificial lambs for...what, 

exactly? Why is keeping kids in school so important that the real risks are dismissed or 

diminished, no contingency plans need be made, no provision for the legitimate fears of families 

who, perhaps, have already lost someone to COVID? Could it perhaps be, “the economy?” 

If the economy is the justification for failing to even plan for a safer-at-home contingency, then 

this really is “The Children’s Crusade for Capitalism,” and that is a tragic and damning 

indictment of our state and its leadership. If the failure to adopt contingency plans is a DoE 

leadership failure, that is a different but no less tragic and damning indictment of our school 

district and its leadership. Have the powers that be just declined to take the lesson from past 

failures? If so, then that is failure indeed; presented with an opportunity to learn from their 

mistakes, they instead made the same mistakes again. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for General BOE full board   

> 1 message
> Debbie Anderson <debbievida@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 7:49 AM
> To: testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Agenda item 

VI . Discussion Items  (should be an  Action Item!) 

A. Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year 

Schools are NOT safe! "Teachers shall not be required to work under unsafe or hazardous 

conditions or to perform tasks which imminently endanger their health or safety. When any teacher 

believes that the personal safety of his students or his person is jeopardized or endangered, the 

teacher shall inform the principal who shall take appropriate action." 

The Delta variant is different significantly, far more dangerous. It can spread in 30 seconds, and 

three times the 6 feet. The current working guideline has not caught up with reality. 

On our neighbor islands, hospital beds are full, and makeshift tents are being set up outside. We 

are in HIGH community transmission! 

Physical distancing is NOT happening, particularly at large scale (300 students) gatherings before 

school and during eating times. Students are sitting in double desks without dividers. 

Our classrooms are not being cleaned, much less sanitized. We have NO extra chargers for 

devices, so our 1:1 device program is jeopardized. Students are NOT supposed to share materials. 

PLEASE consider the unvaccinated under 12 include ALL elementary students, and half of our 

intermediate students. We are playing "Russian Roulette" with the lives of keiki. WHY NOT WAIT 

until the vaccine becomes available for these learners? 

Only CERTIFIED contact tracers should be contact tracing, not untrained administrators. When a 

student is identified as a contact, security rushes in and places on their face and N-95 mask. 

They're rushed out the door, without any further communication. There is NOT " Immediate 

# notification." 

Our classrooms are being traumatized; this is NOT quality SEL. 

Teachers are being placed on quarantine leave; we're running out of substitute teachers. Our well-

being is practically nil, as we're uploading proof of vaccination. The non-vaccinated employees 

who have to test are supposed to QUARANTINE while waiting test results. How long can our 

system struggle before it breaks? 

We need more distance learning options. Principals are directing teachers back into 

hybrid/concurrent teaching without sufficient time for preparation. Appreciate your "Discussion," with hopes that it becomes Action before it's too late. We need the 

DOE to be directed back to the bargaining table with HSTA to face the realities of on the ground 

issues rather than pretending. 

A very concerned employee and parent. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony: Presentation on Opening School 2021-2022 

1 message 

Noe Moku  <noemoku@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 7:49 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha, 

I am Noelani Andersen Moku, Parent of a 4th grader at 

Ke Kula 'O 'Ehunuikaimalino. I want to reach out and 

express my concerns about how COVID is ravaging our 

community and how our keiki are still in school, full time, 

full capacity. 

Our school is one of only 2, k-12, Hawaiian Immersion 

schools in the state. We serve 'ohana from Waimea to 

Oceanview on Hawaii Islandw we cover most of the west 

side of Hawai'i Island. We are extremely over capacity, 

170% to be exact. 

We are rounding out our third week in school, and COVID 

exposure is happening daily among our Big Island 

schools, and statewide.  The Governor and 

Superintendent know they are putting our keiki at risk by 

stating they expected keiki would be exposed and yet are 

taking no action nor responsibility by changing current 

protocol. Keiki, 6th grade and younger, including mine, 

are not old enough to be vaccinated and data is currently 

showing that vaccinated people can still contract and 

spread the virus, the virus can spread silently with little to 

no symptoms among vaccinated people and before we 

know it the situation will be out of hand on campus. 

Kona hospital is currently full, there are no available ICU 

beds, or ventilators. We have a few mākua who are 

nurses there and have shared with me the situation is 

dire. Qieens Hospital will no longer take transfers 

because they are full. Hawai'i Island is now at a 

community spread level, where we put ourselves at risk of 

exposure by leaving our house. How can we justify 

putting our kids into over crowded classrooms? 

My son has already missed 5 days of school because he 

got sick 2 days in. It wasn't COVID, but thats a lot to miss 

in the first 2 weeks. Now, I  worry every day I send my son 

to school, and am no longer confident that he is safe, or 

that the DOE as a whole cares about our keiki.  This is a 

reflection of the decisions being made at the highest 

levels of the system. 

As an immersion school, we don't have a nice pre-made 

DL option for us, DL is not offered at all. Our kumu were 

put through the wringer last year. As a parent, I am not 

jumping at the idea of DL my keiki either. There's no easy 

solution. However, the decision to keep them full time in 

school, is a risk I'm no longer willing to take for his 

education. His education will mean nothing if he ends up 

alone in a hospital, on a ventilator (or worse), far from home because Kona hospital is ill equipped to care for 

him. 

Under our current situation, we are far worse off than at 

any point since this pandemic started. 

Our unique DL hurdles where mitigated by Teachers 

teaching simultaneously via Google class room. The keiki 

and kumu are accustomed to this. Since we went all of 

2020-2021 under this model. 

With no DL option in 'ōlelo outside or within the kula, I 

fear that we will have to make hard choices in terms of 

remaining at the kula or removing him from our chosen 

education medium. Which does infringe on our rights of 

fair and equal access to education. So I'm pleading with 

you to help me find a safer solution, not only for my keiki 

but other 'ohana in the same boat. 

Mahalo, 

Noelani Andersen Moku 

Parent Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 8/19   

> 1 message
> Larissa Johnson <johnson.larissamarie@gmail.com> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 7:27 AM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov
> Larissa Johnson
> General Business Meeting

VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. 

Aloha, 

I am writing to advocate for the transition to a safer learning model for our keiki. Every day that passes we 

are seeing unprecedented numbers concerning COVID-19 and our communities. Our keiki sacrificed so 

much last year, just to have it all to be placed in jeopardy now. We currently have a variant circulating 

affecting more children than ever, yet we are requiring them all to fill tiny classrooms, school buses, and 

cafeterias under measures that aren't even currently allowed in the general public. Our efforts to stop the 

spread of COVID-19 cannot magically disappear at the doors of our schools. I am including a link to a 

petition I started to show the support from parents, teachers, and concerned people of our state for a 

transition to virtual learning during this time. 

> http://chng.it/rKmNysKnHN
> Mahalo,
> Larissa Johnson

Aloha, 

I am a 22 year teacher in the Hawaii State system and am writing this testimony regarding the 

Discussion item for the opening of schools for the 2021-22 year . Since you are making 

decisions on our behalf, I feel it only fair to paint a picture of our current reality. 

First I want to say that by no means is our school at fault. In fact our administration went above 

and beyond to ensure safety on campus for our students and faculty, but in my opinion, their 

hands were tied. We wanted to begin in an A/B model, gradually bringing kids on campus in a 

safe way, ensuring all mitigation strategies were in place despite the large school. They were 

told no. As a result, students, many of whom hadn’t stepped foot on a school campus in almost 

a year and a half, converged in masses at one time. We have double desks, which meant many 

students would sit shoulder to shoulder in classes of 25 plus, no sinks to wash hands in every 

classroom, and essentially were forced to “build the plane in the air” on every conceivable 

measure, including what to do when a student came down ill in class. To be honest, three weeks 

into the school year, I’m still not quite sure as measures have changed so frequently. I had a 

student get sick in my class and the student was removed. The family was told she could 

quarantine for 10 days or get a covid test. I am assuming the student opted for the 10 days, as I 

never heard another word. This left me, our class and all of the students she comes into contact 

with over the course of the school day potentially spreading the virus- on campus and at home 

to loved ones. How is this considered a safe return when we don’t even have the information we 

need to protect ourselves? For every student that tests positive, I’m sure the numbers are even 

more staggering when factoring in those who never test at all. 

Here on the Big Island, covid is out of control. When we asked what measure would indicate a 

necessary shift to distance learning for ALL students, we were told nothing would prompt this; 

school would continue in person at all costs. I am ashamed of this lack of planning on behalf of 

the DOE, as I am being told no matter what I will stand in my classroom and face the 

consequences of this terrible decision. All while your meetings continue via Webex, gatherings 

are limited community wide, the public library is closing hours, stores and businesses continue 

to limit numbers, and the list goes on. (Even some charter schools are able to stop the madness 

and protect their students.) The only place it seems we have thrown all common sense and 

caution to the wind is at schools. With children. Our children that we have taken an oath to 

protect. 

This school year has sadly been a disaster from the start. Students should be offered covid 

testing at school when they are ill, teachers should have access to free and regular 

campus-wide testing and NO student should sit two at a table, shoulder to shoulder with 

another. Air purifiers should be in every classroom and for the love of all that is good, keeping 

school open “no matter what” when the healthcare system around us crumbles is down right 

negligent. It is an unsafe learning and work environment and Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs tells 

us that for learning to occur and our students to Bloom we must first have a safe and secure 

environment to begin with. We do not. We speak of the importance of social emotional learning, 

but then not cultivate an environment that perpetuates exactly the opposite. This could have 

negative long lasting psychological and emotional ramifications for years down the line. Every year, for the last two decades, I have stood in front of my class and vowed to teach, 

nurture, inspire and protect my kids. I cannot protect them alone this year. In fact, quite the 

opposite. I feel worried, helpless and struggle to even come to school right now. I beg of you to 

reconsider the “no matter what” philosophy that could lead to loss of life and as well as loss of 

dedicated personnel who cannot look our children in the eyes and continue in good faith to be 

part of this broken system. 

We need you to help us. Please, make this right. Let’s push the pause button and save lives. 

Our safety is in your hands. 

Sincerely, 

A scared teacher Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Written Testimony of a Student 

1 message 

Ava santos  <avadsantos07@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 7:16 AM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Hello board of education, 

As a student one of the most common questions we are asked is “do you feel safe in school?” Many students would reply 

yes but if asked that question now almost all would say no. It’s crazy how us students are risking our lives just to have a 

good education. There is no social distancing in classes. No sanitization of desks between classes. We’ve proved over 

the past year that we students and faculty can function well through online learning. So why are we being forced to do in 

person schooling in a time where the number of COVID cases are higher than what they were when we were doing 

distance learning. It’s also not fair how if you opt to do distance you have no control over what class you take. Many 

students have worked and continue to work extremely hard to get into the classes they’re in now. Having them choose 

between being safe or losing all your hard work isn’t fair to them what so ever. As a student the only thing we should have 

to worry about is doing good in school, but instead we are worrying about our health and everyone else’s. I’ve been told 

multiple times that high school is the time we’re you make some of the best memories. But right now most of my High 

school memories are ridden with stress and worry for my safety and the safety of others. Put yourself in our shoes having 

the weight of everyone’s safety and doing good in school on your shoulders while not even being adults and thing of how 

we’re feeling. I hope you understand our concern. 

Thank you for your time, 

Ava Santos and many other students 

Sent from my iPhone Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## In-person-learning 

1 message 

Schloss Fam  <andischloss805@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 6:22 AM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Good morning! 

2 weeks ago, my 6-year old’s classroom was quarantined for 10 days due to a positive test in his class. I was curious 

about the actual exposure, and had my son tested. He was negative. The school is clearly doing a remarkable job of not 

spreading 

Covid (in my opinion, their restrictions are far too extreme, but we will accept it for now if it means keeping school open!) 

But I’m curious, if someone on a tourist’s plane tests positive days after landing on island, does the government 

quarantine the plane? Or do they allow tourists to roam front street, where our kids are muzzled and socially distanced 

inside? The answer is the ladder. 

Did you know that my child has a greater statistical chance of being killed on the way to school in a car accident than he 

does of being killed by covid? (Car accident: a little less than 1.0%; dying of Covid: .005%) 

School closures make zero statistical sense with children surviving covid at a 99.995% rate. With abuse (almost 14% of 

children experience abuse or neglect at home) and mental illness on the rise (16.5% of children ages 6-17 suffer from 

mental illness), the school is the safest place for many families. It is where children are fed, loved, and of course, taught 

to make a difference in the world. 

Give children a chance to thrive this year. Bring back what we know is good: socialization, touch, attention. Eliminate what 

we know is bad: screen time (DL), fear, distance with peers. 

Andi Schloss 

Sent from my iPhone Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for General Business Meeting 8/19/21 @1:30pm 

1 message 

Katy Parsons  <katy.parsons55@gmail.com>  Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 5:07 AM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Testimony for discussion item VI-A:  Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year .

Aloha, 

With a heavy heart I write this testimony because I am at my breaking point. I would not be at school each day if it weren't 

for the students. Even though I try to do all in my power to ensure my students safety as well as my own I can not control 

what happens even a centimeter outside of my door. Kids want to be kids to play and have fun with friends but watching 

them hang all over one another in eachothers faces with no social distancing once they leave the classroom with 

complete disregard for anyone elses safety breaks my heart. Student misbehaviors are at an all time high inside and 

outside the classroom. There is barely enough room to fit desks in the classroom safely but at lunch and recess we pack 

almost 100 kids at a time into small areas that are overfilled. We have school assemblies of 100+ people. It's absolutely a 

free for all situation. Whole school faculty meetings since day 1 of the school year. Multiple positive cases (students and 

teachers) not being reported to the DOE website. It took 9 days for people to be notified as a "close contact" on our 

campus last week. Communication is lacking, teachers feel unsafe, and administration can't control students outside of in 

classroom instructional times. Please come out and visit schools unannounced and truly see what happens in class, 

period transitions, at lunch, and during recess with students. Then you will have a clear picture of what is truly happening 

in our schools. 

I feel like I am in a war zone and have to choose between giving students a chance at an education where they can be 

successful at learning after a year of frustration or hide in my corner behind a barrier and hope students listen and get 

their work done while I babysit them for 40 minute periods. This is not teaching! This is not learning! We have no plan for 

closure if we do end up with community spread at school. We were the first middle school to open on Oahu and it has 

been very rocky. At what point do you see that teachers and EA's are jumping ship and leaving the school due to being 

spread too thin and the unsafe working conditions we are told to put up with. I reach out to my principal and tell him how 

unsafe I feel and get a response of "Do independent work only, no group work." or "I will consider virtual meetings but it's 

not really feasible." 

I am immunocompromised and have been very fortunate to have doctors that have given me sound advice to get through 

the pandemic thus far. I will be getting my booster shot this week Friday. If it weren't for this opportunity to protect myself 

(I tested my antibody levels and I had only 16 left on a scale of 250+), I would NOT be working much longer due to stress 

and utter exhaustion if not from getting sick in the near future. I thought last year was tough with uncertainty and stress of 

new requirements and routines but this year absolutely tops that and then some. We are not going back to "Business as 

normal" here in schools. 

Listening to the Superintendent give his opening of school presentation was laughable at best. I feel so cheated that there 

wasn't a call for teachers who wanted to continue teaching online and found success in doing so. Leaving distance 

learning as a last minute option for principals to basically put most students on an online platform with no teacher was a 

true discervice. Class sizes are way too big to properly A) teach students, B) social distance, and C) keep everyone safe. 

He has no backup plan for us, there is no threshold for closing, they under report cases, and are endangering lives. 

I implore you to help fight for us teachers and students whose voices have not mattered much this school year! Ask for a 

real plan and thresholds to keep students and teachers safe so we can continue learning and growing together. Even a 

hybrid schedule would be better than what we are facing now! 

Thank you for your time. 

Katy Parsons 

Honolulu District Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## NO PERSONAL INFORMATION 

> 1 message
> Wed, Aug 18, 2021 at 12:33 AM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

No Personal Information 

I am writing to the BOE as a teacher and as a parent of elementary children.  I am appalled at the lack of 

concern for the safety of our children and the community at large.  I am here to tell you that safety protocols 

are not being followed in all schools.  Mask wearing is not enforced by all teachers, or is simply 

disregarded.  Children are sitting close together and are impossible to keep apart.  Administrations without 

any medical or scientific background are making the judgement calls of who is a “close contact”. 

Do you know that you can not even get a covid test on Maui if you have symptoms?  The wait is over a 

week!  I had 2 students out today with fevers and symptoms, but their parents can not get them a test until 

next week.  So all of my students in class are potential close contacts, but because there is no covid test 

available, there are no warnings to the other parents in class.  I am not allowed to warn them if I wanted to. 

How can we keep our schools safe when something as basic as a covid test is not readily available to the 

community? 

I fear for the life of my own elementary school children.  Every day that I send them to school I know I am 

risking their lives.  There are no alternatives though.  Distance learning has been made an impossible 

option, impossibly difficult to obtain by design.  I have about 25% of my students that are home any given 

day (including my own children) because they are sick or their parents are afraid to send them to school. 

It’s time to give up the farce that covid spread does not happen in school.  Not only is it happening in our 

schools, it is a major driving force of community spread on our islands. Now is NOT the time to have our 

schools fully open with no distance learning options!  Our hospitals are full.  Administrations are working 

hours during the weekend making contact trace calls.  Why is this something that is being dumped on the 

schools and not being handled by the Department of Health?  It is total insanity.  What is the actual 

incentive for a school to spend all weekend making contact trace calls?  I imagine many schools would not 

go through the effort.  Just like some schools are rumored to have made recess and lunch periods 14 

minutes long, so that the 15 minute threshold for ‘contact’ is not reached for exposure to a covid positive 

individual. 

The DOE is not equipped, nor inclined to protect their staff or their students.  I am pleading with you to shut 

down schools until covid numbers go down and our hospitals are stabilized.  Make distance learning an 

option easily available to all parents of all school aged children, regardless of their grades, attendance, or 

health status.  Do not penalize students that choose distance learning by excluding them from milestones 

such as proms.  That is punitive and meant as a way to discourage distance learning. SHAME on the DOE 

for trying to bully and strong arm parents into sending their children to school face to face during a 

pandemic.  ACT NOW, before it is too late and we have pediatric deaths due to overcrowded, unventilated 

and unsupportive schools. 

I had a teacher friend that was a close contact.  They could not obtain a test- it was a week wait.  The 

administration told them to come into school because they would be wearing a mask!!!  Other teachers have 

had their entire class quarantined, yet they are still showing up on campus every day!!  Superintendents are 

discouraging the quarantining of entire classes even though they are all close contacts. This is not safe and it is not sustainable.  Please put the health of our children first, close in person learning 

for now.  The DOE’s continued lack of foresight has been tinder on the fire of Delta.  Putting unvaccinated 

children in harms way is inexcusable, and unconscionable. 

> BOE testimony 8.18.2021 - Google Docs.webarchive
> 7386K

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for the General Business Meeting August 19th 

1 message 

Jasmine DeCosta  <jasminedecosta.berkeley@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 11:38 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Jasmine Cheriche Maile DeCosta 

Kohala Middle School 

Mahalo nui for allowing me to share my voice. The safety and welfare of the Hawai'i school system has been jeopardized 

by Covid-19. Educators and students are suffering due to the lack of support from the Board of Education to ensure that 

protocols are maintained for safety. The amount of uncertainty that we navigate through each day is draining and creates 

an environment rich for burnout. Students are feeling the burden of this pandemic. It is hard to learn when your brain 

cannot focus on the task. With schools fully open and Covid-19 cases at their peak it is mandatory the BOE take action to 

protect our community. We know to plan for the worst and hope for the best. Let us use our wisdom. 

Mahalo nui. I am writing this testimony in response to discussion item VI-A, Presentation on 

Opening Schools for School Year 2021 - 2022, to discuss how inadequate the safety 

measures in this presentation are. My name is Shanae Hatchell and I am a teacher at 

Kahuku High and Intermediate School. 

Many class sizes are large, making it impossible for students and staff in the room to 

social distance. My largest class has 29 students and physically distancing a minimum 

of 3 feet is not possible in my classroom. Students are seated in class, just as they were 

pre-COVID-19. The COVID-19 Health and Safety Guidance for School Year 2021-22 

states that [schools should] “maintain at least 3 feet of physical distance between 

students within classrooms, when possible” and to “maintain at least 6 feet of physical 

distance between students and staff, and between staff members who are not fully 

vaccinated, when possible.” The words “when possible” takes the responsibility off of 

the Department of Education to keep our students and staff safe while providing a false 

perception to parents that students are being physically distanced inside classrooms. 

Guidelines in the presentation referenced above also are inadequate and outdated. As 

shown with the delta variant of COVID-19, those who are vaccinated can and have 

been getting infected. They have been spreading the virus. The virus may be spread by 

those who are asymptomatic. Despite this, the HIDOE COVID-19 Health and Safety 

Guidance, linked above states that “People who are fully vaccinated do not need to 

quarantine if they are exposed to COVID-19 and are asymptomatic, which increases 

in-person education.” This puts students and staff at added risk for getting exposed to 

COVID-19. 

Timely reporting of positive COVID-19 cases must be a priority. Those who have been 

exposed must be contacted and this should not be done by “memory.” All possible 

contacts should be informed and given the chance to get tested. Students, parents and 

staff should not have to wait days before being informed of COVID-19 cases on 

campus. 

Every day that I come to work I am afraid. Despite being happy to be with my students, I 

am afraid that even though I wear a mask, frequently wash my hands and have been 

vaccinated, I will contract COVID-19 at work and bring it home to my child, who is still 

too young to be vaccinated. Please update these guidelines to better protect all 

individuals on school campuses. To Chair Payne and the Members of the Board: 

I am submitting testimony on BOE discussion item VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for 

the 2021-2022 school year . I am a teacher at Waianae Intermediate School and I need to tell you 

the truth about how the opening of this school year is really going in a community with very low 

vaccination rates .

I want to start by making it clear that I do believe everyone is doing the absolute best they can in 

these extreme circumstances. But to say that we are prepared for the challenges that operating at 

full capacity are presenting would not be truthful. Teachers are being given directives that are 

unrealistic, unsustainable, and not thought all the way through. I understand that the 

administrative team is doing the best they can to ensure order, safety, and student success , but 

problems are developing too rapidly for them or us to keep up with and key factors for keeping 

our students healthy and safe are not being met. 

Let’s backtrack a moment and go back to Wednesday July 28 th when teachers reported back to 

school. The schedule we were given for the first two weeks with students indicated that there 

would be an A/B rotation with only the 8 th graders coming to campus on August 3 rd and 4 th , and 

only 7 th graders coming to campus on August 5 th and 6 th . The following week was marked as 

continuing with the “in-person only” A/B rotation with both 7 th and 8 th graders attending school 

Monday through Thursday. Friday August 13 th was marked on the schedule as “virtual only”. We 

were also informed that during our admin-directed team meeting time we would have to prepare 

for a virtual orientation event that was to happen on the afternoon of Friday July 30 th , one of the 

two days that were supposedly teacher-directed preparation days. Friday was designated for 

department meetings and team meetings, as well as the virtual orientation, not for individual 

teacher preparation. My team of teachers (4 core teachers) was also notified that we would have 

three in-person sections of our classes and one virtual section, but we were not notified which 

one would be virtual .

The first two days , Wednesday and Thursday, were spent in various sessions where we were 

presented information relating to expectations, procedures, and COVID-related changes to our 

standard operations. We were given “PPE starter kits” and told by one administrator to just ask 

for more disinfectant wipes when we run out and told by another administrator that we have a 

very limited supply beyond what we were given and to please not be wasteful with them. We 

were also told that teachers with tables in their rooms would be required to set up the plexi-glass 

partitions if students would be facing each other. Without the ability to space students out (there 

are only 7 tables to be used by 27 students in my homeroom) I would certainly have to set these 

up. But we would not be getting any additional time or help to set them up. It would have to be 

done on Monday August 2 nd , the one and only day we had free to prepare for students. The 

process of unwrapping each partition, removing the protective sticker from each side of each 

panel, and securing the plastic stands to each panel took more than 2 hours to complete. The next 

morning, several had already collapsed because the sticky electrical that was used to bind the 

panels together (which did not even cover the entire seam) had melted. Luckily I had some duct-

tape in my closet and I fixed the collapsed partitions. I would eventually (after the first day with 

students in my room) have no other choice than to take home all 14 plexi-glass partitions, rip off the electrical tape at each seam, and reconstruct each partition with duct-tape, which I also had to 

pay for myself. When I say I had no other choice, I mean it. We had been directed to keep one 

window and one door to our classroom open at all times to allow for cross-ventilation. But that 

first gust of wind to blow through the room knocked down three partitions. It was a constant 

chore to keep the partitions up and fix collapsed ones that first day and I ran out of duct-tape 

before the day was over. 

Remember that schedule that I stated we were given on the first day that indicated that August 9-

12 would be “in-person only” and that Friday, August 13 th would be “virtual only ”? About 

halfway through the students’ first week of school we were sent a new schedule for the week of 

August 9-13. The new schedule had us teaching both in-person students and virtual students 

Monday through Thursday of that week and that no students were to report to campus on Friday 

but were required to log in virtually instead and need to have a digital assignment to complete on 

Google Classroom . Due to t his late clarification (or was it a complete change?) we had to make 

various adjustments to our plans for the following week. We were reminded that things would 

continue to change with new COVID-related developments and as new information was received 

on various topics (not necessarily COVID-related) and thanked for our flexibility. 

The second week with students started out positively. It was wonderful to have kids back in the 

classrooms! I had started to truly doubt my abilities last year because everything was a constant 

struggle. But having students back at school reminded me of how good a teacher I am and of 

how I truly do love to teach. I was excited to see my kids each day. Students were happy to be 

back in school and interacting with others. I planned several team building and getting to know 

each other activities to hopefully get even the shiest of 7 th graders talking to one another. Things 

were definitely going well, despite a continuously growing “to do list” of admin-directed tasks. 

On Thursday , August 12 th our entire school received an email from our principal stating that two 

students had been recently diagnosed with COVID and that all potential close contacts had been 

notified. The email also stated that impacted areas had been professionally cleaned and 

disinfected. Around lunch time on Friday, an other email went out notifying our entire school that 

two more COVID-positive students had been on campus and that potential close contacts were in 

the process of being notified. This email also stated that impacted areas would be professionally 

cleaned and disinfected. Nearly an hour later our team received a text message from our 

guidance counselor asking us to go see one of our administrators before we left for the day. I 

knew what that meant. 

My VP told me that it was, in fact, one of our students. He told me that the students in that half 

of the cohort had already been notified and that two were going to bring proof of vaccination on 

Monday. He also told me to monitor myself for any potential symptoms but that, since I’m fully 

vaccinated, I would only need to be quarantined if I developed symptoms. A negative COVID 

test would not be required to come back to work. (Side Note: My wife, a federal worker, was 

required to quarantine and provide a negative COVID test prior to returning to work after she 

notified her supervisor that I was a close contact of a COVID-positive student.) The plan that our 

principal had decided on for how we were to teach and support the quarantined students was that 

those students would have to log into our designated virtual class until they were cleared to come 

back to campus. Mr. Nonaka confirmed this plan with me and I went home. On Sunday morning, I set some time aside to make changes to the lesson I had already planned 

in order to accommodate the students who were being quarantined and figure out how these 

students were actually going to log into class if they weren’t students in that class. A flood of 

logistical questions came to me and I asked my team how they planned on handling this. No one 

had answers to the questions I came up with and I was advised to ask. And that is exactly what I 

did as soon as I arrived on campus on Monday morning. Unfortunately, our principal did not 

have solid answers to any of these questions because these were details that still needed to be 

discussed at that afternoon’s leadership meeting. In the meantime , we were to mark the 

quarantined students absent and wait for further directives following the leadership meeting. A

few students did email me throughout the day, confused as to how they were supposed to attend 

class. They were worried about falling behind and I could not help them because I had not been 

given the information I needed to give to them. 

That same afternoon we received yet another email notifying us of another student on our team 

who had also contracted COVID and had been on campus. We were also sent emails reminding 

us that we had to check the “living document” list for each quarantined cohort to see if there 

were any news or developments. It is our professional responsibility to stay informed and make 

sure that if a student from that list came to us before the end of their quarantine period they must 

have a health clearance from attendance. I noticed that this second living document (the 5 th 

school-wide COVID-positive student in two weeks) had the wrong date listed as this student’s 

“last date on campus”. He had actually last been on campus on Thursday, but the document 

stated he was last on campus on Tuesday. I immediately notified my principal, but the error has 

yet to be corrected as of this moment. 

Today, Tuesday August 17th began with a clearer set of directions: individual teachers need to 

email all their quarantined students a link to their Virtual class Google Meets and all assignments 

need to be posted on Google Classroom for both in-person and for virtual students. Luckily my 

virtual period wasn’t until this afternoon, so I was able to send those emails out and make the 

necessary last minute adjustments to still comply with admin-directives. Only two of my 

quarantined students logged in for class. 

Have I mentioned that my classroom has not yet been cleaned nor sanitized? On Monday 

morning, my classroom was exactly as I had left it on Friday afternoon (except that my trashcans 

had been emptied). Nothing had been wiped down. Tiny bits of eraser that had been left behind 

atop a table by a student during period 5 on Friday were still in the same spot on Monday 

morning. Tuesday morning was no different. The streaky finish on the plexi-glass partitions were 

exactly the same streaks left by students trying to help clean their areas on Monday afternoon. 

Will my classroom, a twice affected area, be professionally cleaned and sanitized as the letter to 

families indicated it already had? Or is cleaning and sanitizing my classroom going to be yet 

another added professional responsibility on that ever-growing to-do list? Where is the 

accountability? Where is the transparency and honesty? Why are teachers being forced to meet 

face-to-face in small rooms with no open windows for the sake of “maximizing participation” 

when our most basic sanitation needs are not being met? My students deserve a teacher whos e

primary focus is to create engaging, highly effective lessons. With the amount of pivoting and 

flexibility that is being required of us, the absolute last thing on our to-do list, sadly, is what 

should be our primary focus. Teaching. Simply saying that schools are safe places does not make them safe. And simply saying that we 

are here to support our students does not make us capable of doing so. We are trying our best but 

the added responsibilities this year far surpass those from last year, which were already 

unrealistic. Teachers need additional support to handle the additional requirements and last 

minute changes that continue to occur. And just to be clear about this, we do not need yet another 

PD session aimed to disperse information to us but not give us any time to do anything with that 

information. Additional PD does not equate support. We need more time, daily, to prepare and 

adjust. 

One last concern I need to leave you with is that it was decided by the leadership team on 

Monday that to “support” students losing days in school due to being quarantined, our advisory 

period would be used as a “catch-up” period instead of a period with a dedicated S ocial 

Emotional Learning curriculum. This is extremely concerning, especially since the responsibility 

for monitoring potential social/emotional concerns in students falls on teachers. Last year we had 

a very reactively-sparked PD about how an alarming percentage of our student body were 

conducting Google searches about depression, anxiety, loneliness, and how to kill themselves 

without feeling pain. We were told to be vigilant and to look for warning signs in our students. 

What we were not giving was any concrete proactive approach to help this situation. Why is an 

SEL curriculum being postponed indefinitely when, clearly, our kids need to learn ways to cope 

with the continued negative effects this pandemic has had on their young, adolescent lives? Isn’t 

SEL one of the keys factors in bringing students back to school? 

I invite you to come spend a day with me at school and see for yourself how things are really 

going. 

Respectfully, 

Anne Alves Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## testimony re: school opening 2021-2022 

1 message 

liberty furchgott  <libertypoetez@yahoo.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 9:32 PM 

To: "Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Testimony Re: School Re-Opening Plan 2021-2022 

As schools have re-opened; parents, students, teachers and other on-campus faculty alike have been searching for 

indications that health and safety are the top priorities in our schools, but as we continue into this second full week of 

school with students, it has become clear that simply 'staying the course' has become the actual mantra of the DOE. 

Before our doors opened to students, during our administrator directed days, my school did not even take the necessary 

time with our faculty to address basics about our protocols for mask wearing, seating, sanitizing, distancing, and what 

was to happen if a student was sick, identified as covid positive or in close contact with a covid positive person. 

Because none of these essential and logistical details were ever made clear or addressed to DOE school staff, it left all 

stakeholders in the dark; and now as our students are returning to campus the administration is scrambling in vain to try 

and rectify the oversights that should have been clearly directed from above our district level and put into place with 

continuity at our schools prior to re-opening. 

As a teacher in the classroom I am aware that the outlined mitigation strategies from the DOE are impossible to 

implement and I feel it is abhorrant that the official guidance states that distancing will be 3 feet apart  when possible,  but it 

is not possible! With class sizes as large as they are (20 to 30+) students are sitting side by side, shoulder to shoulder, 

and face to face just to fit them into the poorly ventilated classrooms. 

In addition to our school's inability to actually implement socially distanced seating, mask wearing is an ongoing issue as 

students do not always wear them correctly and require constant reminders throughout class and the school day, while 

some staff seem to believe that mask wearing doesn't apply to them. And in spite of the fact that our positive case count 

in our community is higher than it has ever been, we are now being told that wiping down surfaces is no longer necessary. 

We have had 4 positive covid cases at our school so far ( this is only the beginning of week 2 with students ) and the 

communication from our school itself just isn't clear; not to mention that the DOE site lags in its reporting. As a teacher on 

the front line daily, I should be made aware of the numbers of positive cases at our school and there should also be data 

available about the number of students and or faculty in quarantine due to covid exposure. This information is not being 

readily shared with the faculty which leads to anxiety and a lack of mental well being. We are all trying to cope and not 

having current and accurate information makes my job much more draining on my mental health than it needs to be. 

Of course we all wish that we could just open as though we were living in normal times but we simply are not. And yes we 

want our keiki back in our classrooms but only when it is safe. 

I realize a justification for opening as we did was the social emotional health of our students and loss of learning but I 

have seen first hand how thrusting students into this current environment is actually detrimental to their social and 

emotional well being; and if their social and emotional health is not solid then there will be no learning. 

Some of my students who are still wary of the surges happening have shown signs of social anxiety attacks as they are 

forced to enter classrooms filled with students and then required to sit side by side with thier peers. There have been no 

clear protocols or extra supports put into place to help our students re-adjust to this sudden and drastic return to in-

person school in the midst of a pandemic surge and their social emotional health is being negatively impacted. 

Many students are fearful about catching covid and since they have no control over thier learning environment; where 

they sit or whether their peers wear thier masks correctly or keep their distance, some students have opted to just stay 

home which creates a whole other set of problems. 

Students getting pulled out due to covid, for quarantine, or staying home until the surge of positive cases on campus 

drops are left with no educational supports at home. Teachers are teaching in class, face to face, as is the new 

requirement in the middle of our highest covid case counts ever, so how are those kids who are being sent home able to 

access their free and appropriate education? Perhaps they are independent learners with support systems at home but perhaps they aren't and now because the DOE opened schools as hastily as they did, these students are recieving no 

instruction and are not even having any social interaction via online hybrid learning. 

With the DOE's school reopening plan there has been a lack of transparency, lack of communication, lack of concise and 

effective safegty guidance, lack of realistic mitigation strategies, lack of social emotional and or mental health support 

services for both students and teachers, lack of instructional back up plans for those unable to attend due to covid and 

most importantly lack of forethought. 

So as I contemplate a continuation of 'staying this course' I am pleading the board of education to revisit the current re-

opnening plan and to revise it in collaboration with teachers and others most affected by these reckless decisions. 

Thank You For Your Consideration, 

Ms. Liberty Furchgott 

Teacher @ HHIS Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## School 

1 message 

Katherine Kolle  <kkolle@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 8:21 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha. 

I am writing this testimony to the general meeting portion of your agenda for the 19th.  Please keep or schools open. Face 

to face.  Shut everything else down. But let the kids learn and put their education and emotional needs above everyone 

else in our community and island. 

Also, if a class needs to be closed for 10 days due to a kid in the class having covid, there needs to be some emotional 

support for the kids as well as a game plan so that they have guidance on school work (provided other students are 

feeling well during quarantine). 

Thank you for reading my testimony. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Charlotte Godfrey-Romo <charlotte.romo30@gmail.com> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 8:20 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Charlotte Godfrey-Romo, Biology & AP Biology Teacher Keaau High 

General Business Meeting 1:30 

Agenda item  VI-A:  Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year .

I cannot help but feel like I am watching a tragedy in the works, 

something that was very preventable. I can't help but wonder; what did the leaders do all 

summer? Where are the plans? There where better plans in place last year.  Why do schools 

have different safety standards for gathering size than the public (less than 10)? Why are we 

still 100% face to face learning in cramped classrooms when the number of Covid cases is 

reaching new record numbers? The hospitals are already overwhelmed on Hawai'i Island, 

the time to take action is now. Actually, the best time was before school started. Why didn't 

we test everyone going back to a public school? I teach Biology and AP Biolgy, the students 

ask these questions too and I don't know what to tell them. We all want to have 100% 

students back, but it is not about what we want, or at least it shouldn't be.  It is about a virus, 

now it is about a much more transmissible variant of the original virus. It is about protecting 

the most vulnerable in our community, the elderly, the unvaccinated (those who can't get it 

and those who won't). Last year our school came back in January with an A/B schedule, why 

isn't this even discussed? I am very worried about the decisions being made by our leaders. I 

understand the importance of school, but we need to scale back to safe levels ASAP. There 

are ways to adapt, we need to think outside classrooms, smaller groups, more TA's,  flexible 

schedules, more on line learning, there are many solutions, we just need to find them. 

Mahalo,  Charlotte Godfrey-

Romo 

> --
> Charlotte Godfrey-Romo
> 1445 Waianuenue Ave.
> Hilo, HI 96720
> (520) 907-4553 Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov>

## Testimony 8/19/2021 meeting      

> 1 message
> Carlton Loving <lovingmathematics@gmail.com> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 8:14 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov
> My name is Floyd C. Loving III. I have been a math teacher with the Hawaii Department of Education for over 30 years. I
> oppose requiring HIDOE employees to be vaccinated. Also, since it has been proven that vaccinated people can contract
> and spread Covid 19 if weekly testing is required, it should be required of all employees regardless of vaccination status.
> The letter below explains some of my concerns:

Compelling any employee to take any current Covid-19 vaccine violates federal and subjects the 

employer to substantial liability risk, including liability for any injury the employee may suffer from 

the vaccine. 

Many employers have reconsidered issuing such a mandate after more fruitful review with legal 

counsel, insurance providers, and public opinion advisors of the desires of employees and the 

consuming public. Even the Kaiser Foundation warned of the legal risk in this respect. 

(https://www.kff.org/ coronavirus-covid-19/issue-brief/key-questions-about-covid-19-vaccine-

mandates/ )

Three key concerns: first, while the vaccine remains unapproved by the FDA and authorized only 

for emergency use, federal law forbids mandating it, in accordance with the Nuremberg Code of 

1947; 

second, the Americans with Disabilities Act proscribes, punishes, and penalizes employers who 

invasively inquire into their employees’ medical status and then treat those employees differently 

based on their medical status, as the many AIDS-related cases of decades ago fully attest; 

and third, international law, Constitutional law, specific statutes, and the common law of torts all 

forbid conditioning access to employment upon coerced, invasive medical examinations and 

treatment, unless the employer can fully provide objective, scientifically validated evidence of the 

threat from the employee and how no practicable alternative could possibly suffice to mitigate such 

supposed public health threat and still perform the necessary essentials of employment. 

At the outset, consider the “problem” being “solved” by vaccination mandates. 

The previously infected are better protected than the vaccinated, so why aren’t they exempted? 

Equally, the symptomatic can be self-isolated.  Hence, requiring vaccinations only addresses one 

risk: dangerous or deadly transmission, by the asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic employees, in 

the employment setting. 

Yet even government official Mr. Fauci admits, as scientific studies affirm, asymptomatic 

transmission is “very rare.” 

Indeed, initial data suggests the vaccinated are just as, or even much more, likely to transmit the 

virus as the asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic. 

Hence, the vaccine solves nothing. This evidentiary limitation on any employer’s decision-making, 

aside from the legal and insurance risks of forcing vaccinations as a term of employment without any accommodation or even exception for the previously infected (and thus better protected), is 

the reason most employers wisely refuse to mandate the vaccine. 

First, federal law prohibits any mandate of the Covid-19 vaccines as unlicensed, emergency-use-

authorization-only vaccines. Subsection bbb-3(e)(1)(A)(ii)(III) of section 360 of Title 21 of the 

United States Code, otherwise known as the Emergency Use Authorization section of the Federal 

Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, demands that everyone give employees the “option to accept or 

refuse administration” of the Covid-19 vaccine. ( https://www.law.cornell.edu/ 

uscode/text/21/360bbb-3 )

This right to refuse emergency, experimental vaccines, such as the Covid-19 vaccine, implements 

the internationally agreed legal requirement of Informed Consent established in the Nuremberg 

Code of 1947. ( http://www.cirp.org/library/ ethics/nuremberg/ ). 

As the Nuremberg Code established, every person must “be able to exercise free power of choice, 

without the intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, overreaching, or other 

ulterior forms of constraint or coercion; and should have sufficient knowledge and comprehension 

of the elements of the subject matter involved as to enable him to make an understanding and 

enlightened decision” for any medical experimental drug, as the Covid-19 vaccine currently is. The 

Nuremberg Code prohibited even the military from requiring such experimental vaccines. (Doe #1 

v. Rumsfeld, 297 F.Supp.2d 119 (D.D.C. 2003). 

Second, demanding employees divulge their personal medical information invades their protected 

right to privacy, and discriminates against them based on their perceived medical status, in 

contravention of the Americans with Disabilities Act. (42 USC §12112(a).) Indeed, the ADA 

prohibits employers from invasive inquiries about their medical status, and that includes questions 

about diseases and treatments for those diseases, such as vaccines. 

As the EEOC makes clear, an employer can only ask medical information if the employer can 

prove the medical information is both job-related and necessary for the business. 

(https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/ guidance/questions-and-answers-enforcement-guidance-disability-

related-inquiries-and-medical ). An employer that treats an individual employee differently based on 

that employer’s belief the employee’s medical condition impairs the employee is discriminating 

against that employee based on perceived medical status disability, in contravention of the ADA. 

The employer must have proof that the employer cannot keep the employee, even with reasonable 

accommodations, before any adverse action can be taken against the employee. 

If the employer asserts the employee’s medical status (such as being unvaccinated against a 

particular disease) precludes employment, then the employer must prove that the employee poses 

a “safety hazard” that cannot be reduced with reasonable accommodation. 

The employer must prove, with objective, scientifically validated evidence, that the employee 

poses a materially enhanced risk of serious harm that no reasonable accommodation could 

mitigate. 

This requires the employee’s medical status to cause a substantial risk of serious harm, a risk that 

cannot be reduced by any other means. This is a high, and difficult burden, for employers to meet. 

Just look at all the prior cases concerning HIV and AIDS, when employers discriminated against 

employees based on their perceived dangerousness and ended up paying millions in legal fees, 

damages, and fines. 

Third, conditioning continued employment upon participating in a medical experiment and 

demanding disclosure of private, personal medical information, may also create employer liability 

under other federal and state laws, including HIPAA, FMLA, and applicable state tort law principles, including torts prohibiting and proscribing invasions of privacy and battery. Indeed, any 

employer mandating a vaccine is liable to their employee for any adverse event suffered by that 

employee. The CDC records reports of the adverse events already reported to date concerning the 

current Covid-19 vaccine.( https://www.cdc.gov/ coronavirus/2019-ncov/ vaccines/safety/vaers.html  )

Finally, forced vaccines constitute a form of battery, and the Supreme Court long made clear “no 

right is more sacred than the right of every individual to the control of their own person, free from 

all restraint or interference of others.” ( https://www.law.cornell.edu/ supremecourt/text/141/250 )

> --
> Merry Mathematics and Happy Numerations... it is always the season to cogitate,
> Mr. Loving

Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Katie Hearl  <katie.hearl@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 7:04 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha, 

My name is Katie Hearl and I am a middle school teacher on Maui. I am writing in regards to agenda item VI-A: 

Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. As a teacher who has taught during this pandemic since 

school closures in March 2020, I have a few questions and concerns about the DOE's plan for in-person learning. 

I am extremely frustrated by the lack of MOU. Since the start of the pandemic, there has been an MOU put in place in 

order to keep workplaces, teachers, and students safe. It also allowed for flexibility to switch between in-person, hybrid, 

and distance learning as needed. It gave special education students contingency plans in case school was shut down so 

they could continue with services. All of these are good things. All of these are needed in order for schools to somewhat 

function during a global pandemic. However, this year, teachers are being asked to do the same things without the 

protection of a MOU. In my opinion (and the opinion of others), this violates our contract. The employer apparently gets to 

ask anything of the employees and we have to comply. Schools are switching to distance learning. Quarantining  teachers 

are being told they need to provide instruction while their class is out on quarantine as well. Special education teachers 

are being asked to write contingency plans. Teachers are being asked to provide digital work for students who are out on 

quarantine, essentially teaching in person and online. All without provisions and guidelines to safely protect employees. 

I completely understand the need to be flexible and adapt to the evolution of the pandemic. However, it is not like this is 

brand new. We have had a year and a quarter, previous MOUs to base this off of! Dr. Kishimoto came out at the end of 

last school year saying that it was going to be a normal year of in-person learning. What we've seen so far is that that is 

anything but the truth. We are being asked to do what we did last year without any protection. 

I am also extremely frustrated with the lack of transparency about the reality of what school looks like for our students. 

Families are being told repeatedly that it is safe for students to be on campus. I cannot tell you how many times a day I 

need to remind students to wear their masks correctly. Students are not socially distanced. It's impossible to keep so 

many people in such a confined space three feet apart. Students intermingle with each other constantly throughout the 

day. And how is close contact defined as someone being three feet away for more than 15 minutes even though we are 

all breathing the same air and it's been proven that the Delta variant can be caught in as little as 30 seconds? In the 

building I work in, some teachers don't have windows in their classroom. The only air flow they get is from the propped 

open door as they breathe the recycled AC air from the building. Where is the testing that the DOE spent relief money 

on? Why wasn't that implemented on day 1 of teachers returning? So far we're 3 weeks in and no school on Maui that I'm 

aware of has begun this program. We have students who have mask exemptions. What is the DOE policy to ensure their 

safety and the safety around them? There is none as far as I can tell. 

We all knew when the start of school was happening. We knew what we were up against. We knew cases were going to 

rise. And yet, the DOE has done less than when cases were far less, when fewer children were sick. There seems to be 

no plan. We had a roadmap from last year to guide us. It is as though we threw that out and are starting again? Why? 

Make decisions. Be accountable for what's going on. Make a plan. Until you do, people will be getting sicker and we will 

be forced to shut schools down anyway because there will be no subs or teachers to teach the kids. 

Thanks, 

Katie 8/17/2021 

Dear Board of Education: 

I watched the news and listened to DOH talk about contact tracing and saying how the schools 

were doing such a good job. All I can say is, “How do they know? Where is the evidence?” 

I can tell you factually, OUR HIGH SCHOOL IS NOT CONTACTING anyone! Page 24 of the 

COVID-19 Health and Safety Guidance for School Year 2021-22 says: 

 A close contact is defined as within 6 feet of a person with COVID-19 infection for a 

combined total of 15 minutes or more over a 24-hour period (regardless of mask use). 

 EXCEPTION : In a K-12 indoor classroom setting, where everyone is wearing a mask 

correctly and consistently, the close contact definition excludes students who were within 

3 to 6 feet of an infected student. 

o This exception does not apply to teachers, staff, or other adults in the indoor 

classroom setting, nor does this apply to students who were eating or drinking and 

not wearing masks. Currently, our Teachers are not being told by Administration 

if their student tested positive. 

Based on this definition, our Administration is not contacting families/students! When 

questioned directly if they have called the families of students who we know are close contacts 

because they are best friends with, have been witnessed in close physical proximity of infected 

students for more than 15 minutes without their masks on, sharing food with infected 

person—eating off of each other’s plates, are in physical relationships with the positive student 

and seen exchanging affection, we are told that WE do not contact trace—rather it is DOH who 

contact traces! When reiterating DOH’s response that they are overwhelmed and cannot manage 

contact tracing with the incredible surge of positive people, can we call the close contacts of our 

students? The response remains, “Our school does not contact trace, DOH does that.” 

The fact is, our Administration IS doing their job according to the Guidelines as the manual 

gives them the excuse NOT to contact families based on that ridiculous EXCEPTION. 

However, the DOE is lying to the public and giving the public a false sense of security especially 

in light of our DOE COVID counts increasing 300% in 1 week! The notification form letter 

reads, 

“If you have not been contacted by a member of our administrative team, this means that 

you or your child is not considered a close contact.” 

This form letter needs to be corrected by pointing out that all students are EXCLUDED from the 

definition of close contact so no one will be contacted at all! And, DOE does not do any contact 

tracing as it is DOH’s responsibility to do so. 

I cannot speak for other schools, except for our High School where our Teachers cannot provide 

any names of close contacts or information because they are NOT informed who their positive 

students are. In one situation, an infected employee provided the names of their students with whom they tutored 1:1 for more than 15 minutes in an enclosed space, but those 

students/families were never contacted. 

Teachers do have access to a list of students who are absent with Covid-19 symptoms, but that 

list does not provide any helpful information that can be used to help mitigate the spread of 

Covid. This is why Covid positives are increasing in our schools and will continue to spread 

within our schools and in our communities like an uncontrolled wildfire. This is why Teachers 

at my school who know about their confirmed positive students (from other sources) are furious! 

This is why more families are verbalizing to faculty that they want to keep their children home to 

protect them and other vulnerable family members despite the threat that their absences will be 

unexcused and no homework will be given. 

While our school may be the exception, which I doubt we are, I do know of other schools who 

are doing everything possible to keep their students, families, Faculty & Staff, and community 

safe. Unfortunately, not all schools are being held accountable for doing this and no one is 

monitoring if any safe-practices are occurring on campus! 

We need saving from the firestorm that has already been lit, unchecked, and ready to take off. 

It’s better to be over cautious then it is to be unprepared and negligent. As you already know, 

DOH and DOE have already failed to create and activate the safeguards needed prior to the start 

of the school year. High Schools do not offer Covid testing on campus which makes it 

inequitable for families who do not have transportation, language skills, computer access, or 

knowledge of where or how to access testing locations. If our tripling positives is not already a 

big enough red flag regarding our dire situation, the ever-increasing positivity rate of our State 

should! 

As of today, 8/17/2021, our school has sent out a Covid positive letter on Monday (8/16) and 

Tuesday (8/17). We don’t know who those students are, if they are friends or related, if they are 

the same grade level, if they share any of the same classes together or occupy the same 

classroom at different times during the day. We no nothing because its too confidential and we 

are not professional enough to respect confidentiality. WE are UNIMPORTANT and our health 

has NO VALUE, just like our STUDENTS, FAMILIES, and COMMUNITY. 

Please Save Us All! 

A Loyal Educator Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## NO PERSONAL INFORMATION, Testimony for Agenda Item VI-A: 2021-2022 SCHOOL 

## REOPENING RESOLUTION 

> 1 message
> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 5:16 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Meeting: BOE 

Agenda Item:  2021-2022 SCHOOL REOPENING RESOLUTION 

To the Honorable Board of Education Members, 

My testimony is in regard to agenda item VI-A,  2021-2022 SCHOOL REOPENING RESOLUTION. 

2) Communication with families on school safety measures 

It does not appear that the families and public are being told the truth about school safety measures. For 

example, the Department of Education’s"  COVID-19 Health and Safety Guidance for 2021-22 School Year " 

states that  “Schools should implement physical distancing to the extent possible within their structures”  and 

that schools should  “Maintain at least 3 feet of physical distance between students within classrooms, when 

possible.”  The phrasing of this guidance,  “when possible”  exempts and neutralizes any and all responsibility 

for the requirement of social distancing safety. At my husband’s high school, he has classes of up to 32 

students per class. Student desks touch one another--the front of a desk is butted up against the back of the 

next student’s chair. There is approximately 18 to 24 inches of distance between one student’s face and the 

next. There is no room for social distancing and therefore social distancing in these cases fall under the 

exemption of not possible. In other words, there is no consistent requirement and/or practice of social 

distancing in classrooms throughout public schools in the State of Hawaii. The public at large should be told 

this in no uncertain terms. 

The public is also being further misled into believing that (at least schools within the FKK district) schools 

(i.e. administrators, teachers, support staff etc.) have been discussing the possibility of returning to full-

distance learning and are prepared with a plan to do so.  Complex  Area Superintendent for the Farrington-

Kaiser-Kalani complex, Rochelle  Mahoe  is quoted on a recent Hawaii News Now segment as saying: 

“...All of our schools are prepared [to go to full distance learning}, at leastl in the FKK complex 

area. We talked about in the summer talked about having students and teachers prepared if they need 

to shift [to full distance learning], we’re hopeful that they don’t have to shift [to distance 

learning]...” Aug. 16, 2021 at 10:49 AM HS 

The truth is very few if any of our teachers or support staff have been told what the plans are--if there are 

any--about going to full-distance learning. At the very best, each school is on their own in regards to plans 

and preparations for distance learning. I can attest as a teacher in the FKK complex, this is the first time I 

heard about the possibility of ever going to full-distance learning. At my school, there are no conversations, 

planning sessions or preparations to go to full-distance learning. We are not in the process of preparing to go to distance learning anytime soon. We are not prepared to “shift” quickly from in person instruction to 

distance learning. All we are being told is that the DOE and the State of Hawaii is committed to in person 

instruction for this school year. 

During this time of rising Covid-19 cases and the health crisis we are in with our maxed out hospitals, the 

teachers, staff, students, parents and the public at large deserve to hear the truth about what is happening--or 

not happening--in our schools. As teachers and students, we deserve at the minimum, a safe learning 

environment, especially when the other State of Hawaii departments are continuing to meet virtually, but 

requiring teachers and students to meet face to face. We need our leaders to be accountable for their decision 

making and actions or lack thereof. We need clearly defined and communicated thresholds, with tiers and 

recommendations for what numbers constitute criteria for in-person and full-distance instruction and 

learning from the Department of Health--we never should have began in person instruction without these 

measures in place! We need proactive leadership now! Please help get us back on track before one student, 

or one teacher or any school community member dies unnecessarily from Covid-19. Please be our voice. 

Thank you. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Social Emotional Learning (SEL) in Schools 

1 message 

Susan Owens-Delucchi  <owensdelucchisusan0@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 4:17 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Dear BOE, 

I remain concerned about the well-being of faculty, staff, and students after teaching during the beginning of the pandemic 

in Q4 2020. I write to you as a DOE, 20-year, elementary teacher, who went out on sick leave in Semester 1 of SY 2020-

2021. I retired in 2021 before vaccine availability due to (fear of getting) COVID 19 after living with immune suppression 

for years. The stress of teaching online during Q4 of SY 2019-2020 caused my disease symptoms to worsen. 

I read a recent article about teaching being one of the most stressful jobs during the pandemic. Yet, there was a need for 

social emotional learning (SEL) long before Covid 19 evolved. I began to use mindfulness as a self-care activity for myself 

years ago and started teaching my elementary students  in 2015 . In addition, I began to use parts of the Yale Center for 

Emotional Intelligence (RULER) program to validate and help students face difficult emotions that impaired learning and 

behavior in the last three years I taught. I have always recognized the importance of dealing with emotions, but was 

confounded when faced with several students with extreme emotional issues outside of the norm. While working with 

counselors and using their suggestions, I still needed more techniques without support of a school-wide program such as 

RULER. While making gains with the students’ needs, they continued to need guidance when encountering challenges 

they didn’t want to face (particularly during independent work times and interpersonally during unsupervised times). Most 

issues were not related to skills or intelligence, but emotional. After leaving Hawai’i, one student wrote a note thanking me 

for helping her face her fear. One of the things I did was to engage the other students to support her in a kind way, but I 

didn’t have the safety net of a school-wide system such as Yale’s RULER program. I had read Carol Dweck’s work on 

growth mindset theory and did use it to inform my strategies for supporting my student and class, but my school didn’t 

have very many others educated/informed about what that looks like when engaging such students around campus—at 

least not cohesively. Another troubled student told me a few years after leaving my school that she still found mindfulness 

practice useful. 

Now,  after this year of isolation,  loss, fear of getting the disease,  it is imperative to develop SEL for the well-being of our 

community. Having taught during No Child Left Behind and Race to the Top, I saw how test performance overwhelmed 

teachers and SEL fell behind. When I left last year, my school was still living in the wake of that wave. Test performance is 

an important measure of learning, but NOT at the expense of sound SEL! Sound SEL will provide scaffolding for better 

academic performance. My colleagues talked about the need for SEL, but just don’t have the time in the day to educate 

themselves, scaffold, and plan for implementation on their own. Nor, has there been a cohesive in-service of a particular 

program for all. Teachers at my school operated on survival mode and quite honestly many exhibited symptoms of burn 

out long before the pandemic. They didn’t have left over energy to add in enough SEL with all the other mandates and 

school-wide expectations. What they were doing was piecemeal. My intent is NOT to  criticize, but to explain the reality of 

teaching so many curricular areas in a limited number of hours. My students referred to earlier would have been better 

served had my school adopted a sound SEL program. Then, all of the adults and children they encountered could have 

been equipped to help students feel the supportive kindness to enable them to overcome emotional issues which 

impaired  their well-being and/or academic performance. I spent a great deal of my personal time researching and 

planning for these children as well as working with their parents.The supports put in place were inadequate and left a 

lonely road for these students and for me to travel. Again as stated before, this is not a criticism of folks who tried to 

support the students and me. Everyone was doing the best job possible with the existing constraints of operating without 

a cohesive SEL program! The reality is that without a  cohesive program at the school level it’s all on the teacher most of 

the time. So, I urge you to lead DOE in conjunction with HSTA to find a way to help mend the broken spirts of teachers, 

students, and their families. Doing this right will take more than a quarterly 2 hour in-service which will show a haphazard 

bag of tricks from which the teacher can choose which will only enhance the stress of decision overload. Teachers are not 

magicians! It’s got to come from the top. Principals & Complex Area Superintendents have to lead by educating 

themselves and modeling SEL behaviors with adults…not leave it buried within the lines of the yearly academic financial 

plan. Then, teachers can begin to feel the level of support  they will need to face the challenges of learning how to teach 

SEL to engage learners to do their best during these difficult times. A few years ago, a survey of graduating senior 

students revealed that they felt that they’d not been adequately supported emotionally  when they attended our 

elementary school . They’d felt an over emphasis was placed on academic performance during their elementary years. 

Incidentally, the majority of these seniors were high performing students. So after all the fear and media coverage about 

children falling behind academically during lock downs during this pandemic, which I am concerned about as well, there’s 

going to be a push to catch them up to their grade level as soon as possible. Please pause that inclination to consider appropriate SEL which will prepare students to face all academic and emotional challenges. However well intentioned, 

teachers or leaders can’t teach what they don’t know. And they will need the scaffolding of a well-modeled SEL program 

to support their own learning so that they can teach others. I can’t stress enough the urgency for doing this NOW for all 

members of schools which will support the larger community now and in the future. 

Thank you for your time and service to our community especially during these difficult times. Please accept this testimony 

as evidence of my concern for the well-being of all members of our schools as well as the surrounding community. I offer 

this testimony with hopeful intention and without judgment of anyone referred to above. 

Regards I, and many others, are greatly concerned about the current state of schools during this alarming surge 

of COVID cases. At my school, important protocols are not being consistently followed, and teachers are 

being overwhelmed with additional responsibilities. I have class sizes of over 30 students, making 6, and 

even 3-foot distancing between desks completely impossible. Students are not monitored during recess 

and lunch and are not adhering to social distancing or consistent mask wearing, and two assemblies are 

scheduled for this month, meaning large numbers of students will be grouped up. The water fountains 

are no longer taped up, meaning students are now able to put their mouths onto the water faucet, 

instead of only being able to fill up water flasks. 

When I returned from summer break, only one of my classroom fans was still working; this made 

adequate ventilation impossible in my room, aside from being incredibly hot and uncomfortable. 

Despite all the supposed federal funding allocated for our schools, I was told there were no more fans 

left, and the only reason I received additional fans was because other teachers assisted me. We are also 

allocated minimal paper towels (so we are constantly running to the front office for more) and spray 

bottles for disinfecting (one per classroom) which means even more instructional time is lost due to the 

meager amount of cleaning equipment we have and the large class sizes. 

I would like to know what exactly is being done with all the money this state was allotted for education 

from federal funding. Aside from not having adequate means to ventilate and sanitize, teachers were 

literally the only bargaining unit to have their pay reduced, but as usual we are being asked to meet an 

unreasonable and unfair amount of responsibilities IN ADDITION to our teaching obligations. The bill 

that was meant to compensate for our salary loss, and then subsequently vetoed, was so incredibly 

insulting. The treatment of educators in this state is absolutely shameful. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## item VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year    

> 1 message
> Kelly E Duell, MA, NBCT <mauitechgirl@gmail.com> Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 1:59 PM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov
> According to interim superintendent

schools have  spent  several months  demonstrating that campuses 

can operate safely while accommodating students for  in-person  learning.  This is untrue; we have had 

at least  five cases with dozens of students sent home for close contact.  The DOE is blaming 

community spread yet it is  in our school. So if a student catches covid outside of school and gives it to 

other students while at school, DOE is counting that as community spread.  That is ridiculous. 

The DOE  continues  to prioritize  in-person learning regardless of the covid case numbers, regardless of 

active  cases on campuses, regardless of community spread, regardless of all safety  precautions. 

The DOE states that  masking is happening consistently  and correctly while at school byt students and 

staff; I wonder if they have  been at any school? I, just this morning, told more than a dozen students to 

either put a mask on or cover their mouth and nose.  Students are lowering or removing masks 

constantly; staff members are doing the same; at a meeting folks took their  masks off to speak into the 

microphone and passed the microphone to the next  person to talk-that is NOT wearing masks! 

As far as proper hand  hygiene  is concern, teachers are giving student hand sanitizers but there is little 

to  no time for actual hand washing.  When  changing from one class to the next, there is not hand 

washing happening. 

There are no room  cleaners at my school and the custodians can only do so much.  My room has not 

been cleaned at all this  entire school year.  No sweeping, no  mopping, no wiping surfaces, no wiping 

light switches, etc. Nothing! 

“Promoting COVID-19  vaccinations was added as an additional core essential strategy.” It is a  mandate 

for all employees, which is unconstitutional, violates human rights,  and is simply just not pono! Then to 

make folks pay for the testing and on  their own time, that is straight out punishment!  No medical 

exemptions allowed so those of us  who CANNOT be vaccinated are getting punished for “choosing not 

to vaccinate”-again  a complete injustice! This is dividing citizens, educators, and schools.  There is 

anger and hatred festering between  the two classes of citizens that management has now created. It is 

very  difficult to work with someone who has opposing views and spew negativity and  guilt on those 

making a different choice them they made.  It is horrible and isolating.  This is NOT healthy for 

educators, which will  trickle down to the students. 

Why is the DOE not accepting  HP Immunizations and covid preventive treatments?  They have a 

90.4% success rate and are  scientifically researched and proven!  Is  it because they want the dollar 

from every injection the federal government is  giving them?  Is it because the pharmaceutical 

companies are paying the government a lot of money to force everyone to take  their drug? 

In addition, why are  unvaccinated employees required to test when vaccinated employees can carry 

and  pass the virus at the same viral load as an unvaccinated employee?  DOE will send an 

unvaccinated teacher home  but not a vaccinated teacher?  DOE is NOT  quarantining whole classes, 

only other students who are under 3’ away, but not  the teacher.  This whole line of thought  is illogical 

considering the virus is an aerosol, thus spreads quickly across  classrooms, which are not properly 

ventilated!  I was given a portable air purifier meant for a standard bedroom!  This in no way filters the 

air properly.  The DOE failed to install proper ventilation  and provide appropriate protections for the 

students and staff. “The Department also  continues to work closely with the Department of Health to monitor health data 

and trends in the community. With more than 163,000 students and more than 40,000  full- and part-

time employees, the Department recorded 1,150 COVID-19 cases system  wide from June 2020 

through August 6, 2021. Safety measures are working to quickly  identify cases and to mitigate the 

spread of COVID-19 on our campuses.”  This is untrue; some folks are not being  notified; some folks 

are not notified for days; and of course the numbers look  low because we were NOT in school!  This  is 

the DOE twisting statistics to suit their own needs. 

The distance learning  option is joke; parents have to be accepted by the principal regardless of the 

parents’ objections to unsafe school environment.  DOE did a bait and switch, telling parents  that they 

were using K12Learning with all the bells and whistles, curriculum supplies  and materials sent to the 

students, with a teacher on the other side; but what  the Ohanas received was a curriculum that the 

parents are solely responsible  for implementing with zero support.  There is no plan for what happens 

when a student is out for covid.  The DOE refuses to negotiate terms with HSTA,  thus teachers are 

NOT to provide work for these students nor shall they teach  both virtually and in-person.  Admin is 

demanding this of teachers, yet it is not part of our current contract.  Stop telling teachers to do more 

for the sake  of the keiki, guilty us is not helping. 

DOE states they are  designing the appropriate responses and interventions calling this strategy  "3-1-1 

": 

• Assessing three  priority areas for students: Attendance, Academics and SEL; 

• Focusing on one  priority area for staff: Well-being; 

• And prioritizing one area for the system: A safe return for everyone. 

First  SEL are NOT a priority nor is student health and well-being.  My school cut Kinesiology / Physical 

Education to once every two weeks unless there is a holiday, then could be 3-4  weeks.  Students need 

this instruction  daily and especially with covid, but the DOE has failed students once again. 

Second,  there is no prioritizing teachers’ well-being.  We are getting slammed with extra duties, 

vaccine mandate at own expense  and on own time if you cannot get, constant demands, negativity, 

unstable environment,  and stress from not being told the truth!  It is worse this year than last year! 

Third,  a safe return for everyone is probably the biggest lie.  Students crammed 20-30-60 in a 

classroom; no  ventilation, so-called cohorts yet students mix at recess, lunch, before  school, after 

school, on the bus, and in the after school programs.  What a joke!  It is NOT safe for some teachers 

and the DOE’s response is to take  leave.  You have to use all your sick  time up and then go on leave 

with no pay.  How is that fair or right?  Management and school offices sit behind their plexi-glass 

shields, hold  virtual meetings, and do not interact with hundreds of students every day, yet  tell teachers 

that barriers do not work so you cannot have them!  They should be required to take all theirs  down if 

that is true.  They should be  required to meet in a closed room with dozens of others who they have no 

idea  what they are doing in their personal lives.  Whatever management expects of teachers, they 

should be required to do  and follow as well!  Making up plans on  the fly, as there are none.  Sorry but 

masks and washing hands is not going to do it! 

The  BOE needs to take swift action before all the students and teachers get sick,  end up with lifelong 

illnesses, or die! 

Mahalo, 

Kelly  E. Duell, MA, NBCT 

Kealakehe  Elementary  School 

Hawaii Island Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## No Personal Information- Covid and Distance Learning 

1 message 

Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 1:29 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

I am writing this from home as I have been out sick for the past 5 days. I am a high school teacher and have been very 

alarmed at the rise in numbers of Covid infections in Hawaii. I have been exercising extreme caution to protect myself and 

my family from Covid through vaccination, strict mask usage and avoiding contact with other people as much as 

possible. 

Within the first week of returning to in person classes I started having possible symptoms of Covid. I ended up in the 

emergency room over the weekend being told I had pneumonia in both lungs which the doctor told me was classic Covid 

pneumonia. 

My classroom has students packed into the space just like before covid, no safe distancing at all. Students routinely either 

are not masked or wearing them only partially, crowed together during recess. It is a breeding ground for the virus. I feel 

unsafe on campus. Please let us go back to distance learning until this covid crisis passes. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Jennifer Bennett  <jenanner@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 1:03 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Aloha, 

I have three children in public school in Lahaina. Kindergarten, 3rd and 5th grade. 

They need to be in school. 

The keiki are the least susceptible to the virus yet are being put on the back burner when it comes to their education and 

mental Heath being a priority!!!  We cannot continue to put them in this position again in regards to going back to distant 

learning. 

Parents need to be able to return to work and let the teachers teach, in person! 

Please consider the effect this is having on their mental health and well being. Kids are healthy, energetic, and can move 

through this in-person. 

In addition to keeping kids in schools face-to-face, for those that are concerned about going back maybe there could be 

an option for them to do class by zoom or some other means, but do not keep all the kids out. It’s not right. 

Thank you for hearing me out. I know many dozens of other families feel this way. We want our kids in the school in 

person. It’s time to move forward. !! 

Aloha, Jenny Bennett 808-205-9232 Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Jen Sarpi  <jensarpi@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 12:11 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

Jennifer Sarpi, SSC at Pearl Ridge  Elementary School and parent of two public education students, this statement is for 

the General Board Meeting related to the topic of School Closure Metric. 

I am strongly in favor of the DOE being required to develop and follow metrics for when it is safer  for the students and 

adults for schools to be closed.  Since this school year has started, I am living in constant fear.  My sons are attending 

Campbell High School and Ewa Makai.  I am regularly getting notifications that students and staff on campus are being 

diagnosed with COVID.  I don't feel confident that the DOE is capable of keeping my children safe.  DOE also isn't 

offering distance learning options where my children would be able to benefit from safely learning while developing 

relationships with their teachers and other students. 

At my own school, I see that actually implementing the guidelines is an impossible task.  Kids are magnets and gravitate 

to other kids.  Despite teachers' best efforts, their masks aren't always properly worn, they definitely aren't well spaced 

out, etc. 

I don't think that it is fair to ask teachers to spend a full day in a classroom with 20-30 students while socially we need to 

limit the group size of people we visit with to 10.  I also don't think it is fair to reassure the public that teachers are 

consistently implementing all the precautionary measures, when this is an impossible task. 

Clearly, COVID is in our schools currently- in our classrooms.  The DOE is not able to confidently say that they are able to 

keep students and teachers safe at schools.  If school isn't a safe place for people to be, then we shouldn't be there.  We 

need to make responsible decisions for the health and safety of both teachers and our Keiki. 

Please make a responsible decision for our schools and create and follow a realistic metric for when students should be 

on campus and when it is better for the safety of all for them to be learning from home.  I don't want there to be student 

and staff deaths from COVID because we weren't smart enough to shut schools down when it was needed. 

Thanks for your consideration, 

Jen Sarpi Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Temporary School Closure 

1 message 

Wayne Yanagisawa  <wyanagi12@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 12:11 PM 

To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Dear Board Members, 

As the Covid numbers are rising significantly and overwhelming hospitals, isn’t now the time to close the schools 

temporarily? Yes, the last published numbers of infection have been low, however, even one student, especially at an 

elementary school, that tests positive should be a sign that these youngsters are vulnerable.  How many students have to 

be infected before action to shut down the schools will be taken? When will your voices as Board members be heard? 

When the transmission of the virus spreads like the wildfires as in the northwest?  Further, who will care for these 

youngsters with the hospitals overrun? 

Governor Ige is not taking any serious action to stem the spread.  In the mean time the elementary students are being 

exposed daily.  Please, take action and do your part in advocating for the health and safety of our youngsters. 

As a grand parent of an elementary school age child my wife and I implore upon you to advocate for the health and safety 

of my grandchild as she is, as all elementary age students are, very vulnerable to this profuse and highly transmissible 

Covid Delta variant.  We are very worried and frightened 

as all youngsters of this age group are ineligible to receive the Covid vaccination and, yet, are being exposed daily to 

others that are potentially infected. 

As an aside, the courts are not holding jury trials due to the ongoing Covid surge.  Yet, youngsters that are ineligible to 

receive vaccinations are required to attend in person instructions and risk being infected.  Would you be willing to be 

exposed and risk being infected as these students are without being vaccinated?  I believe you wouldn’t just as I would 

not.  Let’s get real here and see the reality of what’s currently happening. 

Had the DOE and all schools offered the blended virtual choice as last school year rather than the virtual choice offered 

this school year, our son and his wife would have selected the virtual blended choice.  We would have supported that 

strongly, too.  But, as it is, schools may not be fully staffed and, therefore, unable to provide the blended program as an 

option? 

Again, please be advocates for all students. Isn’t this your main kuleana?  School closure shouldn’t be a political nor 

economic issue.  This is an emergency and a major crisis.  The science has been reporting time and time again that this 

Delta variant is one bad dude(if can call it that?).  That’s the reality the Governor speaks of but closes his eyes in not 

taking action. 

We ask for your strong support and action to the aforementioned.  Thank you for your time, consideration, and for your 

timely and strong support. ASAP, let’s keep students at home, temporarily, until the numbers are significantly lower. 

With gratitude, 

Wayne Yanagisawa 

Sent from my iPhone NO PERSONAL INFORMATION Testimony for the General Business Meeting August 19,2021 

Aloha Board of Education, 

Please consider establishing a Memoranda of Understanding for this school year, 2021-2022 to address 

the safety concerns of teachers, staff, students, parents, and the community. 

We are dealing with a much more contagious strain of COVID 19 and need more intense safety 

considerations this school year than we did for last year. For example, there needs to be distance 

learning options for those parents that do not want to send their child into a highly populated situation. 

This would also help with having fewer students in the classrooms. The CDC’s guidelines of keeping a 

social distance of three feet is impossible in many of our classrooms. I was just squeaking by with the 

three-foot distance, and then another student was added to my classroom which affected all the 

students that were near the new desk and student brought into my classroom. Our classrooms do not 

have proper ventilation. I have fans but researched that blowing fans can increase the spread of this 

airborne virus. The cafeteria is another concern, where all of the students have their masks off and 

socializing occurs. A safer way for lunch would be a grab-and-go lunch. There have been many 

procedures that worked ok last year, and some that can be improved on for this year, but, insisting that 

ALL students are face to face in their classroom, on campus at the same time passing to different 

classes, and eating lunch just is not sustainable. We will have even more students, faculty and staff out 

due to positive cases appearing in our over-crowded and ill-prepared schools. We do not have enough 

subs to handle the normal day let alone COVID daily notifications that five more students are 

quarantining due to COVID contact as well as teachers that are COVID positive. 

Please, this is the time we must all work together to provide as safe a school year as possible. It is not as 

safe in the schools as the show-case classrooms depicted on the news. 

Education is important, however, safety should be first and foremost in this conversation about the 

school year. 

Mahalo, 

A very concerned teacher. Dear Board of Education, 

I am writing in response to discussion item VI which pertains to reopening schools. I oppose the current 

guidelines because the working conditions are not safe for students and staff. 

According to the Star Bulletin, teacher vacancies rate is 2.7% or 364 since December. These vacancies 

caused teachers to have larger class sizes as they try to meet their student’s and social distancing needs. 

However, not all schools have space enough to socially distance their 30 plus students in their small 

classrooms. This has resulted in one of my colleagues to have 29 students, but only 26 chairs available. If 

restaurants and other businesses are restricted to only 10 people indoors, why is it allowed for teachers 

to have students up to 37 or more students? 

Other horrors that my colleagues have mentioned is COVID cases are not being reported in the DOE 

weekly COVID case counts because COVID cases continue to increase at a rapid state. The DOE claims 

that in person school is safe even though the past two weeks, we had 400 COVID cases in which is 

enough to make up the daily COVID counts in Hawaii. 

Most schools are also severely understaffed. Some schools do not have a custodian and school nurse. 

One colleague has reported to me that they have to close bathrooms because there is no janitor to 

disinfect the bathrooms. Other schools do not have a school nurse to help with formulating a plan for 

better contact tracing. The DOE has released information to all principals to require contact tracing in 

the form of seating charts while neglecting the fact that students go outside their ‘ohana’ bubble at 

recess, lunch, and after school. This is also neglecting the fact that secondary teachers are seeing 

upwards of 80 plus students a day. 

Schools are not being setup to handle the 21 st century learning environment by limiting distance learning 

options while pay millions of dollars for other efforts in complexes. Currently, students with IEP’s are not 

getting their specialized services met if they opt out on distance learning. Many parents are frustrated 

that their child cannot get specialized services as promised by law. 

I implore the Board of Education to please speak to the Department of Education to formulate a better 

plan to make schools safer for staff and students. Parents, families, and our communities deserve better 

plans that have multiple mitigation strategies and backup plans in case efforts fail. Parents, families, and 

the communities deserve to have a singular plan that is communicated. Students deserve to learn in safe 

and clean environment while getting the services promised by law. I implore the Board of Education to 

have the Department of Education work with HSTA, HGEA, and other unions to make sure our schools 

are up to standards. 

Thank you Board of Education with taking the time to read my testimony. 

Sincerely, 

A Concerned Hawaii Public School Teacher Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for BOE Meeting Thursday, August 19, 2021 

1 message 

tammy holt  <tammy8707@gmail.com>  Tue, Aug 17, 2021 at 7:40 AM 

To: testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov 

Dear Board of Education, 

Mahalo for allowing me to email today regarding the 2021-2022 opening procedures. I am an elementary school teacher. 

First and foremost, I would like to state that our school is doing everything under the DOH guidelines. They have been 

clear with our staff through the whole process. 

However, I am asking that the Board recognize that free COVID testing is not readily available  to teachers. Free testing 

must be accessible  regardless of whether or not the teacher is vaccinated. I am finding that we as teachers are being 

faced with multiple circumstances of exposure. 

Please know, that we understand the department of health guidelines. However, many of us live with kupuna or 

unvaccinated children. My decision  to seek a test due to an indirect exposure while on my job,  is my personal choice and 

I should not have to wait over three hours at the airport for a free test or pay $140.00. 

Teachers must be able to get tested when they feel they need to in a timely matter. This is for the safety of ourselves, our 

families, and our students. 

Mahalo. 

T.Holt Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Agenda item VI-A 

1 message 

Sienna Makarewicz  <ohanamaka@gmail.com>  Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 8:07 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

BOE, 

I am deeply disappointed that I am having to write testimony again. The lack of willingness to communicate and try to 

keep everyone safe as we try to keep schools open is disheartening.  The DOE will not talk to HSTA.  DOE will not do 

something unless the BOE forces them. 

How is the opening going?  Not as well as it could.  Simple things that we had in place last year have all been thrown out 

because the HSTA MOU expired and DOE will not meet to negotiate a new one.  Some of the things that are missing that 

would keep us safe are that meetings that are offered online. We are required to go into a sealed air conditioned library. 

Our school shares the Library with the high school.  They already had 4 Covid cases.  My request was denied to attend 

the meeting via WebEx. 

Another big change is when a classroom has a positive case the administrators only pull a few students.  Last year the 

whole class would have quarantined.  They do not let the parents of the other students know that there was a positive 

case in their classroom.  They don’t consider that the students could have eaten snack or lunch or spent time together at 

recess.  They are little kids and they are trying their best but their mask wearing is not 100%. 

Also the classroom, the cafeteria, the bathroom and any common area would be professionally cleaned.  This year the 

custodian just wipes the desk, which they are supposed to do daily anyway. 

It is like there is no common sense if these protections were in place last year why are they not in place this year?  We 

have an even more contagious strain and it is effecting children even more.  We have already had 4 cases at our school 

even though they only have told the parents about 3 of them.  Parents are continually asking us what is the school doing 

to protect our children?  There needs to be more open communication and common sense safety procedures in place. 

Thank you for your time. 

Please help keep us safe. 

Sienna Makarewicz 

Second Grade 

Kapaa Elementary School 

Sent from my iPad Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Vanessa Picon  <vanessa.picon@gmail.com>  Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 8:04 PM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Aloha my name is Vanessa Knoepfel I am a teacher at Kahalu’u Elementary. I am submitting testimony  for Opening of 

schools 2021-2022. I am concerned for my safety and that of my students. For the following reasons: I have 17, 5 year 

olds in a crowded classroom with poor ventilation, at 3 feet apart, students touch and take off mask often, these 

conditions are extremely difficult to work in and learn in. I have already had 2 students with parents who tested positive for 

COVID. This is irresponsible and dangerous to all in my class. 

Please rethink these safety measures and protect us. Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Jenna Fear  <jennamfear@yahoo.com>  Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 4:26 PM 

To: "Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Aloha Board of Education, 

I am writing to you as a general education teacher at Kealakehe Elementary School. I am HORRIFIED of teaching this 

year at an elementary school who in the first two weeks of opening have already had 6 positive COVID cases from our 

students. I am even more horrified that after those 6 cases, there was no extra "professional deep cleaning" of the space 

and students who were not identified as close contact were able to enter the same un-sanitized space. Due to our staff 

shortage, some classrooms aren't even getting the basic cleaning or sanitization of rooms at all. 

When a student at our school is identified as positive, the entire class does not need to quarantine. They are requiring 

only the students who sit around the positive case in the classroom. I find this very troubling since elementary school 

students often move about the classroom, have a hard time wearing their mask correctly, and are often with each other 

before school, during recess, unmasked less than 3 ft apart at lunch, and after school. Another problem I find troubling is 

not notifying all parents in the classroom of a positive COVID case within the classroom even if they were not "close 

contact" or sitting next to the positive student I feel parents would want to know this information so they can monitor for 

symptoms or test if they wish. 

It seems as if there is no plans or guidance in place with our current surge in cases. Many of my students parents have 

contacted me saying they wish to do distance learning but there is not enough spaces. Since there isn't space they are 

just not sending their children to school. On an average, I have at least 25-50% of my students absent daily. There needs 

to be a plan when our hospitals get full. 

All over the news, administration is painting a picture that public schools mitigation measures are working. I am telling 

you, from in the trenches, they are NOT.  There needs to be clear, consistent guidance for positive COVID cases included 

resources for deep cleaning and schools that don't have enough support staff to do that cleaning. There needs to be more 

distance learning options for families who are too afraid to send their students to class. Elementary school students or 

ages that are too young to get vaccinated should require ALL students in their classes to be quarantined if there is a 

positive case or at least notified. Teachers that are vaccinated should not be exempt from quarantine since the delta 

variant can be transmitted to vaccinated people. 

I hope the board can look into these problems and help make a change before it is too late and students and teachers get 

severely sick or die from the inadequate planning of schools reopening. 

Thank you for your time, 

Jenna Lee 

Kealakehe Elementary School Teacher Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Start of the 2021-22 School Year Testimony 

1 message 

Annie Zamber  <anniezamber@gmail.com>  Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 4:18 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

If teachers are vaccinated they should feel safe. They will not die if they get covid. Teachers can enforce protocols 

through class management  and their class rules. If schools are not providing hand sanitizers and masks for students who 

don’t have them they need to. Please do not have us or allow schools to choose to go back to virtual learning. We need to 

push for vaccination for all teachers, staff, and students that can get it. The vaccination, hand sanitizing, and masks are 

the solution, virtual learning is not. 

Sent from my iPhone Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony for General Business Meeting Discussion Item VI-A   

> 1 message
> Mike Landes <jmlandes@gmail.com> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 3:56 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Aloha Board members, 

My name is Mike Landes, and I write to you today as a  parent, as a DOE employee, and as the HSTA Maui Chapter 

President.  I am wri  ng this to you a  er two days of extremely  anxious wai  ng for my 9-year-old daughter to get a 

nega  ve result on a COVID  test, because she has been showing symptoms of illness. 

As a parent, I have deep concerns about the safety of my  children.  My daughter is too young to be  vaccinated (as are 

all of the students at her school), yet neither of the elementary  schools in the town where she a  ends o ff er any type 

of distance learning  op  ons.  Because of the extremely  limited number of spaces available in the state’s distance 

learning program, and  the fact that my wife and I both work, we do not have the op  on to keep her at  home. 

Instead, she has no choice but to  a end in-person class in a room of over 20 unvaccinated children, and now she is 

sick.  I am beyond relieved that her test  results came back nega  ve, but why should she be forced into this risky 

situa  on to begin with?  And how long will  it be un  l she does test posi  ve?  And  what about all of her friends? 

As an employee of the DOE, I have deep concerns about how I’m  supposed to do my job.  Today I had to  take leave to 

care for my sick daughter and access a COVID test.  How many more days will I have to miss for  similar reasons?  How 

will my students be  able to learn everything they need to learn if I cannot be there to teach  them?  What happens 

when some or all of  my students have to quaran  ne due to the rapidly spreading Delta variant that  is able to infect 

those who are fully vaccinated? 

And as HSTA Maui Chapter President, I have deep concerns about  the impacts to the working condi  ons of my fellow 

members.  Over 80% of our members report being fully  vaccinated, and most comments I’ve received have indicated 

support for measures  to make our schools as safe as possible for everyone.  But, we do have some members who 

cannot  receive the vaccine due to legi  mate medical reasons, and the tes  ng op  ons they  will have to use weekly on 

Maui have problems.  Most of the free tes  ng is available only during school hours and only in certain  loca  ons. 

Today, I had to drive across the island and wait 4 hours  for my daughter to get tested, and one tes  ng facility ran out 

of tests.  Will our members who cannot be vaccinated be  allowed to miss poten  ally a full day of work to go to these 

test sites during  the workday without having to use their own leave   me to do so?  I’ve heard from teachers who 

were directed to  quaran  ne due to COVID, but who were then also directed by their principals to  teach their classes 

online while on quaran  ne leave.  How can  they be directed to work while they are directed to be on leave?  I’ve also 

heard from teachers who have been  directed to teach in a hybrid model (simultaneous instruc  on to in-person and 

distance-learning students), even though HSTA’s e ff orts to nego  ate a new MOU  for such things this school year were 

denied by the employer.  Clearly there are some serious impacts to  employee working condi  ons, which makes it all 

the more confusing that there  has yet to be any response from the employer to the public sector unions' joint call for 

impact bargaining. 

In closing, the past couple days have been angst-ridden for  my family.  My daughter’s nega  ve COVID  test this 

a ernoon helps to relieve that angst on a personal level for now,  but how long un  l she does catch COVID at school? 

And what about the kids who have already tested posi  ve?  And how can teachers e ff ec  vely teach their  students 

with these things happening and s  ll no clear guidance or consistently  enforced protocols?  And how can  employees 

trust that their employer is honoring their contractual rights, when  there are decisions being unilaterally made that 

impact the condi  ons of  employment?  Members of the Board, I urge  you to take ac  on to mandate that the DOE 

uphold its obliga  ons to the students,  employees, parents, and community members of Hawai‘i. 

Mahalo for your   me, 

Mike Landes Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony re: Safe Reopening   

> 1 message
> Abi Hobbs <abigail.hobbs@gmail.com> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 3:15 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Aloha, 

This is a comment about the Safe Reopening of Schools presentation and discussion 

during the General Business Meeting. 

In the past week, we have had a few positive cases reported in the schools I serve.  This 

has brought home to me that we are only getting this information when individuals are 

either sick enough to seek medical attention or get tested on their own initiative and then 

report that information to the school.  Given the prevalence and ease of spread of the Delta 

Variant (including among vaccinated individuals), it is hard to feel that we have any idea of 

the real situation in any of our schools. 

Because of that, I would like to urge the implementation of random "surveillance testing" on 

each campus of both students and staff.  We cannot react appropriately to outbreaks we 

don't know are happening, and we cannot have confidence that our schools are safe 

without meaningful, reliable data. 

Thank you, 

Abigail Hobbs, OTR/L with the DoE on Hawaii Island Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## NO PERSONAL INFORMATION 

1 message 

> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 2:33 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

As I write this, I am sitting in a cafeteria room with over a hundred other teachers, listening to an informative speech about 

Transgender students. Why was this not shown via Zoom? 

Today is Monday, August 16th, and our Maui hospital is on the brink of collapse. The entire country is willing to put our 

kids last for the benefit of the economy. 

I am coming to work, doing the best I can- but here is the truth. We have gone our whole careers being treated like 

absolute garbage- given no tools, no resources, no opportunities, educating our children with nothing and going home 

with nothing in our pocket. You took away our 21 hours, mandated vaccines and took away our sovereignty. 

Hawaii's education system is comparable to a third world country. THAT is my everyday reality. 

Why did you spend last week's meeting discussing ways to communicate with the public, if you are going to ignore the 

public's biggest question for you right now? 

When will the unnecessary, dangerous, and absolutely irresponsible decisions to put us (keiki and teachers) in 

harm's way come to an end? Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year   

> 1 message
> Graham and Diane DeVey <kulakidz@gmail.com> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 12:38 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Include "Testimony" in the subject line 

Name with position/title and organization, if applicable; 

Meeting (Student Achievement, Finance and Infrastructure, Human Resources, or 

General Business Meeting (full Board)); 

Agenda item; and 

Position (support, oppose, or comment). 

Testimony by Graham DeVey, retired 17-year science teacher, Baldwin High School, Maui 

Intended for General Business Meeting Aug 19 2021 

Agenda Item VI-A:  Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. 

Comment: 

June 6, 2021 addendum:  Graham  DeVey  (Updates Aug 

10) 

Everyone who has died of Covid 19 has gone through the  following sequence: 

Exposure àInfec  on àIllness àHos pitaliza  on àDeath 

However, all Americans should realize progress along this  path is very age-dependent.  From January  1, 2020 to May 

8, 2021 there have been 568,053 deaths in America as recorded by  CDC.  Here’s how those deaths group by  age: 

Over 85  171,686  30 %  (Note:  Americans  over  85  are 2 % of the popula  on but 30 % of Covid 

deaths) 

Under 85  398,367  70 % 

Under 75  239,590  42 % 

Under 65  113,651  20 %  (Note:  Americans  over 65  are 13 % of the population but 80 % of 

Covid  deaths) 

Under 55  42,984  7.6 % 

Under 45  14,963  2.6 % 

Under 35  4,964  0.9 % Under 25  1,076  0.2 % 

Under 15  205  0.04 %  (Note:  Americans  under 15  are 20 % of the popula  on but 0.04 % of 

Covid  deaths) 

The single message we should glean from this data is PROTECT  OUR ELDERLY.  Please no  ce that we’ve  closed nearly 

every college campus in America to slow Covid; same for  elementary and secondary schools.  We’ve  been telling our 

children “We love you and don’t want you to get sick and die,  so we need to keep you safe.”  It has  been a terrible lie. 

By keeping children  apart from one another, we have s  ll managed to kill 171,686 Americans over  85.  PROTECT OUR 

ELDERLY, and let our  kids go to school. 

PROTECT OUR ELDERLY,  and let ci  zens in their 30s, 40s, and 50s go to work.  Look at the numbers, please!  We’ve 

closed schools but only lost 205  youngsters age 15 (10 th  graders) and below.  Are we afraid that our high school 

freshmen  are going to infect each other?  Our  kindergarteners?  What, will the number  double from 205 to 410? 

Covid was not in  the top 10 reasons for child death last year, not even close—there were three  categories of suicide 

that each killed more youngsters than this supposedly dreadful  Covid.  Stop showing us protocols for  school opening, 

with desk spacings, hand washings, plexiglass teacher cages,  and sanitary wipes everywhere, because these foolish 

and scary measures are  tying my own stomach in a knot, and hur  ng our children even worse.  Don’t close a whole 

school and send everyone  home when a sta ff er has “tested posi  ve,” because we s  ll don’t know what a  posi  ve test 

means.  It very certainly  does not mean that our children are about to die. 

I have had people look at me seriously and say that I don’t  get it—kids will carry the exposure to older people and 

spread the disease,  even if they are at low risk themselves.  My answer stays the same, PROTECT OUR ELDERLY.  I

honestly cannot see why we’ve impacted so  many young lives restric  ng children from each other when it has not 

protected  our elderly. 

The only thing American kids should know about Covid is  to stay away from people with white hair.  By the way, 

adjusted for popula  on, a student aged 15 and under is 9000   mes less likely to die of Covid than an American over 

85. 

Look at the total deaths under 45—14,963 deaths and 2.6 % of  the total.  There is no pandemic below 45  in America; 

this has been like a mild  fl u season in impact.  PROTECT OUR ELDERLY. 

I’m not an epidemiologist.  But, working from the death numbers, I urge  anyone reading this to understand that the 

sequence of the disease toward death  is extraordinarily, overwhelmingly di ff erent for young than for old.  Somewhere 

along Exposure àInfec  on àIllness àHos pitaliza  on àDeath, the disease  typically breaks down in young bodies 

while raging in older bodies.  PROTECT OUR ELDERLY. 

Our poli  cians and leaders keep telling us to be pa  ent  and we will get through this together.  Totally insipid and 

colossally uninformed words.  The only way we will get through this is  apart—our young apart from our old. 

Best wishes, Graham DeVey Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Logan N <logan.newbill@gmail.com> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 6:06 AM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Agenda Item:  Presentation on opening schools 

School: Hawaii Technology Academy (charter) 

Comment: 

The recent Vaccine and  testing  mandate by Governor Ige is clearly an effort to discriminate against a 

minority.  The CDC has stated vaccines do not prevent transmission.  As of Sunday 8-16-21 there were 

30  fully vaccinated people in the Hawaii  hospitals being treated for covid.  Most of our students are 

not  vaccinated but are being crammed into small rooms with recirculating air.  In a few months we went from 

enforcing a 6ft foot distance rule with 10-12 students in a room to now over 22 in the same small rooms. 

How is any of this following logic and good science.  Unvaccinated  teachers are being singled out to  undergo 

weekly testing.  We are suppose to do this outside working hours, which are 8:00-3:30. On Kauai the free 

testing is open fro 8:00 - 3:30.  We are told we cannot do  then testing during working hours and must do it on 

Friday, and then upload the results on Monday to our schools private administrative HR website.  We are told 

to pay for these test if we  canto get to the free testing facility, which is clearly impossible due to the time we 

work and the times it is open.  There are also no clear  consequences, which makes it seem even more like 

intimidation and  coercion towards getting a vaccine shot. 

It is very clear that the intention is not to stop the spread of a virus, but to punish and intimidate those that 

have still not got a vaccine shot.  I and  many others feel this is a civil rights issue, and HSTA needs to 

intervene.  These are not safe and equitable working conditions.  This is causing great anxiety and stress on 

my family and many others.  Many I know are looking to take long term leave, take a year off, leave the 

profession, or leave the state to find refuge in a more reasonable governed  state. 

Finally, this seems like a perfect way to ramp up the number of positive tests for the  unvaccinated  minority 

group.  If hundreds or thousands of  unvaccinated state and  county workers now have to do weekly tests, 

while the unvaxxined workers are rarely tested, you will see a giant surge in unvaxxined infections.  If we 

really want good data to figure out the best way to protect against a virus, everyone  should be testing. 

I would  appreciate a  response to this e-mail to know who else I can speak to about this matter. 

Thank you, 

Logan.newbill@gmail.com Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> DW Ab <dabuel247@gmail.com> Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 8:29 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Dwayne Abuel, Highlands Intermediate School, teacher 

Meeting:  Student Achievement, Infrastructure, Human Resources, and General 

Business Meeting 

Urgent Pandemic Problems 

Observation and experience statement 

As more and more get sick during our opening of school, these students who had to go 

testing and stay out ten days are missing a lot of school that the teachers need to keep 

reteaching a lesson over.  The packets we send home are not enough to cover what we do 

live in class and therefore have to reteach.  Although I'd rather those people be home to 

get well, no one has come down to spend time with us, talk to us to get an in-depth look at 

what is happening and what we need to survive.  The problems that are occurring, we are 

left to bandage up.  Alongside with the kids getting sick and going out for testing and 

quarantine, this also affects some teachers who have made some close contact with 

students.  We are being forced into over crowded situations, days that do not have air flow 

(almost zero wind breeze).  Not every class has an air cleaner. 

Some teachers have conditions that only allow one shot and some no shot.  It is 

unfortunate that the state made no effort to protect these individuals.  The choices that we 

are faced with are not  "Kosher".  Resign/quit or be quiet and teach.  The "lame" statement 

that many use is, "You are lucky to have a job!  Don't complain!"  Or, "You lucky, it could be 

so much worse!"  But, the reality is that statements like that does excuse "Lack safety!", 

hospitalization and death. 

For the middle schools, they are facing the hardest times ever with low enrollment, lack of 

personnel, and financial issues. 

- A loyal and sincere teacher   

> --
> |<-----------------------------------Greetings ---------------------------------->|

## Mahalo, 

## Dwayne  Abuel Life in this world is limited. Never be in the least bit afraid! 

"The Proof of the Lotus Sutra" (WND, 1109) 

A person, who no matter how desperate the situation, 

gives others hope, is a true leader. 

- Daisaku Ikeda 

DISCLAIMER:  The opinions expressed in this e-mail are not those of any known person.  Do not send confidential information over 

email.  E-mail is not considered secure or private. 

"Confidentiality Notice:  This e-mail message, including any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) and 

may contain confidential and/or privileged information.  Any review, use, disclosure, or distribution by unintended recipients is 

prohibited.  If you are not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail and destroy all copies of the original 

message." 

|<----------------------------------- Greetings  ---------------------------------->| Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony - item VI-A: Presentation on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school 

## year   

> 1 message
> Richard Stange <richardstng83@gmail.com> Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 7:13 PM
> To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov

Name : Richard Stange 

School : Mililani Middle School 

To Superintendent Hayashi and the Hawaii Board of Education, 

Aloha, 

At the start of this school year, I relished in the optimism of being able to finally take steps toward 

normalcy. I absolutely love what I do in the classroom, and I could not be more excited to have 

students in the classroom full time once again! The classroom is where students belong. The 

classroom is where students learn best. The classroom is where much needed social and 

emotional development occurs, especially at the age of which I teach. I have been advocating for 

schools to reopen, because I believe that the classroom is where students belong. I believe that it 

is where I belong. 

But, then something happened. 

Like a light switch; seemingly overnight our COVID-19 cases seemed to increase exponentially 

due to the Delta variant. We have now had over a week of an average of 700-800 positive COVID 

cases per day in Hawaii. On Friday, August 13, it was reported that there were 1,167 cases. 

Yesterday, there were 791. Today the number is 845. These positive case counts are exponentially 

higher than they were when school campuses were first closed down on Monday, March 16, 2020. 

It breaks my heart to say what I'm about to say. We have shown children the beginning of a school 

year which seemed to approach normalcy. I am devastated by the emotional impact of what I am 

about to express and the effects it can have on our students who are enjoying being able to see 

their friends at recess and lunch time. As much as I do not want to see public education go back to 

a distance format, how many people (including children) will be infected? For those who do not 

believe that the new Delta variant of COVID-19 can infect children, according to a recent  news 

article , "76 students tested positive," causing "an entire Georgia school district to shut down less 

than two weeks after classes began." The article also states that "67 school district faculty have 

tested positive for COVID-19." It is unfortunate that Delta is very real. Teachers and children are in 

real danger. I feel that it would be irresponsible to allow schools to remain fully open with this 

infection spreading faster than it ever has. Even if schools have mitigation practices in place, can you honestly say that you can stop 100 children outside in the courtyard from touching one another 

at the same time? It is not a practical, realistic, or even possible expectation. 

This is honestly the last thing I would like to see happen. Expressing this concern does not bring 

me joy in any way, shape, or form. 

But, I am concerned. 

I am concerned for my health. 

By extension, I am concerned for my family's health. 

I am concerned for my students' health. 

I am concerned for my students' families' health (the health of the community). 

I am concerned for my colleagues' health. 

I am concerned for my colleagues' families' health. 

I am concerned for the health of my administrators and all other staff members on campus. 

Unfortunately, there is still a percentage of our community that is unvaccinated. Visitors and 

travelers are once again coming and going. Mitigation strategies have been an utter failure to stop 

the reported 1,167 cases just two days ago. This is the time in which we must act before more 

people are infected with this horrible disease. 

With sadness I advocate for returning to a blended learning format or total distance. This is not the 

way I wished this school year to go. I looked forward to having students in my classroom every 

day. I got to know my students. I have been having a blast with my students. But, this disease is 

out of control. We do not have it under control with over 800 cases per day on an average. The 

children in my classroom are in danger of contracting and spreading the Delta variant. 

I believe that for the safety of the public, schools need to return to a distance or blended format. 

Mahalo for considering my point of view. 

> --
> Sincerely,
> Richard Stange

To Whom It May Concern: 

I am submitting testimony for Item VI-A. I write out of concern for the current situation of public 

schools during a pandemic surge. First, with respect to the recent announcement that public 

school sports be delayed to allow time for the required vaccinations (or, for unvaccinated, 

regular testing), I would like to express appreciation to the Interim Superintendent for having the 

integrity to follow the Department of Health (DOH)’s guidance for school sports and 

extracurriculars during this period of high transmission. However, the fact is that the Department 

of Education (DOE) is not beholden to comply with anything put forth in the DOH guidance 

document. This precedent had already been clearly set under the previous Superintendent’s 

administration during the 2020-21 school year, when several schools welcomed back hundreds 

more students in person, even in the middle of the post-holiday surge, when two consecutive 

weeks of metrics indicated that they should have returned to online instruction or at least 

paused this return to in person instruction. 

In a more recent example, a highly qualified probationary teacher who tested positive prior to 

the beginning of the 2021-22 school year, and who was therefore quarantining to keep their 

colleagues safe, was terminated by the DOE for not showing up on the first teacher workday. To 

add insult to injury, this teacher was denied quarantine leave on the basis that they were 

officially terminated. This occurred despite the fact that page 6 of the DOH guidance for schools 

says, “Schools should allow flexible, non-punitive, and supportive sick leave policies and 

practices that encourage sick staff to stay home without fear of retaliation, loss of pay, or loss of 

employment level.” 

In addition, in a meeting with Senators, the DOE claimed that they were following ASHRAE 

Standards. However, ASHRAE Standard 62.1 says that the default occupancy for classrooms 

for ages 5-8 should be 25 persons per 1000 square feet, and for classrooms for those over 9, 

should be 35 persons per 100 square feet. My own high school classroom is 27 feet by 27 feet, 

for a total of 729 square feet. According to ASHRAE then, my classroom occupancy should not 

exceed 25 persons, but all my classes are larger than this, and as large as 32, in fact. I am 

confident that there are many teachers with more crowded classrooms than myself. As Board 

Member Takeno once astutely pointed out, ventilation is a safety standard. Could we not expect 

lawsuits from parents of students who contract COVID from their classmates, or teachers who 

contract COVID from students and vice-versa, after spending a period together in a classroom 

where ASHRAE standards are, in fact, not being followed? 

On a related note, over two months ago, the Star Advertiser reported that the DOE had 

purchased and distributed CO2 monitors to each school. Where and when are these being 

utilized? What are the CO2 measurements of each classroom while hosting a full class of 

students in person, and what will be done to remedy those classroom settings found to have 

insufficient ventilation as demonstrated through their CO2 readings? This situation reminds me 

of Deputy Superintendent Unebasami’s recent statement to the Senators that all schools have a 

plan B, but no metrics to inform a decision as to when they should be implemented. The tools 

may be there, but in reality, there is no action being taken. These are actions that could and should have been planned well before the commencement of the 2021-22 school year (especially with the DOE’s commitment to full in person instruction back in May 2021), and that the DOE should be implementing currently across the state at all schools. I fear that the DOE’s negligence will aggravate the State’s current crisis, which is how Dr. Char herself has described the situation. Therefore, I urge the Board to direct the DOE to immediately commence impact bargaining with HSTA to ensure that employee rights and health and safety guidelines for both teachers and students will be contractually guaranteed. Thank you for your consideration. Rooosevelt High School teacher Dear Board of Education, 

I am writing testimony regarding item VI-A. 

My school is unsafe. I have a large class (almost 30), in a small, old, room with 

one bank of windows. I have multiple students with serious medical conditions, of the 

types that could be fatal should they contract Covid-19. I have the same double desks 

we’ve had since I was a child in our public schools. There is no space between my 

students- to fit them all in, they have to be in long rows. 

My elementary class is even bigger than usual because our school lost positions 

due to budget cuts. I have an air purifier I scavenged on campus, and fans I purchased. 

I was given two small containers of wipes, one box of surgical masks, and a spray 

bottle. The custodian comes in unmasked in the afternoon to empty trash and vacuum, 

and that’s it. 

Where are the Covid relief funds, BOE? Why are there fewer teachers this year, 

when we should have more, so that our class sizes are smaller, so we can space the 

children out? Why am I the only teacher in my school with an air purifier, and only 

because I managed to find an unused one? Why are there not more custodians hired 

so that cleaning is occurring more often? Our school’s solution to the crowded 

cafeteria is to have students eat in the classrooms, but no one comes to clean them 

afterward. I cannot carefully clean and teach at the same time. 

My classroom is so unsafe, it is only a matter of time. I hope to God I don’t lose 

one of these precious children that their parents have entrusted to my care, because 

you have created a situation in which I cannot keep them safe. 

And as a parent, I feel exactly the same. My child, too young to be vaccinated, is 

in the same situation. But when the case numbers started going up, it was too late to 

sign up for distance learning, and his school doesn’t even o ff er it, so we would have to 

get a GE just to get on the waiting list. My island’s hospitals are full. We have been in 

the purple metrics since Day 1. I have lost family members to Covid this month. 

What you are doing is unconscionable. The classrooms are unsafe, and you 

refuse to listen to the teachers, the ones on the ground trying to implement your “swiss 

cheese” protocols. There is only one, maybe two pieces of cheese left in your analogy 

(masking and hand-washing) at the elementary level, all other safety protocols from last year have been stripped away. Delta does not discriminate, it sickens, hospitalizes, and 

produces long-term impacts on children. We are leading up to a catastrophe, where 

children are very ill, and the hospitals are already full, and they cannot get the care they 

need and families are devastated. 

I almost didn’t even write this, because it feels pointless. I am exhausted, and 

have lost faith in your leadership. I carry with me every day the crushing reality and 

feeling of responsibility that a child may be irreparably damaged because of their time 

in my classroom. A family could be torn apart, and there is nothing I can do, because 

you are not listening- only insisting that yes, measures are in place, yes, schools are 

safe, when I can see with my own eyes that they are not. 

My suggestion: put us back in full distance until our hospitals are under control. 

Then set up the learning pods and only accept those who do not have care at home, 

and keep most students in distance until community spread is under control. Start 

actually using the funding allotted to you for SAFETY MEASURES. Not after-the-fact 

tutoring, but the type of safety measures that would allow the keiki to safely learn at 

school the first time around- air purifiers, CO2 devices in EVERY CLASSROOM, tents 

for the schools that could use them for outdoor lunches. Reinstate the metrics, and set 

up testing at every school, and test us all , vaccinated and unvaccinated, weekly, and 

nip the outbreaks in the bud. Full distance, and hybrid are incredibly exhausting, but I 

would take that every day of the week over putting the keiki in unsafe conditions. 

Sincerely, 

LocalTeacher Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony: Presentation on Opening Schools SY 2021-2022 

1 message 

klum2014@gmail.com  <klum2014@gmail.com>  Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 5:08 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

To whom it may concern, 

I am a 6th grade teacher at an elementary school, and I have concerns with the opening of school because of the 

inconsistencies with procedures and protocols across schools, like alerting students, families, and staff of cases on 

campuses. I am also concerned that a plan for distance learning was not discussed prior to the end of the school year 

and that the options were not as well-planned as they could have been. 

In terms of safety protocols, I am concerned that there are so many inconsistencies with how the DOE is handling them. I 

know that this is a difficult time for admin who are trying their best; however, from what I hear from families or faculty/staff 

from different schools, the reports of the number of cases on DOE campuses and the communicated cases to parents via 

letters are not consistent with each other. We should be transparent and honest about the number of cases, because it 

increases the lack of trust in the DOE. Also in terms of procedures being carried out on campuses, faculty and staff are 

trying their best to follow the necessary procedures to keep everyone safe, but it is still a challenge particularly with more 

students on campus and the lack of enough bodies (e.g., teachers, EAs, custodians) and space to make sure that we can 

best follow the protocols and address students’ needs. I have been fortunate that my students wear their masks for the 

most part, but many do reminders still to keep them over their noses and maintain their 3 feet distancing. I am constantly 

reminding students of these safety measures and trying to keep our classroom as safe as possible, but it becomes 

repetitive and tiresome for all. It becomes even more challenging when we have family members who are concerned 

about the DOE’s inconsistent procedures and communication. 

I am currently pregnant and will be giving birth within the next few weeks, and I understand the family members’ concerns 

and why many are trying to sign up for the DL option. With the rising cases, I am concerned for my own health and the 

health of my baby with the rising cases despite being vaccinated. This should have been better planned for in the event 

that we would need this option, but it feels like a repeat from the SY2020-2021 since we did not have a plan for it until 

close to the beginning of the school year. Being 2 weeks into the school year, why are families still trying to figure out the 

DL option if that is what they are opting for? 

Katherine Shinsato Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony 

1 message 

Tamisha Lee  <lee.tamishaj@gmail.com>  Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 5:01 PM 

To: testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov 

This testimony is given by me, Tamisha Lee, teacher at Kealakehe High School in Kailua Kona to the General Business 

Meeting of the HI BOE. 

School has been in session for two weeks.  The DOE may have made a good faith effort to prioritize safe learning 

environments over the summer, but that was before the Delta Variant showed up.  I had a student test positive on the first 

day of school.  As of Friday, I had 6 students in quarantine, and another three who will not attend during this surge. We 

have been told by our administration that it is OUR responsibility to ensure three foot distancing in our classrooms.  This 

is simple NOT a viable option for most of us.  My first period class has 32 students enrolled, my 6th period class had 31, 

the rest have 27-28, at least it did as of Friday.  Who knows what my rosters will look like when I get in on Monday.  Up 

until Friday, I did not even have enough desks and chairs for that many students.  During NORMAL times, that class size 

is too large to be an effective learning environment.  Right now, it is a recipe for disaster. 

While I know that the DOE has said we are not to do hybrid teaching, I cannot in good conscience allow my students to 

flounder because they are required to quarantine.  Especially because they WANT to be in school.  So, I open up my 

Google Meet and record all my lessons for my students at home.  I am running parallel classes for my kids at home. What 

else can I do? 

What we are facing is an unprecedented surge that is going to cost our students time, stress, and regrettably possibly 

their lives.  Do not think this virus will not mutate and begin attacking young people who cannot get vaccinated.  It can 

and it will.  We have to assume that and we have to take action RIGHT NOW.  Waiting a few more weeks will only cost 

time, money, and more infections. 

I KNOW that we want all people to get the vaccination, but they aren’t doing it, so either you are going to have to require 

ALL students 12 and older to be vaccinated to attend classes, or you’re going to have to provide students a better online 

option.  I am ready.  I have already prepped my students for a possible school closure.  NO ONE wants to be in school 

more than teachers.  We know the costs to learning and mental health being at home exact, but those options are better 

than long term health problems, death of a parent/relative, or death of a student.  If keiki are our priority, then we have to 

make sure their safety is also our priority. 

I know the economic costs of closing schools is a giant driver of the decision to keep kids in schools, but the need to 

make money shouldn’t trump their ability to just be safe. 

Please, give us some options.  Give the kids some options.  I cannot imagine what it is costing parents with young 

children who are not eligible for vaccinations in stress, worry, and fear. 

Please, make sensible choices.  For the keiki. 

Tamisha Lee 

Kealakehe High School 

Social Studies Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Item VI A 

1 message 

Valerie Simmons  <waifongsimmons@gmail.com>  Sun, Aug 15, 2021 at 3:18 PM 

To: "testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov" <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Cc: Gmail <waifongsimmons@gmail.com> 

With regard to the opening of school, we have been in school for only 1 week and already have a Covid positive student, 

in which the whole class will need to be quarantined.  No provisions were made for this since only in-person learning was 

recognized. 

Concern 1 

With the sibling in my class, I am being told that since they will be quarantining and it is a weekend, the Covid virus will no 

longer be active on surfaces beyond 48 hours.  Is this the truth?  What about virus spread in the air, since the sibling had 

already been in school? 

Quarantining does not give us a definitive answer of whether the sibling was positive or negative.  The teacher and 

students deserve to know if we are safe or we ourselves need to be tested or take precautions in our multigenerational 

families.  Siblings in school should also be tested so we will know how to proceed safely. 

Suggest that kits could be made available at the schools to test and get results of “suspect” students. 

In this world of many uncertainties, it would be nice to know that the BOE, DOE and the state ‘have our backs.’  Thank 

you. 

Valerie Simmons, grade 1 

Sent from  Mail  for Windows Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## testimony 

1 message 

Gordon Piianaia  <heulup@yahoo.com>  Thu, Aug 12, 2021 at 11:18 AM 

To: "Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov" <Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov> 

Gordon Piianaia 

Teacher 

Keaau Middle School 

General Business Meeting 

Opening of schools safely 

I am writing to testify as to the existing condition in my own school.  I believe that the current class sizes are not providing 

a safe environment for our school community.  I have rosters up to 32 students in more than one class, and one class with 

29(smallest class).  Our school facilities do not have the space to provide 3ft Social Distance recommendation between 

each student.  I understand that the guidelines state "whenever possible,"  but this will never be possible if class sizes are 

this high.  I also do my best to keep the class ventilated, but if there is no wind then the air is stifling at best.  When it is 

recess, the limited space is crowded amongst the several hundred students we have and becomes even more crowded if 

it is raining so they can stay under covered walkways.  Stress and anxiety levels are high amongst faculty, staff, and 

students.  By the 3rd day of school we had 3 fights.  I myself had to break up one, compromising my own health and 

safety for the welfare of the students(both of whom had their masks off at that point). 

I am in favor of going back to the A/B rotation system we had when we reopened during the second semester of last 

school year.  We were able to socially distance to the the recommended spacing, while also providing an incredible 

amount of support for our students due to the lower numbers in person(imagine going from 30 to 15!).  I believe this can 

be done in a short amount of time as most DOE teachers have already done this and I believe that we'd also be 

supporting our community at large by reducing Covid transmission rates at a time when numbers are exceeding the 

capacities of our medical support networks. 

Mahalo for your time, 

Gordon Piianaia Testimony BOE <testimony.boe@boe.hawaii.gov> 

## Testimony   

> 1 message
> Jennifer Kramer <jenkramerteacher@gmail.com> Mon, Aug 16, 2021 at 9:31 PM
> To: Testimony.BOE@boe.hawaii.gov

Dear BOE Personnel, 

I am submi  ng tes  mony for the August 19th general business mee  ng discussion item VI-A: Presenta  on 

on opening schools for the 2021-2022 school year. While I am concerned about many issues that have been 

brought up, this is a policy issue that has been largely overlooked. I feel I need to bring it to your a  en  on: 

According to page 22 of the  “Covid-19 Health and Safety Guidance for School Year 2021-22,”  for an 

asymptoma  c case, the infec  ous period begins “two days prior to the date the posi  ve test was 

conducted.” Based on this guidance, if a child is tested and con fi rmed to be posi  ve on a Monday, the class 

does not need to quaran  ne because they were in close contact with that child three days before. For 

FERPA reasons,  the class would not even know there was a posi  ve case.  This does not seem to make sense 

in light of the fact that the quaran  ne period is ten days long. I believe that the Board of Educa  on and 

Hawaii’s ci  zens deserve a scien  fi c explana  on of why this makes sense. If it doesn’t make scien  fi c sense, 

this guidance should change to re fl ect the real risk to the community. 

Thank you for considering this issue. 

Sincerely, 

Jennifer Kramer 

Teacher, Keone'ula  Elementary As of July 30, 2021 Table of Contents 

Introduction 3

Considerations for Schools 4

Guiding Principles 4

Minimizing Exposure and Spread of COVID-19 6

Core Essential Strategies that reduce the spread of COVID-19 6

Promoting Vaccination 6

Stay Home When Sick 7

Masks 8

Hand Hygiene (Handwashing and Respiratory Etiquette) 9

Mitigation Strategies to Maintain Healthy Operations and Environments 11 

‘Ohana Bubbles or Cohorting 11 

Ventilation 11 

Physical Distancing 12 

Screening Testing 14 

Cleaning and Disinfection 15 

Additional Considerations 19 

Visitors 19 

Drop-off/Arrival Times 19 

Recess and Physical Education 19 

Field Trips, Meetings, and Assemblies 19 

Sports and Extracurricular Activities 20 

Communications 21 

Travel 21 

Preparing for When Someone is Sick with COVID-19 22 

Before a Case of COVID-19 Occurs 22 

Response Procedures for Cases of COVID-19 22 

Close Contacts 24 

When Close Contacts Are Identified at School 24 

Students or Staff Who Become Sick at School 24 

Reporting a Potential Outbreak 25 

Hawai‘i Keiki: Healthy and Ready to Learn Program 26 

Additional Information on Testing Strategies for COVID-19 Prevention 27 

Testing 27 

Diagnostic Testing 27 Screening Testing 28 

References 29 

Resources 31 Introduction 

The Hawai‘i State Department of Education (HIDOE) and the Hawai‘i State Department of 

Health (DOH) recognize the benefits of children attending school in person, including the 

fundamental links between education and long-term health outcomes. In-person instruction is 

particularly important for younger children and those with special educational needs. Social and 

emotional support resources made available on school campuses are also critical to the health 

of our keiki, and for some families, food security is provided through school meal programs. All 

these factors must be considered in the overall health benefits of in-person learning. 

Reopening of schools requires a broad community commitment to reduce the risk of exposure 

to COVID-19. It is critical that all complex areas, school administrators and school staff are 

prepared to contribute to the prevention, rapid identification and mitigation of the spread of 

COVID-19. The goal of this guidance document is to help schools protect students, teachers, 

administrators and staff, and to help slow the spread of COVID-19. 

The DOH COVID-19 guidance for schools, which this guidance document is based on, is 

layered, flexible and aligned with the CDC's Guidance for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 

Schools. Each school is different, and not every strategy outlined in this guidance can be 

implemented at every school. 

All guidance, including this document, is subject to change as new information regarding 

COVID-19 becomes available. 

3Considerations for Schools 

Guiding Principles 

Based on CDC’s Guidance for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools, updated July 9, 2021. 

● The goal is to open schools as safely as possible given the many known and established 

benefits of in-person education. 

● The more people with whom a student or staff member interacts and the longer that 

interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread. 

● Schools must adopt and implement actions to slow the spread of COVID-19 in schools 

and the community. 

○ Multiple mitigation strategies (e.g., vaccination, directing students and staff to 

stay home when sick, correct and consistent masking, hand hygiene, cohorting, 

improving ventilation, physical distancing, screening testing, and cleaning and 

disinfection) should be implemented. 

● Students, families, teachers, school staff, and all community members must take actions 

to protect themselves and others. 

As the COVID-19 pandemic continues and community spread persists, even when a school 

carefully prepares, plans, and coordinates, students and staff will test positive for SARS-CoV-2 

and be diagnosed with COVID-19 infection. To prepare, schools should plan to reduce the 

impact of COVID-19 on in-person education by: 

● Lowering the risk of exposure and spread of COVID-19 by implementing multiple, 

layered mitigation strategies and 

● Preparing for when students and staff get sick. 

Every school should have a well-established plan to protect staff, children, and their families 

from the spread of COVID-19. Additionally, schools should have a response plan in place for 

when a student, teacher, or staff member tests positive for COVID-19. 

4Table 1. Mitigation Strategies 

Core Essential 

Strategies 

To be implemented in every situation. 

Because of the effectiveness of these 

strategies, in-person learning always 

requires these strategies to be 

implemented in every situation. 

● Promote vaccination 

of staff and eligible 

students 

● Stay home if sick and 

go home if sick at 

school 

● Correct and 

consistent masking 

● Hand hygiene 

Additional 

Mitigation 

Strategies 

To be applied in combination to the 

greatest extent possible, with priority 

given to those strategies higher on this list. 

Schools should evaluate which mitigation 

strategies they cannot practically 

implement, and which strategies can 

supplement the intended effects of that 

mitigation measure. For example, keep 

students within established small ‘ohana 

bubbles (cohorts), open windows to 

increase ventilation, and utilize air filtration 

systems for interior rooms. 

● ‘Ohana bubbles or 

cohorting 

● Improving ventilation 

● Physical distancing 

● Screening testing 

● Cleaning and 

disinfection 

5Minimizing Exposure and Spread of COVID-19 

Implement multiple mitigation strategies to encourage behaviors and create environments that 

reduce the spread of COVID-19: 

● Core essential strategies 

● Additional mitigation strategies 

● Preparing for when someone gets sick 

# Core Essential Strategies that reduce the spread of COVID-19 

Promoting Vaccination 

See CDC’s Vaccines for COVID-19 for additional information including frequently asked 

questions. 

People who are fully vaccinated against COVID-19 are at low risk of symptomatic or severe 

infection. Evidence shows that people who are fully vaccinated against COVID-19 also are less 

likely to have an asymptomatic infection or transmit COVID-19 to others than people who are 

not fully vaccinated. 

● COVID-19 vaccination is the most important core essential strategy. 

● Everyone who is eligible should get fully vaccinated for COVID-19. 

● All teachers, staff, and families, including extended family members who have 

frequent contact with students, should get vaccinated as soon as possible. 

● People who are fully vaccinated do not need to quarantine if they are exposed to 

COVID-19 and are asymptomatic, which increases in-person education. 

● See the State of Hawai‘i COVID-19 Portal for vaccine information, including where to get 

vaccinated. 

● Schools can help increase vaccine uptake among students, families, and staff by 

providing information about COVID-19 vaccination, promoting vaccination, and 

establishing supportive policies and practices that make it easy and convenient for 

eligible students, staff, and others to get vaccinated. 

● To promote vaccination, schools should: 

○ Publicize the State of Hawai‘i COVID-19 Portal to share where eligible students, 

families, and staff can get vaccinated in their community. 

○ Publicize that vaccinations are free regardless of health insurance status. 

○ Provide COVID-19 vaccination information for students and families during 

enrollment and back-to-school events. 

○ Encourage COVID-19 vaccination for eligible students and family members 

during pre-sport and extracurricular activities. 

○ Develop educational messaging for vaccination campaigns to build vaccine 

confidence, and to emphasize that individuals are fully vaccinated 2 weeks after 

completing the vaccine series. 

6○ Use CDC’s COVID-19 Vaccination Toolkits to educate school families and 

communities and promote COVID-19 vaccination. 

○ Provide students and families flexible options for excused absences to receive a 

COVID-19 vaccination and for possible side effects after vaccination. 

○ Offer flexible, supportive leave options for staff to get vaccinated. Refer to memo 

Release Time for COVID-19 Vaccination. 

○ Remind school families that in addition to COVID-19 vaccination, children and 

adolescents should get all recommended routine and catch-up vaccinations in 

order to protect themselves, other students, staff, and families from other 

vaccine-preventable diseases. 

● Because not everyone is fully vaccinated, schools must continue to implement multiple 

mitigation strategies to slow the spread of COVID-19. 

Stay Home When Sick 

Staying home when sick is a core essential strategy to keep COVID-19 infection from spreading 

in schools and to protect others.  All HIDOE staff, contracted service providers, visitors and 

students should complete a wellness check each morning before going to school or the office. If 

the answer is “yes” to any of the questions below, stay home and follow the Return to 

School/Work Criteria before returning to campus. Please report any illness or COVID-19 

exposure to the school. 

STEP 1: Check for Symptoms of Illness 

Do you or your child have any of these symptoms? If yes, do not go to school. 

● Fever (higher than 100°F or hot to the touch) 

● Chills 

● Cough 

● Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing 

● Fatigue (tiredness, weakness) 

● Muscle or body aches 

● Headache 

● New loss of taste or smell 

● Sore throat 

● Congestion or runny nose 

● Nausea or vomiting 

● Diarrhea 

Students and staff who have symptoms of any infectious illness or symptoms consistent with 

COVID-19 should not attend school and should get tested as it will help with rapid contact 

tracing and prevent spread in schools. Encourage staff to monitor themselves for signs of 

infectious illness including COVID-19 every day . A printable Wellness Check visual has been 

created for awareness to help keep our schools safe. 

7Universal symptom screening is not required upon arrival at the school or office but symptom 

screening can be conducted for anyone who is showing signs of illness at school. Screening 

must be performed in a safe and respectful manner. Any designated adult can perform the 

screening. 

STEP 2: Check for Recent COVID-19 Exposure 

Do any of the following apply to you or your child? If yes, do not go to school. 

● Are sick or test positive for COVID-19. 

● Are unvaccinated and have had recent close contact with a person with 

COVID-19. 

● Adult and student close contacts who are fully vaccinated and asymptomatic do 

not have to quarantine and can go to school. 

Masks 

Correct and consistent mask use is a core essential strategy to help prevent and slow the 

spread of COVID-19 in schools and the community. When people wear a mask correctly and 

consistently, they protect others as well as themselves. 

● Indoor settings 

○ Masks must always be worn correctly and consistently by all students and 

staff when indoors. 

○ The only exception is for eating and drinking. 

● Outdoor settings 

○ Students and staff do not need to wear masks in most outdoor settings. 

○ Students and staff should wear masks in crowded outdoor settings or during 

activities that involve sustained close contact with other people. 

○ Schools may elect to require that masks be worn in outdoor settings to simplify 

procedures for identification of contacts when a person with COVID-19 infection 

is identified. 

■ For example, if cohorting or physical distancing will not be maintained 

during recess, wearing masks can help mitigate exposure and decrease 

the number of unvaccinated students and staff who must quarantine. 

○ Schools should be supportive of students and staff who choose to wear a mask 

outdoors. 

● Suitable cloth masks should have two layers of cloth and should fit snugly, covering both 

mouth and nose. 

● Teach and reinforce the correct and consistent use of masks by students and staff. 

● All students should learn about proper mask wearing. 

● Students and staff should be frequently reminded not to touch their mask and to wash 

their hands or use hand sanitizer frequently. 

8● Consider the use, by some teachers and staff, of masks with a clear window that cover 

the nose and mouth and wrap securely around the face. Clear masks are not face 

shields. 

○ Clear masks should be determined not to cause any breathing difficulties or over 

heating for the wearer. 

○ Teachers and staff who may consider using clear masks include: 

■ Those who interact with students or staff who are deaf or hard of hearing. 

■ Teachers of young students learning to read. 

■ Teachers of students who are new language learners. 

■ Teachers of students with disabilities. 

● Masks should not be worn by or placed on: 

○ Children younger than 2 years of age. 

○ Anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious. 

○ Anyone who is incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without 

assistance. 

● Students seeking exemption from wearing a face mask shall complete the Request for 

Face Mask Exemption at School form and submit it to the school. 

● Employees seeking exemption from wearing a face mask shall make an ADA request for 

reasonable accommodations by submitting Form RA-1 and RA-3 to the principal or 

Complex Area Equity Specialist. 

● Face shields should not be used as a substitute for masks because of a lack of evidence 

of their effectiveness. 

○ A face shield provides eye protection for the person wearing it (e.g., in the event 

of bodily fluid splashes) and not respiratory protection. 

Hand Hygiene (Handwashing and Respiratory Etiquette) 

Hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette (covering coughs and sneezes) is a core essential 

strategy to keep from getting and spreading respiratory illnesses including COVID-19. 

● Hand-washing or sanitizing stations should be available at the entrances of school, near 

or inside of classrooms, and in all meeting areas (e.g. library, cafeteria, offices). 

● Teach and reinforce handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. 

○ If soap and water are not readily available, use hand sanitizer containing at least 

60% alcohol (for staff and older children who can safely use hand sanitizer). 

○ Hand sanitizers should be stored up, away, and out of sight of young children and 

should be used only with adult supervision for children less than 6 years of age. 

● Provide frequent reminders to wash hands and assist young children with handwashing. 

● Monitor to ensure adherence among students and staff. 

● Avoid touching eyes, nose, mouth, and mask. 

● Encourage staff and students to cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue. 

○ Throw used tissues in the trash and wash hands immediately with soap and 

water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer. 

9Adequate Hygiene Supplies 

● Support healthy hygiene behaviors by providing adequate supplies, including masks, 

soap and water, hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, paper towels, tissues, 

disinfectant wipes, and no-touch or foot pedal trash cans. 

Signs and Messages 

● Post signs that promote everyday protective measures in highly visible locations, such 

as the health room, restrooms, hallways, classrooms, and offices. 

● Use simple, clear, and effective language about behaviors that prevent COVID-19 

spread when communicating with staff and families. 

● Translate materials into common languages spoken by students, faculty, and staff in the 

school community. 

● Consider using the following resources: 

○ DOH COVID-19 Guidance for Schools provides printable resources for school 

administrators, students, families and the public 

○ Stop the Spread of Germs at School and Offices 

○ CDC Wash Your Hands! 

○ COVID-19 Protective Hand-washing 

10 Mitigation Strategies to Maintain Healthy Operations and 

# Environments 

‘Ohana Bubbles or Cohorting 

‘Ohana bubbles or cohorting means keeping students and staff together in a small group and 

having each group stay together. ‘Ohana bubbles or cohorting can be used to limit the number 

of students and staff who interact with each other, especially when it is challenging to maintain 

physical distancing, such as among young children. This is a strategy schools may use to help 

limit the spread of COVID-19 by: 

● Decreasing opportunities for COVID-19 exposure. 

● Facilitating more efficient contact tracing in the event of a person with COVID-19 

infection. 

● Allowing for targeted quarantine of the cohort in the event of a person with COVID-19 

infection or cluster of people with COVID-19 infection. 

Cohorting Implementation 

● ‘Ohana bubbles or cohorting does not eliminate the risk of COVID-19 spread. 

● ‘Ohana bubbles or cohorting helps to reduce the spread of COVID-19 to fewer people. 

● Keep students and teachers into distinct groups that stay together throughout the entire 

school day during in-person classroom instruction, meals, and recess time to minimize 

exposure across classes, grades, and the school. 

● Limit mixing between groups so there is no interaction between ‘ohana bubbles or 

cohorts. 

Ventilation 

See CDC’s Ventilation in Schools and Childcare Programs, updated February 26, 2021. See 

CDC’s Ventilation in Buildings, including frequently asked questions, updated June 2, 2021. 

Improving ventilation is an important COVID-19 prevention strategy that can reduce the number 

of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles in the air. Bringing fresh outdoor air into a building helps keep 

virus particles from concentrating inside. 

● Increase outdoor air ventilation. 

○ When weather conditions allow, increase fresh outdoor air by opening windows 

and doors. 

○ Do not open windows and doors if doing so poses a safety or health risk to 

children using the facility. 

○ Use fans to increase the effectiveness of open windows. 

■ Safely secure fans in a window to blow potentially contaminated air out 

and pull new air in through other open windows and doors. 

11 ■ Strategic window fan placement in exhaust mode can help draw fresh air 

into a room via other open windows and doors without generating strong 

room air currents. 

● Move activities, classes, and meals outdoors when circumstances allow. 

● Ensure heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) settings are maximizing 

ventilation. 

● Ensure ventilation systems are serviced and operate properly. 

● Set HVAC systems to bring in as much outdoor air as the system will safely allow to 

reduce or eliminate HVAC air recirculation, when practical. 

● Increase the HVAC system’s total airflow supply to occupied spaces when practical; 

more air flow encourages air mixing and ensures any recirculated air passes through the 

filter more frequently. 

● Consider portable air cleaners that use high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters to 

enhance air cleaning, particularly in higher-risk areas (e.g., interior rooms with poor 

ventilation), when possible. 

● Use exhaust fans in restrooms and kitchens. 

● Inspect and maintain exhaust ventilation systems in restrooms and kitchens. 

● Ensure restroom and kitchen exhaust fans are on and operating at full capacity when the 

school is occupied and for 2 hours afterwards. 

Physical Distancing 

Schools should implement physical distancing to the extent possible within their structures but 

should not exclude students from in-person education to keep a minimum distance requirement. 

Several studies from the 2020-2021 school year show low COVID-19 transmission levels among 

students in schools that had less than 6 feet of physical distance when the school implemented 

and layered other mitigation strategies, such as the use of masks. 

● Maintain at least 3 feet of physical distance between students within classrooms, when 

possible. 

● Maintain at least 6 feet of physical distance between students and staff, and between 

staff members who are not fully vaccinated, when possible. 

● When it is not possible to maintain a physical distance of at least 3 feet, implement the 

core essential strategies and additional layered mitigation strategies to the extent 

possible to reduce the risk to in-person education. 

Modified Layouts 

● Space seating and desks as far apart as possible. 

● Turn desks to face in the same direction (rather than facing each other), or have 

students sit on only one side of tables, spaced apart as much as possible. 

● Modify learning stations and activities so there are fewer students per group, spaced 

apart as much as possible. 

● Avoid direct contact between students and staff as much as possible. 

12 Physical Barriers and Guides 

● Physical barriers are not a substitute for masks. 

● Provide physical guides, such as tape on floors or sidewalks and signs on walls, to 

remind staff and students to maintain as much distance as possible in lines and at other 

times (e.g., guides for creating “one-way routes” in hallways). 

Communal Spaces 

● Communal spaces such as cafeterias and bathrooms may be used with planning. Plans 

for each communal space should be based on the risk of COVID-19 spread in that 

space, with priority for mitigation strategies given to higher-risk spaces. For example: 

○ Cafeterias pose a higher risk of COVID-19 spread because they are indoors, 

people remove their masks to eat and drink, and meals are usually more than 15 

minutes in duration. 

○ Bathrooms pose a lower risk of COVID-19 spread because people keep their 

masks on, can stay 3 feet apart from others, and usually spend less than 15 

minutes in bathrooms during the school day. 

● In cafeterias or indoor rooms (e.g., breakrooms, classrooms) where people eat and 

drink and do not wear masks, a close contact is any adult or student who was within 6 

feet of a person with COVID-19 infection for 15 minutes or more over a 24-hour period. 

Food Service and School Meals 

● Maximize physical distancing as much as possible when in food service lines and while 

eating. 

● Use additional spaces for mealtime seating such as the gymnasium or outdoor seating to 

facilitate physical distancing. 

● Layer mitigation strategies during eating and drinking indoors, such as: 

○ Cohorting 

○ Assigning seats 

○ Having students and staff sit facing the same direction 

● Improve ventilation in food preparation, service, and seating areas. 

● Because of the very low risk of transmission from surfaces and shared objects, there is 

no need to limit food service approaches to single-use items and packaged meals. 

● Clean frequently touched surfaces. 

● Surfaces with food contact should be washed, rinsed, and sanitized before and after 

meals. 

● Promote handwashing using reminders and visual guides. 

● In the event of a positive COVID-19 case that disrupts meal service, the administrator 

should contact their district supervisor. They will determine a strategy to ensure that 

meal service will not be interrupted. The district supervisor will then contact the School 

Food Service Program Administrator. 

13 Sleeping Spaces 

● Maximize physical distancing between sleep mats as much as possible. 

● Place students head-to-toe to maximize distance between their faces. 

● Assign nap mats to individual students and clean regularly. 

● Prioritize improving ventilation in spaces for sleeping. 

● Masks should not be worn when sleeping. 

School Buses and Vehicles 

● The CDC issued an Order on January 29, 2021 requiring the wearing of masks by 

people on public transportation conveyances, including school buses, to prevent spread 

of COVID-19. 

● Drivers and passengers must wear a mask on school buses. 

● Have spare masks available to ensure all students wear masks on school buses. 

● No eating or drinking. 

● Keep vehicle windows open when it does not create a safety or health hazard. 

● More open windows are better; opening a few windows even a few inches is better than 

keeping all windows closed. 

● Sanitize hands before students get on the bus. 

● Have household members sit together. 

● Load the bus back to front and unload front to back to limit students standing in the 

aisles next to those seated, as practical. 

● Create physical distance between students on buses or transportation, when possible. 

● Assign seats, in order to facilitate cohorting. 

○ Assigned seating will assist in identifying close contacts if there is a person with 

COVID-19 infection on the bus. 

○ Only unvaccinated persons identified as close contacts (within 6 feet of an 

infected person for 15 minutes or more over a 24-hour period) will be required to 

quarantine. 

Screening Testing 

Screening testing identifies people infected with COVID-19, including those without symptoms 

or before symptoms develop, early to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. In partnership with 

the DOH and health service providers, schools may consider screening testing of those who are 

not fully vaccinated to facilitate safe participation in sports, extracurricular activities, and other 

activities with a higher risk of COVID-19 transmission. High-risk extracurricular activities are 

those in which increased exhalation occurs, such as activities that involve singing, shouting, 

band, or exercise, especially when conducted indoors or in close proximity to others. 

Guidance around screening testing procedures is being developed and will be forthcoming. 

14 Cleaning and Disinfection 

See CDC’s Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Facility, updated on June 15, 2021, for more 

information. 

Cleaning and disinfection are part of a broad approach to prevent infectious diseases, including 

COVID-19, in schools. 

● In most situations, the risk of infection from touching surfaces is low. 

● Cleaning once a day is usually enough to sufficiently remove potential virus that may be 

on surfaces. 

● Prioritize high-touch surfaces for more frequent cleaning. 

● The most reliable way to prevent infection from surfaces is to regularly wash hands or 

use hand sanitizer. 

● If there has been a sick person or someone who tested positive for COVID-19 in a space 

within the last 24 hours, clean and disinfect the space. 

● Use a disinfectant product from the Environmental Protection Agency’s List N that is 

effective against COVID-19. 

When to Clean and Disinfect a School When Someone is Sick 

Upon consultation and confirmation by the COVID-19 Response Team, the Office of Facilities 

and Operations (OFO) will begin working with the principal, supervisor or designee on a 

cleaning plan and schedule. If someone is suspected to have COVID-19 while on campus, close 

off any areas used or accessed by the individual. The OFO representatives on the COVID-19 

Response Team shall determine sanitization priorities and protocol. 

● If less than 24 hours have passed since the person who is sick or diagnosed with 

COVID-19 has been in the space, clean and disinfect the space. 

● If more than 24 hours have passed since the person who is sick or diagnosed with 

COVID-19 has been in the space, cleaning is enough. 

● If more than 3 days have passed since the person who is sick or diagnosed with 

COVID-19 has been in the space, no additional cleaning (beyond regular cleaning 

practices) is needed. 

The following steps should also be taken and information relayed to the COVID-19 Response 

Team: 

● Identify all areas accessed by the positive case during the infectious period. 

● AS, CAS, principal, supervisor and/or designee decide on what areas, rooms, and 

buildings to close and/or sanitize. 

Additional CDC guidance for Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Facility is available. For more 

information, contact OFO at (808) 784-5000. 

15 Considerations 

● For more information about distance learning support in the event of a classroom or 

school closure, click here. 

● For more information about the types of leave to use in the event of a positive case 

and/or possible staff exposure, view the following memos: 

○ Dec. 31, 2020: Leave of Absence Update for Classified Employees and a 

Reminder Regarding Quarantine Leave, click here (Lotus Notes login required). 

○ Dec. 16, 2020: Quarantine Leave - COVID-19 for Certificated Employees and 

Leave of Absence Update for Classified Employees, click here (Lotus Notes login 

required). 

Daily Cleaning of Facilities Protocol 

Daily cleaning procedures expectations for Custodial Service Workers - OSHA Link. The 

cleaning schedule for school facilities should adhere to guidance from the CDC and DOH as 

available. School facilities should be cleaned daily including high-touch areas, such as door 

knobs, light switches, counters, desks and chairs, railings, and water fountains. 

Proper personal protective equipment (PPE), such as masks and disposable gloves, should be 

worn at all times during the preparation, cleaning, and disinfection of school facilities. 

● Clean all frequently touched surfaces as often as possible and at minimum, each day: 

○ School hardware may be cleaned before school, during recess, lunch recess, 

and afterschool. 

○ When classes are in session, custodians may clean doorknobs, handrails, and 

water fountains. 

● Wear disposable gloves for all tasks in the cleaning process, including handling trash 

○ Additional PPE may be required based on the cleaning/disinfectant products 

being used and whether there is a risk of splash. 

○ Gloves should be removed carefully to avoid contamination of the wearer and the 

surrounding area. 

● When disinfecting, use EPA-registered products or diluted bleach against the virus that 

causes COVID-19. 

○ Always read the labels and safety data sheet of any chemicals used in daily work 

before using the product. 

○ Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for safe, effective use. 

○ Disinfectants are most effective when surfaces are pre-cleaned prior to 

disinfection. 

○ Be aware of the “contact” time for your disinfectant to be effective. 

● Provide touch free waste-disposal containers. 

● Ensure that facilities are regularly cleaned, sanitized, and disinfected, and that 

hazardous materials are disposed of properly. 

● Always wash hands immediately for at least 20 seconds with soap and water after 

removing gloves and after contact with a person who is sick. 

16 ● Principals, with Head Custodians, should develop a daily schedule for the Custodial Staff 

to clean school hardware. High touch surfaces outside of classrooms should be cleaned 

multiple times throughout the day with special attention given to high traffic locations 

such as restrooms and the front office. 

Request for PPE supplies 

HIDOE school, complex area, and state office requests for PPE will be filled based on 

assessments of current and future PPE needs for individuals or groups of higher risk of 

exposure. 

● Given the dynamic nature of the pandemic, requests are subject to considerations of the 

overall response needs and supply chain limitations. 

● OFO provides essential PPE supplies to HIDOE offices and schools. These PPE 

supplies are procured from a combination of the Hawai‘i Emergency Management 

Agency, commercial vendors, and donations. Essential PPE items include disposable 

surgical face masks, KN95 face masks, face shields, gloves, surgical gowns, hand 

sanitizer and disinfectant. 

OFO will work and consult with the HIDOE Office of Talent Management (OTM) and Office of 

Student Support Services (OSSS) to determine the appropriate PPE needed for various 

categories of workers. 

● Needs will be based on CDC guidance and the risk of exposure levels described by the 

Hawai‘i State Department of Labor and Industrial Relations and the Occupational Safety 

and Health Administration. 

Requests: 

● HIDOE offices and schools must update PPE counts through the CPT inventory system 

on a weekly basis. These inventory levels are used by OFO to determine ongoing PPE 

reorder and resupply needs. Replenishment of PPE is subject to availability (e.g., nitrile 

glove supply may be low across the state and even nationally). 

● OFO will continue to work with the complex areas and schools to identify and provide 

special PPE supply needs as they arise. 

● In case of an emergency, schools should keep their CAS apprised and contact the 

Safety, Security and Emergency Preparedness Branch. 

● A hotline for urgent PPE requests from HIDOE schools and offices is available at 

(808) 784-5185. 

Daily Cleaning of Technology Devices 

Devices that are loaned to students/staff for distance learning and telework should be cleaned 

upon return and reissuance to another person. For devices used throughout the day by multiple 

people, cleaning should occur between use by the next person. 

17 ● General steps to cleaning commonly used technology devices (e.g., computers, tablets, 

laptops, phones) 

● For detailed steps and information: 

○ Review “Cleaning of Devices” in the HIDOE Technology Guidance for Employees 

(employee login required). 

18 Additional Considerations 

Visitors 

● All visitors must wear a face mask on campus. 

● Review rules for visitors and family engagement activities. 

● Limit nonessential visitors, volunteers, and activities involving external groups or 

organizations with people who are not fully vaccinated. 

● Do not limit access for direct service providers but ensure compliance with school visitor 

policies. 

● Emphasize the importance of staying home when sick. 

● Limit visits to multiple campuses for unvaccinated staff who travel between schools. 

Drop-off/Arrival Times 

● Establish clear policies for student entry and dismissal from campus that ensure physical 

distance between individuals. Consider staggering drop-off and arrival times for 

students, so that large groups of people are not arriving and leaving at the same time to 

minimize overcrowding and close contact in confined areas. 

Recess and Physical Education 

● In general, students and staff do not need to wear masks when outdoors (e.g., 

participating in outdoor play, recess, and physical education activities). 

● Students and staff should stay in their ‘ohana bubbles or cohorts when unmasked 

outdoors to decrease mixing across classes and grades and to facilitate identification of 

close contacts if a case is reported. 

● Students and staff must wear a mask in crowded outdoor settings or during activities 

that involve sustained close contact with other people who are not fully vaccinated. 

● When physical education activities or recess is held indoors, students and staff must 

wear a mask. 

Field Trips, Meetings, and Assemblies 

● Promote as much physical distancing as possible between students, staff, and members 

of the public, and limit group size. 

● Keep students and staff within their defined cohorts, as much as possible, and ensure as 

much distance as possible between each cohort group (e.g., by using aisle space or 

other markers that separate the groups). 

● No eating, drinking, and singing during indoor events. 

● Keep records of seating charts. 

● HIDOE COVID-19 Guidance for offices, training facilities and meeting rooms. 

19 After-school Child Care Programs 

● Students and staff should comply with school day policies and procedures. 

● Mixing students from different classes and cohorts within a school and across different 

schools increases the risk of COVID-19 spread. 

● After-school programs should implement the same core essential strategies and layered 

mitigation strategies as schools. 

● Core essential strategies must be implemented in after-school programs. 

○ Promote vaccination for all staff and eligible students. 

○ Direct students and staff to stay home when sick. 

○ Correct and consistent masking when indoors. 

○ Hand hygiene. 

● Multiple layered mitigation strategies should be implemented in after-school programs to 

the extent possible. 

○ Designated ‘ohana bubbles or cohorts, improving ventilation, physical distancing, 

screening testing, and cleaning and disinfection. 

● Prioritize outdoor activities. 

○ Students and staff do not need to wear masks in most outdoor settings. 

○ Students and staff should stay in their ‘ohana bubbles or cohorts when unmasked 

outdoors to decrease mixing across classes and grades and facilitate 

identification of close contacts. 

○ Students and staff should wear masks in crowded outdoor settings or during 

activities that involve sustained close contact with other people. 

● Keep records of students and staff in attendance. 

● Keep records of ‘ohana bubbles or cohorts, if implemented. 

● Prepare for when a student or staff has COVID-19. 

○ See section below, Preparing for When Someone is Sick with COVID-19. 

○ See What to Do If a Person at School has COVID-19. 

○ Immediately notify the school that the student attends or the school where the 

staff is employed. 

Sports and Extracurricular Activities 

Students and staff who are fully vaccinated and asymptomatic do not have to quarantine 

following a known exposure, allowing continued participation in in-person education, sports, and 

extracurricular activities. Due to increased exhalation that occurs during physical activity, some 

sports can put players, coaches, trainers, and others who are not fully vaccinated at increased 

risk for spreading COVID-19. Close contact and indoor sports are particularly high risk. Similar 

risks might exist for other extracurricular activities, such as band, choir, theater, and other school 

clubs that meet indoors. 

● Students and staff should comply with school day policies and procedures. 

20 ● In-person education should be prioritized over sports and extracurricular activities. 

● Students and staff should not participate in sports and extracurricular activities when 

they have symptoms consistent with COVID-19, and they should get tested. 

● Schools should consider using screening testing for students and staff (e.g., coaches, 

teachers, advisors) who are not fully vaccinated and who participate in and support 

these high-risk activities. 

● Facilitating safe participation in sports and extracurricular activities can reduce 

COVID-19 spread and the risk to in-person education. 

● Mixing students from different classes and cohorts within a school and across different 

schools increases the risk of COVID-19 spread. 

Communications 

● Staff and families should self-report to the school if they or their students have symptoms 

of COVID-19, a positive COVID-19 test, or were in close contact with someone with 

COVID-19 within the last 14 days. 

● Notify staff, families, and the public of school closures and any restrictions to limit 

COVID-19 exposure (e.g., limited hours of operation). 

Travel 

● See Safe Travels Hawai‘i for questions regarding Hawai’i travel requirements and 

recommendations for staff. 

● See DOE Memos & Notices for the most recent student travel requirements. 

21 Preparing for When Someone is Sick with COVID-19 

Before a Case of COVID-19 Occurs 

● Schools should establish a COVID-19 point of contact. 

○ Provide a telephone number and email address to the DOH and the school 

community that will be checked at least daily, including on weekends and 

holidays. 

○ This will help ensure timely notification of schools when a positive case or close 

contact occurs or when DOH becomes aware of a cluster of infected persons 

related to a school setting. 

● Schools should be prepared to: 

○ Report persons with COVID-19 infection to DOH. 

○ Notify school close contacts of exposure. 

○ Provide school close contacts with Home Isolation and Quarantine Guidance. 

Response Procedures for Cases of COVID-19 

Take these steps when: 

● A positive case is confirmed: An individual received a diagnosis from a viral test, 

authorized medical professional, or the DOH reported the case to the school. 

● A probable case is identified: An individual has one or more COVID-19-like symptoms 

and known exposure (i.e. close contact) to a positive case, or meets presumptive 

laboratory evidence. 

● These steps do not apply to close contact situations. 

Step 1: Determine if the individual was on campus during the infectious period, which begins 

two (2) days before the onset of symptoms or if no symptoms, two (2) days prior to the date the 

positive test was conducted. 

Step 2: Send a text including the CAS or AS and HIDOE’s COVID-19 Response Team. The text 

should say, “Case reported at [insert school or office name]. The case [was/was not] on campus 

during the infectious period." 

Step 3: If the case was on campus during the infectious period: 

○ Identify and notify close contacts (students, employees, casual hires, and 

vendors) as soon as possible using the template available here. Document all 

outreach (e.g. date/time of phone call or email). 

○ Clean and disinfect. If less than 24 hours have passed since the person who is 

sick or diagnosed with COVID-19 has been in the space. If cleaning support is 

needed, please contact the OFO representative. If more than 24 hours have 

passed since the person who is sick or diagnosed with COVID-19 has been in 

22 the space, cleaning is enough. You may choose to also disinfect depending on 

certain conditions or everyday practices required by your facility. If more than 3 

days have passed since the person who is sick or diagnosed with COVID-19 has 

been in the space, no additional cleaning (beyond regular cleaning practices) is 

needed. 

● Step 4: Broad staff and family notification. Notification templates are available here. 

Notifications in other languages are available at the same link. A final copy of the 

notification(s) should be emailed to the COVID-19 Response Team for the Department’s 

records. If a case has not been on campus for two weeks prior to diagnosis, a 

notification is optional. Notification to families should go out via School Messenger 

and/or distributed as a hard copy. The notification should not be posted on the school's 

social media platforms or website. The COVID-19 Response Team will assist the 

principal, supervisor or designee with messaging. All reported confirmed cases are 

posted weekly on the Department’s website at hawaiipublicschools.org. 

● Step 5: Complete HIDOE’s Case Intake Form (updated May 3, 2021) and email it to the 

AS or CAS and COVID-19 Response Team. 

● Step 6: If DOH did not report the case, contact DOH to report and/or confirm the positive 

case and share the intake form and DOH Close Contact Report. (See What to Do If a 

Person at School has COVID-19 for DOH contact information) 

● Step 7: Determine when it is safe for employees and/or students to return to their 

worksite or campus. Students and staff who have tested positive for COVID-19 or have 

symptoms consistent with COVID-19 must isolate at home. A positive case can return to 

school when all the following conditions are met: 

■ At least 10 days have passed since symptoms first appeared; or 

■ If there are no symptoms, at least 10 days have passed since the date the 

laboratory test was collected; and 

■ At least 24 hours have passed since last fever without use of 

fever-reducing medications; and 

■ Symptoms have improved. 

■ Schools should not require a negative COVID-19 test or a clinician’s note 

to return to school if the person has completed 10 days of isolation and 

meets the conditions above. See Home Isolation and Quarantine 

Guidance for more information. 

Close Contacts 

If a school can clearly identify the students and staff who meet the definition of a close contact, it 

will help limit the number of persons quarantined and tested to those with greatest risk for 

exposure to the infected person. Definitions of close contacts in the school setting: 

23 ● A close contact is defined as within 6 feet of a person with COVID-19 infection for a 

combined total of 15 minutes or more over a 24-hour period (regardless of mask use). 

● Exception: In a K-12 indoor classroom setting , where everyone is wearing a mask 

correctly and consistently, the close contact definition excludes students who were within 

3 to 6 feet of an infected student. 

○ This exception does not apply to teachers, staff, or other adults in the indoor 

classroom setting, nor does this apply to students who were eating or drinking 

and not wearing masks. 

● Examples where all persons in the class would be considered close contacts includes: 

○ Cohorts in classrooms that spend the entire day together and have prolonged 

close interaction. 

○ Classrooms that do not have assigned seats and/or students are frequently 

moving around in class. 

○ Cohorts that engage in activities that may increase the risk of transmission (e.g., 

eating and drinking indoors, singing indoors, playing brass or woodwind musical 

instruments indoors). 

● Examples where all persons in the class may not be considered close contacts include: 

○ Classrooms with assigned seating and students remain seated throughout class. 

When Close Contacts Are Identified at School 

● See Home Isolation and Quarantine Guidance. 

● Unvaccinated students and staff who are close contacts of a person with COVID-19 

infection must quarantine for 10 days and should be tested. 

○ Unvaccinated students and staff who are close contacts can return to school 

when both of the following conditions are met: 

■ At least 10 days have passed since the last contact with the infected 

person; and 

■ No symptoms. 

○ Schools should not require a negative COVID-19 test or a clinician’s note to 

return to school if the person has completed 10 days of quarantine and meets the 

conditions above. 

● Fully vaccinated students and staff who had close contact with a person with COVID-19 

infection and remain asymptomatic do not have to quarantine or be tested. 

Students or Staff Who Become Sick at School 

When someone is ill at school, check for any COVID-19-like symptoms: 

○ Fever (higher than 100°F) 

○ Chills 

○ Cough 

○ Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing 

24 ○ Fatigue (tiredness, weakness) 

○ Muscle or body aches 

○ Headache 

○ New loss of taste or smell 

○ Sore throat 

○ Congestion or runny nose 

○ Nausea or vomiting 

○ Diarrhea 

● If any COVID-19-like symptoms are present, separate the sick person from others at the 

school. The individual should be sent home or to a healthcare facility depending on 

symptom severity. Provide them or the family with a copy of the Return to School/Work 

Criteria so that it is clear when it is safe to return to campus. 

● If the person must wait for pick-up, identify an isolation area to separate anyone who has 

COVID-19 symptoms, ideally with a dedicated restroom and waste receptacle not used 

by others. 

○ Ensure students are isolated in a non-threatening manner, within the line of sight 

of an adult, and for very short periods of time. 

● Ensure personnel managing sick students or employees are appropriately protected 

from potential exposure to COVID-19. 

○ Personnel who need to be within 6 feet of a sick student or staff should be 

provided appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE), including a face 

shield or goggles, an N95 or equivalent (or a surgical facemask if a respirator is 

not available) and follow standard and transmission-based precautions. 

○ Gloves and gowns are not routinely required but consider use during interactions 

with a student or employee who is actively coughing or with special medical 

needs which may result in aerosol generation (e.g., child with tracheostomy who 

requires suctioning). 

○ Personnel should be trained on appropriate use of PPE. 

● Clean and disinfect any isolation areas, work areas, shared common areas (including 

restrooms) and any supplies, tools, or equipment handled by an ill student or staff. 

Reporting a Potential Outbreak 

● Schools are required to immediately report (by telephone) COVID-19 or influenza-like 

illness activity to the DOH when daily: 

○ Absentee rate exceeds 10% for entire school; or 

○ Absentee rate exceeds 20% of one grade or classroom. 

Hawai‘i Keiki: Healthy and Ready to Learn Program 

In partnership with the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, 

the Hawai‘i Keiki (HK) program is helping to address the impact of COVID-19 on students and 

25 schools. HK nurses, located in every complex area statewide, are available to support schools 

with the following services during school year 2021-22: 

● Telephone hotline and telehealth services; 

● COVID-19 school readiness assessment; 

● Contingency planning for medically fragile students; 

● Rapid response to reported cases at school; 

● Training for students and staff to decrease the spread of COVID-19; and 

● Advice for COVID-19 exposed and positive families. 

Please reach out to the Complex Area RN or APRN, contact information can be found here. 

26 Additional Information on Testing Strategies for COVID-19 

# Prevention 

Testing 

See CDC’s Testing Strategies for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools, updated July 9, 2021, 

for more information. 

Testing is a mitigation strategy that schools can consider for an additional layer of protection and 

to reduce the risk to in-person education. 

Diagnostic Testing 

Diagnostic testing refers to testing for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, in a 

person who has symptoms consistent with COVID-19 or who has been exposed or is suspected 

of being exposed to a person with COVID-19 (i.e., a close contact), regardless of whether they 

have symptoms. 

● Schools should always recommend diagnostic testing to any student or staff who 

exhibits symptoms of COVID-19 at school. 

● Schools should also recommend testing to students and staff when they have been 

exposed to a person who is confirmed or suspected of having COVID-19, whether or not 

they have symptoms. 

● In some schools, school-based healthcare professionals may perform SARS-CoV-2 

diagnostic testing, including rapid point-of-care testing. 

○ School-based healthcare professional must be trained in specimen collection and 

○ Obtain a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certificate of 

waiver. 

● School-based healthcare professionals must have access to, and training on, the proper 

use of personal protective equipment (PPE). 

● All testing performed by school-based healthcare professionals must be reported to 

DOH as mandated by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. 

● Consent from a parent or legal guardian (for minor students) or from the individual (for 

adults and students 18 years of age and older) is required for voluntary school-based 

testing. 

● For persons who test positive for COVID-19, see section above, Response Procedures 

for Cases of COVID-19. 

○ See What to Do If a Person at School has COVID-19. 

○ See Home Isolation and Quarantine Guidance 

27 Screening Testing 

Screening testing refers to testing for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, to identify 

people who are infected but do not have symptoms or before symptoms develop. 

In schools, screening testing can help to do the following: 

● Promptly identify and isolate students and staff with COVID-19. 

● Promptly identify and quarantine students and staff who may have been exposed to 

COVID-19 and are not fully vaccinated. 

● Promptly identify clusters indicating spread of COVID-19. 

● Reduce the risk to in-person education. 

● Screening testing is a mitigation strategy for schools to consider if they are not able to 

implement multiple layered mitigation measures. 

● Screening testing is a mitigation strategy for schools to consider for students and staff 

(e.g., coaches, trainers, advisors, volunteers) who participate in higher-risk sports and 

extracurricular activities (e.g., football, band, singing). 

● Screening testing is likely to be most feasible in larger settings and for older children and 

adolescents. 

● Schools considering implementing screening testing programs should review CDC’s 

Guidance for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools, Appendix 2: Testing Strategies for 

COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools, which addresses the following topics: 

○ Testing benefits 

○ Testing strategies 

○ Choosing a test 

○ Reporting results 

○ Ethical considerations for school-based testing 

○ Collaboration between education (i.e., Department of Education) and public 

health (i.e. DOH) 

○ Resources to support school screening testing programs 

■ Shah Family Foundation Open and Safe Schools toolkit, which provides 

school leaders resources and tools to implement COVID-19 screening 

testing. 

■ Rockefeller Foundation playbook with detailed, step-by-step guidance to 

help design and implement effective testing programs in schools, 

including operational challenges and everyday realities of implementing a 

complex, logistical program in an easy-to-understand, practical guide. 

28 References 

COVID-19 Guidance for Schools | Hawai‘i State Department of Health 

July 26, 2021 

Guidance for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools | CDC 

July 9, 2021 

When You’ve Been Fully Vaccinated | CDC 

July 16, 2021 

COVID-19 Vaccine - Hawai‘i DOH: Info & Resources for Managing COVID-19 

Reviewed July 23, 2021 

COVID-19 Vaccination Toolkit for Health Departments and other Public Health Partners | CDC 

April 15, 2021 

Post-vaccination Considerations for Workplaces | CDC 

April 2, 2021 

Vaccines for COVID-19 | CDC 

May 23, 2021 

Ventilation in Schools and Childcare Programs | CDC 

February 26, 2021 

Ventilation in Buildings | CDC 

June 2, 2021 

CDC Order: Requirement for Persons to Wear Masks While on Conveyances and at 

Transportation Hubs 

January 29, 2021 

National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Risk Stratification for Sports Table 

May 3, 2021 

List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus| EPA 

July 6, 2021 

Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Facility | CDC 

June 15, 2021 

29 Safe Travels Hawai‘i 

Reviewed July 23, 2021 

Symptoms of COVID-19 | CDC 

February 22, 2021 

Using Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) | CDC 

June 9, 2020 

30 Resources 

Increasing Community Access to Testing provides free COVID-19 testing and support to 

underserved school districts utilizing local health centers and pharmacies including CVS Health, 

Health Mart, and Walgreens in Hawai‘i. 

Operation Expanded Testing provides COVID-19 testing, training, and support for K-12 schools 

and select community groups by delivering a free on-site screening testing solution for 

implementation by schools. 

Additional Print Resources 

● CDC Cover Coughs and Sneezes 

● CDC A Healthy Future Is In Your Hands! 

● CDC Germs Are Everywhere 

● CDC 10 Things You Can Do To Manage Your COVID-19 Symptoms At Home 

● A Parent's Guide: Helping Your Child Wear a Face Mask 

● Help your Child Feel Good about Using and Seeing Others Wearing Face Masks 

● I Can Stay Healthy by Wearing a Face Mask (PPT) 

● I got my COVID-19 vaccine! Soccer player 

● I got my COVID-19 vaccine! Educator 

● I got my COVID-19 Vaccine! Bus Driver 

● You are Essential: Vaccine Educator 

DOH Contacts by Island 

(Direct contact for specific DOH personnel will be provided by COVID-19 Response Team to 

impacted school or office.) 

Oahu 7:45 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Oahu Office (808) 587-6845 

(ask for school liaison) 

Oahu After hours/weekends (808) 600-3625 

Maui 7:45 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Maui Office (808) 984-8213 

Kauai 7:45 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Kauai Office (808) 241-3563 

Hilo 7:45 a.m.-4:30 p.m. DHO Hilo (808) 933-0912 

(808) 974-6006 

Kona 7:45 a.m.-4:30 p.m. DHO Kona (808) 322-4877 

Neighbor Islands (after hours) (800) 360-2575 

31 ** Please note that the answering service will say “Physician’s Exchange.” You reached the 

correct number. 

Email: doh.c19schools@doh.hawaii.gov 

Authorities and References 

● American Academy of Pediatrics 

https://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novel-coronavirus-covid-19-infections/clinical-gui 

dance/covid-19-planning-considerations-return-to-in-person-education-in-schools/ 

● Governor’s Emergency Proclamations 

https://governor.hawaii.gov/emergency-proclamations/ 

● Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 

Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus 

Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/guidance-business-response.ht 

ml 

● U.S. Department of Labor/Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 

Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19 

https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf 

● U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 

https://www.eeoc.gov/coronavirus/ 

● Department of Health 

https://health.hawaii.gov/coronavirusdisease2019/ 

● Society for Human Resources Management 

https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/tools-and-samples/hr-forms/Pages/covid-19-b 

ack-to-work-checklist.aspx 

● American Society of Heating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 

https://www.ashrae.org/news/ashraejournal/guidance-for-building-operations-during-the-

covid-19-pandemic 

32
