Title: Taibai Mountain National Forest Park

URL Source: https://www.esrexpo.com/enm/service/travel_detail/id/35.html

Markdown Content:
Published: 2024-09-01 Source: Taibai Mountain Tourism official website Read: 1007

Shaanxi Taibai Mountain National Forest Park is located in Baoji, Shaanxi, the northern foot of the Qinling Mountains, Mei County, Taibai County, Zhouzhi County three counties. It is the main peak of the famous Qinling Mountains in China, and it is also the first peak in the eastern part of China's mainland, with an altitude of 3771.2 meters. The Qinling Mountains are a natural barrier between the south and north of China, and are also the watershed of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River. As the main peak of the Qinling Mountains, Taibai Mountain has more unique natural geographical conditions, its towering majestic momentum and rapidly changing climate posture have given people a layer of mystery since ancient times, and it is more desirable for Chinese and foreign scientists and literati.

Taibai Mountain is famous for its high, cold, dangerous, strange, beautiful and mysterious characteristics, and is dominant in China. "Taibai Snow June Day" is one of the famous eight scenic spots in Guanzhong. Yuan's "Unification Chronicles" contains: "The mountain (Taibai Mountain) is extremely high, the snow is always covered, and the hope is bright"; In Wang Xin's "Three Talents Picture Meeting" in the Ming Dynasty, the year-round snow cover of Taibai Mountain is depicted: "There is often snow on the top of the mountain, and it is still rotten in midsummer." However, the scenery of the snow in the middle of summer in Taibai Mountain is wonderful, the time is long, and it is a wonder, and the silver light is shining, and it can be seen for hundreds of miles. It is not an exaggeration or fiction, and it has indeed come from a long time. Taibai Mountain is the best eco-tourism scenic spot due to its geological landforms, mountain glaciers, beautiful springs, forest communities, celestial landscapes, exotic flowers and grasses, and cultural history.

Taibai Mountain is the main peak of the Qinling Mountains, which is the climatic dividing line between the south and north of China, and the watershed of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River. It is like a tall and wide wall, blocking the air flow from the south to the north, so that the climate of the north and south has a clear difference. According to the characteristics of climate and vegetation, Taibai Mountain is divided into five obvious climate zones: warm temperate zone, temperate zone, cold temperate zone, cold zone, and alpine cold zone. The temperature of Taibai Mountain is ever-changing, and the ancient poems say: the middle of summer is a hot day, and the night is accompanied by snow sleep. Spring flowers and autumn leaves pave the road, and the four o'clock is in an instant. What's more: "At the foot of the mountain, the mountains are in midsummer, the foothills are bright in autumn, the top of the mountain is cold, the red cliffs are yellow, green, white, blue and purple, and it is difficult to distinguish between spring, summer, autumn and winter." ".

The unique natural environment of Taibai Mountain has given birth to a variety of biological populations, with a wide variety of species, ancient origins, and is a natural species gene bank, with more than 302 species of animals, more than 230 species of birds, and more than 1,900 species of plants, known as "Asian Natural Botanical Garden" and "Chinese Natural Zoo".

Taibai Mountain National Forest Park is located in Meixian County, Shaanxi Province, named after Taibai Mountain, approved by the Ministry of Forestry in 1991 to establish a national forest park, officially opened to the public in July 1992. It has been rated as "National Civilized Forest Park" and the first batch of "National 4A-level Scenic Spots", and has now rapidly developed into a tourist resort integrating sightseeing, tourism, leisure and vacation, scientific expedition and recuperation and health care in western China. The park covers an area of 2,949 hectares, with more than 180 scenic spots in 8 major scenic spots, and the altitude spans from 620 to 3,767 meters, making it the highest national forest park in China. Taibai Mountain Forest Park takes the forest landscape as the main body, the strange peaks of Cangshan Mountain as the skeleton, the Qingxi Bitan as the vein, and the cultural landscape as the connotation, constituting a static landscape and dynamic landscape coordination, natural landscape and human landscape are integrated, and the style is unique. In it, the canyon wall stands, the stone path lingers, the ancient maple hangs down, and the ravine is deep. In spring, the grass and trees are green, and the flowers are beautiful; In the middle of summer, the green shade is sandwiched and the breeze is cool; In golden autumn, the mountain fruit is bunched, and the maple leaves are charming; In the cold winter, the jade tree is silver, the mountain warrior silver snake, and the hot spring spits fog. There is the magic of "too white snow in June", the beauty of "Doumu Peak", and the comfort of "Ping An Sea of Clouds"; The legend of "Camel Sacred Tree", "Ancient Temple of Sheep", the grandeur of the "Bodhisattva Hall" in the past, here, not only a mountain and a water, a ditch and a ravine, a peak and a stone are very chic and beautiful, even a forest and a tree, a grass and a flower, a tree and a branch on the mountain are also so wonderful and magical. Stepping on the green space, the forest sea is vast, the dense shade is turned, the bright sun shines through the canopy like an umbrella, and the golden spots of light are sprinkled all over the winding paths; The howling mountain wind swept through the treetops overhead, and distant calls echoed through the forest. At your feet, the ancient road winds and winds its paths. Birds chirp in their ears, and autumn insects play their harps by the stream. , looking at the verdant mountains in the distance, the mountains are stacked on top of each other, the waterfalls and flowing springs, and the scenery is pleasant. Look at the green grass up close, the birds sing and the flowers are fragrant, the warblers are dancing and the swallows are dancing, and the scenery is attractive. At this moment, the sense of detachment from the ordinary and the unworldly arises spontaneously, and the nostalgia for the past quietly comes. The tranquil and deep forest and the fresh and humid air are not intoxicating and fascinating
