Title: 

URL Source: https://www.icao.int/sites/default/files/2025-02/7204_en.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 04 May 2025 09:32:57 GMT

Markdown Content:
TITLE 

# HERE 

## Subtitle here 

ALSO IN THIS ISSUE 

REPORTS ON 

SPACE 2017, GACS 2, 

DRONE ENABLE / 

RPAS 2017, DGCA54 

DREAMS SOAR 

– SHAESTA’S 

JOURNEY AND 

ICAO’S SUPPORT 

THE EMERGING 

ERA OF 

ELECTRICS 

# AVIATION FOR A 

# BETTER FUTURE GLOBAL CONNECTIVITY AND ECONOMIC GROWTH UNITING AVIATION 

> ICAO

# JOURNAL NEWS AND DEVELOPMENTS FROM THE INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION – VOL.72 – NO.4 The Global ACI-ICAO Airport Management Professional Accreditation Programme (AMPAP) 

is an executive development programme for airport executives worldwide. The primary focus is to develop airport managers through a six-course curriculum that covers all functional areas of the airport business in key areas. AMPAP encourages participants to share best managerial practices in an interactive, cross cultural environment while establishing a 

global network of contacts. 

# AMPAP 

Look out for 2018 Gateway course venues 

# www.IAP.aero 

Premier Sponsor Media Partner AMPAP Administrator 

Follow us 

@AMPAP_IAP AMPAP.IAP /www.iap.aero https://twit-ter.com/AM-PAP_IAP https://www.face-book.com/AMPAP.IAP https://www.linke-din.com/compa-ny-beta/223689/ 

# The Hallmark of Excellence in Airport Management THE ICAO JOURNAL 

VOLUME 72, NUMBER 4, 2017 

Editorial 

ICAO Communications Unit 

Tel: +1 (514) 954-8221 

www.icao.int 

communications@icao.int 

twitter.com/icao 

Editor: Rick Adams 

AeroPerspectives 

Tel: (33) 434 1077 05 

E-mail: rickadams@aeroperspectives.com 

AeroPerspectives.com 

Graphic Designer: June Kim 

Tel: +1 (514) 954-8219 ext. 7168 

E-mail: jukim@icao.int 

Advertising 

FCM Communications Inc. 

Yves Allard 

Tel: +1 (450) 677-3535 

Fax: +1 (450) 677-4445 

E-mail: info@fcmcommunications.ca 

Submissions 

The Journal encourages submissions from interested 

individuals, Organizations and States wishing to share 

updates, perspectives or analysis related to global 

civil aviation. 

Subscriptions and single copies 

Yearly subscription (4 issues) US $40. 

Single copies available for US $10. For subscription 

and sales information, please contact the Sales and 

Customer Relationship Unit 

Tel: +1 (514) 954-8022 

E-mail: sales@icao.int 

Published in Montréal, Canada. ISSN 0018 8778. 

The information published in the ICAO Journal was 

correct at time of printing. The opinions expressed 

are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily 

reflect the opinions of ICAO or its Member States. 

Reproduction of articles in the ICAO Journal is 

encouraged. The ICAO Journal must be credited 

in any reproduction. 

Printed by ICAO 

2

5

14 

17 

22 

24 

26 

30 

33 

# Contents 

Message from the ICAO Secretary General Dr. Fang Liu 

SPECIAL SECTION – AVIATION FOR A BETTER FUTURE 

5 Excerpts from the 2017 Aviation Benefits Report 

6 Shared Value: Nuestra Huerta 

7 Air Connectivity Supports Caribbean Tourism 

8 China’s Belt and Road Initiative 

8 Air Ambulances for Remote Norway 

9 Flowers for the World from Small Growers in Kenya 

9 Air Safety = Economic Benefits 

10  Maximizing the Benefits of Aviation 

13  New ICAO Air Transport Accessibility App 

Directors General Discuss Asia-Pacific Safety, Security, 

Capacity, Emissions 

A Report on the 54th DGCA Conference in Mongolia 

RPAS 2017 & Drone Enable Events Emphasize Global 

Framework 

A Report on the Second Global Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems 

Symposium (RPAS 2017) and Drone Enable, ICAO’s Unmanned Aircraft 

Systems (UAS) Industry Symposium, at ICAO Headquarters 

GACS 2 Promotes Aviation Cooperation 

A Report on the Second Global Aviation Cooperation Symposium in Greece 

Third ICAO / UNOOSA Symposium Focuses on Space Harmony 

A Report on Space 2017 in Austria 

Dreams Soar 

Capt. Shaesta Waiz’s solo round-the-world flight is inspiring the next 

generation of aviation professionals. 

Bilingualism in the Sky 

Communication in a Foreign Language. 

Dr Francois Grosjean interviews Dr Judith Bürki-Cohen 

The Emerging Era of Electrics 

ICAO Editor Rick Adams  Looks at Research to Develop Electric 

Passenger Aircraft 

32  UAE Creates Global Aviation Awards 

Supporting the  No Country Left Behind  Programme With the importance of aviation connectivity to local economic vitality and prosperity 

becoming much better appreciated, most especially in the context of the 17 UN 

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted under Agenda 2030, it’s critical 

that governments be committed to fully ICAO-compliant air transport operations and 

that they continue to work through ICAO to ensure that future air transport growth is 

effectively managed, and that air services expand sustainably and equitably. 

To help assure this, ICAO has been continuing to help States cooperate together on 

the basis of the more than 12,000 Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) 

for global air transport adopted under the Convention on International Civil Aviation 

(Chicago Convention). 

These ICAO provisions serve as an important foundation upon which governments can 

develop their local aviation infrastructure, operations and other capacities, consistent 

with other States’ expectations and the exemplary global alignment of our network. 

This greatly aids governments’ related ambitions to leverage, on behalf of their local 

citizens and businesses and the sustainable future of their civil societies, the distinct 

socio-economic benefits which derive from global aviation connectivity. 

# GENERATING LOCAL ECONOMIC 

# GROWTH THROUGH GLOBAL 

# AVIATION CONNECTIVITY 

Dr. Fang Liu ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

2

MESSAGE FROM THE ICAO SECRETARY GENERAL DR. FANG LIU Today those benefits generate many positive impacts for the global 

economy, with our sector directly and indirectly employing some 

63.5 million people, contributing over 2.7 trillion dollars annually to 

global GDP, and moving over 3.8 billion passengers and one third 

of world freight by value each year. 

Air transport also moves over half of the world’s 1.4 billion annual 

international tourists, establishing commercial air services as 

a veritable economic lifeline for many landlocked developing 

countries (LLDCs) and small island-developing States (SIDs). 

When we talk about effectively managing the forecast growth in air 

transport, our sector is focused most intently on improving upon 

our current metrics for ICAO Strategic Objectives such as aviation 

safety, security and capacity/efficiency. 

ICAO, States, and industry groups focus on capacity and efficiency 

in aviation because the speed by which modern commercial 

aircraft can move passengers and freight globally is the core value 

offering of international air transport. 

Safety and security provisions complement this essential rapid 

transit attribute, establishing an overall foundation of speed, 

breadth, confidence, and dependability which no other form of 

transport can equal. 

ICAO also places a determined focus on the sustainability of our sector, 

as represented by our additional Strategic Objectives for the economic 

development and environmental performance of civil aviation. 

Environmental goals and challenges are especially urgent today 

given the current global context, and we have been grateful for our 

States’ leadership in helping our sector to achieve some key world 

firsts – whether in terms of a new aircraft CO 2 emissions standard 

or the landmark international emissions offsetting solution 

represented by our recent Carbon Offsetting and Reduction 

Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) agreement. 

One thing we know for certain is that our network needs both new 

and modernized infrastructure established, especially if we’re 

to manage future growth while still improving upon our sector’s 

admirable safety and security results. 

To help address these issues, whether through our ICAO World 

Aviation Forums or other events and missions we undertake, ICAO 

is expanding global awareness at the highest levels on aviation’s 

unique ability to connect cities and countries to the world. 

We are stressing to ministers and State planners everywhere that, 

to optimize aviation’s significant socio-economic benefits, their 

aviation infrastructure and related development needs should be 

incorporated into their national development plan and strategies. 

We also, of course, wish to engender higher levels of investment 

for the large-scale air transport infrastructure modernization now 

needed, whether in developed or developing States. To that end 

our World Aviation Forums are specifically designed to forge new 

partnerships among the aviation, finance, donor, and development 

communities, and also to help our Member States realize 

business plans consistent with investor expectations for increased 

transparency and accountability. 

Our objective through all of these efforts is to foster sustainable 

economic growth for those governments which make the necessary 

commitments, and which also follow through successfully on their 

projects and investments. 

This in turn will greatly expand local access to foreign markets and 

producers, amplifying business opportunities and engendering 

more dependable and positive employment and tax base impacts, 

permitting further staged growth. 

Another important element of this planning is the numbers 

of skilled young men and women available to operate our 

technologically, logistically, and politically complex global network. 

Just this year we hosted our first Global Summit for Next 

Generation Aviation Professionals, and initiated an ICAO Gender 

Equality Programme. Both of which are now helping to address our 

future aviation workforce and human development challenges in 

league with ICAO’s Global Aviation Training office. 

Aviation is now poised to usher in a 21st Century air transport 

network which will serve as a key enabler of local economic vitality 

and sustainable development by optimizing global connectivity. 

This role and responsibility are directly consistent with the Chicago 

Convention which established ICAO, and a great testament to the 

vision of its drafters. 

Dr. Fang Liu 

Secretary General of ICAO 

# “ ICAO is expanding 

# global awareness 

# at the highest levels 

# on aviation’s unique 

# ability to connect 

# cities and countries 

# to the world.  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

3

MESSAGE FROM THE ICAO SECRETARY GENERAL DR. FANG LIU Members of the Air Navigation Commission are nominated by Contracting States 

and appointed by the Council. They act in their personal expert capacity and not as 

representatives of their nominations. 

Mr. R.H. Carboni  Mr. J. Metwalli  Mr. H. Yoshimura 

Mr. M.G. Fernando  Mrs. I. Monnier  Mr. D.C. Jang 

Mr. R.H. Godinho  Mr. N. Naoumi  Mr. M. Reeves 

Mr. M. Halidou  Mrs. K.L. Riensema  Mr. C. Schulthess 

Mr. C. Hurley  Mr. I.P. Serrano  Mr. A. Tiede 

Mr. A.A. Korsakov  Mr. F. Tai 

Mrs. E. Koryfidou  Mr. J.W.K. Twijuke 

www.icao.int 

## ICAO Council 

President: 

Dr. Olumuyiwa Benard Aliu 

First Vice-President: 

Mr. Tee Chiou Ng 

Second Vice-President: 

Mr. Musa Shuaibu Nuhu 

Third Vice-President: 

Mr. Germinal Sarasqueta Oller 

Secretary General: 

Dr. Fang Liu 

Information accurate at time of printing 

Algeria  Mr. A.D. Mesroua  Kenya  Ms. M.B. Awori 

Argentina  Mr. G.E. Ainchil  Malaysia  Mr. K.A.B. Ismail 

Australia  Mr. S.C. Lucas  Mexico  Mr. D. Méndez Mayora 

Brazil  Mrs. M.G.V. da Costa  Nigeria  Mr. M.S. Nuhu 

Cabo Verde  Mr. C.A.B.C.L. Monteiro  Panama  Mr. G.S. Oller 

Canada  Mr. M. Pagé  Repubic of Korea  Mr. J. Hur 

China  Mr. S. Yang  Russian Federation  Mr. S. Gudkov 

Colombia  Mr. A.M. Gómez  Saudi Arabia  Mr. S.A.R. Hashem 

Congo  Mr. R.M. Ondzotto  Singapore  Mr. T.C. Ng 

Cuba  Mrs. M.M.C. Frasquieri  South Africa  Mr. M.D.T. Peege 

Ecuador  Mr. I.F.A. Lascano  Spain  Mr. V.M. Aguado 

Egypt  Mr. A.H.M. Khedr  Sweden  Mrs. H.J. Saxe 

France  Mr. P. Bertoux  Turkey  Mr. A.R. Çolak 

Germany  Mr. U. Schwierczinski  United Arab Emirates  Ms. A. Alhameli 

India  Mr. A. Shekhar  United Kingdom  Mr. D.T. Lloyd 

Ireland  Ms. N.A. O’Brien  United Republic of Tanzania  Mr. R.W. Bokango 

Italy  Mr. M.R. Rusconi  United States  Mr. T.L. Carter 

Japan  Mr. S. Matsui  Uruguay  Mr. M. Vidal 

## ICAO Air Navigation 

## Commission  | ANC 

President: 

Mr. Claude Hurley 

First Vice-President: 

Mrs. Kirsten L. Riensema 

Second Vice-President: 

Mr. Feng Tai 

Secretary: 

Mr. Stephen P. Creamer 

## ICAO’S GLOBAL PRESENCE 

North American, 

Central American 

and Caribbean 

Office | NACC 

Mexico City 

South American 

Office | SAM 

Lima 

Western and 

Central African 

Office | WACAF 

Dakar 

European and 

North Atlantic 

Office | EUR/NAT 

Paris 

Middle East 

Office | MID 

Cairo 

Eastern and 

Southern African 

Office | ESAF 

Nairobi 

Asia and Pacific 

Regional 

Sub-Office | APAC 

Beijing 

Asia and Pacific 

Office | APAC 

Bangkok AVIA 

> civil air navigation services organisation

# AVIATION 

> civil air navigation services organisation

# AVIATION BENE 

> civil air navigation services organisation

# AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 

> civil air navigation services organisation

# AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 

> civil air navigation services organisation

# AVIATION FOR A 

# BETTER FUTURE 

## Excerpts from the Industry High-Level 

## Group (IHLG) report,  Aviation Benefits 2017 

arrangement between States and the industry rather 

than working individually on such matters. 

The IHLG organizations have collaborated to provide a 

comprehensive view of the importance of aviation on 

supporting the global economy and generating social 

benefits through the prism of sustainable air transport 

solutions. 

The complete 68-page document,  Aviation Benefits 

2017 , is available on the internet: 

https://www.icao.int/sustainability/Documents/AVIATION-

BENEFITS-2017-web.pdf 

The Industry High-Level Group (IHLG), established 

in 2013, is an initiative of the International Civil 

Aviation Organization (ICAO) Secretary General, 

bringing together the heads of four industry 

organizations: the Airports Council International 

(ACI), the Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation 

(CANSO), the International Air Transport Association 

(IATA) and the International Coordinating Council 

of Aerospace Industries Associations (ICCAIA). The 

IHLG is an informal group which considers matters 

of global significance to international civil aviation 

that can be better addressed in a collaborative ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

5

SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 Aviation is one of the most “global” industries: connecting 

people, cultures and businesses across continents. Colleagues 

throughout the sector are committed to raising awareness of the 

benefits and the role of aviation. It is necessary for all stakeholders 

and partners to work together to maximize the benefits of air 

transport, and to support the sustainable growth of aviation by 

connecting more people and more places, more often. 

Aviation has continued to expand. It has weathered crises and 

demonstrated long-term resilience, becoming an indispensable 

means of transport. Historically, air transport has doubled in size 

every 15 years and has grown faster than most other industries. 

In 2016, airlines worldwide carried around 3.8 billion passengers 

annually with 7.1 trillion revenue passenger kilometres (RPKs). Fifty-

three million tonnes of freight were transported by air, reaching 205 

billion freight tonne kilometres (FTKs). Every day, around 100,000 

flights transport over 10 million passengers and around US$18 billion 

worth of goods. 

AVIATION: MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR TO 

GLOBAL ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 

Aviation provides the only rapid worldwide transportation network, 

which makes it essential for global business. It generates economic 

growth, creates jobs, and facilitates international trade and tourism. 

According to recent estimates by the cross-industry Air Transport 

Action Group (ATAG), the total economic impact (direct, indirect, 

# “ It is necessary for 

# all stakeholders and 

# partners to work 

# together to maximize 

# the benefits of air 

# transport.  ”

SHARED VALUE: 

NUESTRA HUERTA 

“Nuestra Huerta” (Our Garden) is a programme initiated by 

Mariscal Sucre International Airport, Quito, Ecuador, which aims 

to integrate the area’s small agricultural producers in a chain of 

virtual community commercialization. Currently, 16 producers 

and their families, residing in parishes around the airport, are 

participating in Our Garden. Airport employees consume local 

products of Our Garden: fruits, dairy products, vegetables, 

bread, desserts, cooked grains, and prepared food. 

The programme involves training for producers in areas 

such as sound agricultural and manufacturing practices, 

industrial safety, social responsibility, entrepreneurship and 

innovation, accounting management, and customer service. 

With the technical and financial advice of the Inter-American 

Development Bank, the airport has started to turn Our 

Garden into a shared value programme. 

Source: Quiport ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

6

SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 induced and tourism-connected) of the global aviation industry 

reached US$2.7 trillion, some 3.5 percent of world’s gross domestic 

product (GDP) in 2014. 

The air transport industry also supported a total of 62.7 million jobs 

globally. It provided 9.9 million direct jobs. Airlines, air navigation 

service providers and airports directly employed over three million 

people. The civil aerospace sector (the manufacture of aircraft, 

systems and engines) employed 1.1 million people. A further 5.5 

million worked in other on-airport positions. 52.8 million indirect, 

induced and tourism-related jobs were supported by aviation. 

These estimates do not include other economic benefits of aviation, 

such as the jobs or economic activity that occur when companies 

or industries exist because air travel makes them possible, the 

intrinsic value that the speed and connectivity of air travel provides, 

or domestic tourism and trade. Including these would increase the 

employment and global economic impact numbers several-fold. 

One of the industries that relies most heavily on aviation is tourism. 

By facilitating tourism, air transport helps generate economic 

growth and alleviate poverty. Currently, approximately 1.2 billion 

tourists are crossing borders every year, over half of whom travelled 

to their destinations by air. In 2014, aviation supported over 36 

million jobs within the tourism sector, contributing roughly US$892 

billion a year to global GDP. 

Air transport is a driver of global trade and e-commerce, allowing 

globalization of production. The small volumes of air cargo amount 

to big values in world trade. In 2014, US$6.4 trillion worth of goods 

were transported internationally by air, representing 35 percent 

of world trade by value, despite representing only 0.5 percent by 

volume. Aviation’s advantage over other modes of transport in 

terms of speed and reliability has contributed to the market for 

“same-day” and “next-day” delivery services and transportation of 

urgent or time-sensitive goods. 

Some 87 percent of business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce 

parcels are currently carried by air. The e-commerce share of 

scheduled international mail tonne kilometres (MTKs) grew from 16 

percent to 83 percent between 2010 and 2016 and is estimated to 

grow to 91 percent by 2025. 

AVIATION PROVIDES SIGNIFICANT SOCIAL BENEFITS 

The availability of reliable air transport services provides people 

with access to what they need: decent livelihoods, food, healthcare, 

education, safe communities and spaces, etc. Aviation is by far 

the world’s safest and most efficient mode of long-range mass 

AIR CONNECTIVITY 

SUPPORTS CARIBBEAN 

TOURISM 

The Caribbean region is heavily reliant on tourism 

for its economic health. In many markets such 

as Cuba, Guyana, Martinique, Saint Lucia, 

Trinidad and Tobago, and Dominican Republic, 

more than 90 percent of tourists arrive by air. In 

2014, aviation supported US$27 billion in tourist 

spending across the region, of which US$24.3 

billion was leisure tourism and US$2.7 billion was 

business tourism. This amount would be sufficient 

to cover public spending on healthcare and 

education in the region combined. 

Source: IATA ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

> 7
> SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017

CHINA’S BELT AND ROAD INITIATIVE 

The Belt and Road initiative is a development strategy proposed by China 

that aims to promote the connectivity of Asian, European and African 

continents and their adjacent seas, plus establish and strengthen 

partnerships among over 65 countries. The identified countries jointly 

account for 62 percent and 30 percent of the world’s population and 

gross domestic product (GDP), respectively. In the next five years, China is 

estimated to invest up to US$150 billion in Belt and Road countries. 

The initiative calls for the integration of the region into a cohesive economic 

area through building infrastructure, increasing culture exchanges, and 

broadening trade. On the basis of respecting each other’s sovereignty 

and security concerns, countries along the Belt and Road should improve 

the connectivity of their infrastructure construction plans and technical 

standard systems, jointly push forward the construction of international 

trunk passageways, and form an infrastructure network connecting all sub-

regions in Asia, and between Asia, Europe and Africa, step by step. 

Countries need to improve the region’s infrastructure, putting in place a 

secure and efficient network of land, sea and air passages, lifting their 

connectivity to a higher level and further enhancing trade and investment 

facilitation. For air transport, the initiative calls to expand and build 

platforms and mechanisms for comprehensive civil aviation cooperation, 

and quicken the pace in improving aviation infrastructure. 

AIR AMBULANCES FOR REMOTE 

NORWAY 

People living in rural and remote areas may face particular challenges. 

One of the biggest is healthcare. In Norway, where residents of rural towns 

benefit from Air Ambulance Services, a programme was put in place 

nearly 30 years ago to provide prompt and easy access to healthcare. 

With a budget of around 800 million Norwegian kroner (US$91 million) 

and 20,000 patients helped annually, this service allows remote areas in 

Norway to maintain their population and assure the urgent care of their 

medical needs 

Source: luftambulansetjenesten 

transportation. It provides the only possible means of 

transportation to provide health care to many remote 

communities, and it is a fast and reliable way to 

deliver urgent humanitarian aid during emergencies 

caused by natural disasters, famine and war. 

Furthermore, educational opportunities are made 

available to students around the world, especially 

for those students from developing countries who 

must travel abroad for higher quality education. 

Aviation also contributes to improving quality of 

life by broadening travellers’ leisure and cultural 

experiences. It provides an affordable means to visit 

distant friends and relatives, and fosters awareness 

of other cultures. 

SUPPORTING UN SUSTAINABLE 

DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

The United Nations (UN) adopted the Transforming 

Our World: 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development in 2015. This agenda is a plan of 

action for people, planet and prosperity, and seeks 

to strengthen universal peace in larger freedom. 

The world should aim to achieve the 17 Sustainable 

Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets by 2030. 

Aviation contributes to achieving many of the SDGs 

directly and indirectly. 

Attainment of the SDGs relies on advances in 

sustainable air transport, which is a driver of 

sustainable development. In accordance with the 

recommendation made by the UN Secretary General’s 

> SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017

FLOWERS FOR THE WORLD FROM 

SMALL GROWERS IN KENYA 

In Kenya, over 100,000 jobs (and 500,000 livelihoods) depend on 

the cut flower industry, which supports 1.6 percent of the national 

economy, generating around US$1 billion in foreign exchange each year. 

Horticulture is Kenya’s fastest growing sector and is ranked third after 

tourism and tea as a foreign exchange earner. 

Over 90 percent of fresh horticultural products are transported by air 

freight. An estimated 70 percent of the flowers are grown at the rim of Lake 

Naivasha, northwest of Nairobi. There are good road network connections 

between the Lake Naivasha growing area and Nairobi’s Jomo Kenyatta 

International Airport, a distance of about 80-100 kilometres. Flowers picked 

in the morning reach markets in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, by evening. 

Source: World Bank 

AIR SAFETY = ECONOMIC BENEFITS 

The growth of air traffic depends on factors such as airfares, relative prices, 

real income, level of output, etc. Although there is not a clear understanding 

of how safety performance affects traffic demand, public safety reputation 

might affect travellers’ choice of destinations and airlines. 

A potential impact of safety on traffic demand can be estimated using 

the econometric model, which uses an effective Implementation (EI) 

score measured by the ICAO Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme 

Continuous Monitoring Approach (USOAP-CMA) as a proxy to each State’s 

safety performance. With all other factors affecting traffic being constant, 

this hypothetical analysis suggests that 10 percent improvement of the EI of 

a State’s safety oversight system might generate on average an additional 

1.8 percent of aircraft departures from the State concerned. 

Source: ICAO 

High-Level Advisory Group on Sustainable Transport, 

all stakeholders must make a genuine commitment to 

transforming the transport system in terms of individual 

travel and freight into one that is “safe, affordable, 

accessible, efficient, and resilient while minimizing carbon 

and other emissions and environmental impacts.” 

SUSTAINING THE FUTURE OF AVIATION 

By 2034, both air passenger traffic and air freight traffic 

are expected to more than double, compared to 2016. 

Passenger traffic is expected to reach over 14 trillion RPKs 

with a growth of 4.6 percent per annum, and freight will 

expand by 4.4 percent annually over the same time period, 

to 466 billion FTKs. 

This growth holds tremendous economic potential which 

will support all States in achieving the UN’s 2030 Agenda 

for Sustainable Development. In 2034, aviation will provide 

99 million jobs and generate US$5.9 trillion in GDP, a 122 

percent increase from 2014. 

# “ Aviation provides the 

# only rapid worldwide 

# transportation 

# network.  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

9

SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 “ It provides the only 

# possible means of 

# transportation … 

# to deliver urgent 

# humanitarian aid 

# during emergencies.  ”

# MAXIMIZING 

# THE BENEFITS 

# OF AVIATION 

This checklist provides a 

guide for maximizing aviation 

benefits in a sustainable 

manner. Implementation 

will require leadership and 

concerted, coordinated 

actions from public authorities 

at all levels, together with 

aviation stakeholders, 

financial sectors, and 

international and regional 

organizations. 01  ECONOMIC 

DEVELOPMENT 

PLANNING 

Mainstream the priorities of the aviation sector in States’ 

economic development planning so that aviation can be used 

as an economic development driver. 

# 02  AIR TRANSPORT 

REGULATORY 

FRAMEWORK 

Establish and apply good governance for air transport, i.e. the 

institutional, regulatory, and policy frameworks, in which air 

transport is designed, implemented and managed. 

# 03  AVIATION 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

Develop quality aviation infrastructure (including air 

navigation systems and airports) commensurate with 

the level of predicted traffic growth and based on ICAO’s 

global plans. 

# 04  RESOURCE 

MOBILIZATION 

Promote diversified funding and financing sources in 

partnership with States, international and regional 

organizations, and industry, as well as multi-lateral 

development banks and other financial institutions. 

# 05  SAFETY AND 

SECURITY 

Comply with ICAO’s global standards and policies, as well as 

industry standards to continue enhancing civil aviation safety 

and security. 

# 06  ENVIRONMENTAL 

PROTECTION 

Reinforce efforts toward minimizing the environmental effects 

from civil aviation activities, especially the achievement of the 

aspirational goals of carbon neutral growth from 2020. 

# 07  PUBLIC 

ENGAGEMENT 

Foster an informed and engaged public as a crucial partner to 

advance sustainable air transport solutions. 

The future growth of air transport will likely depend on sustainable 

world economic and trade growth, as well as declining airline costs 

and ticket prices. Other factors, including regulatory regimes (such 

as liberalization of air transport), technological improvements and 

fuel costs will also impact future growth. 

If traffic growth were to slow by just one percent annually, the total 

number of jobs supported by the air transport sector would diminish 

by over 10 percent (more than 10 million jobs) and the contribution 

of the air transport sector to world GDP would drop by some 12 

percent (US$690 billion). 

To encourage this projected growth in a sustainable manner and 

produce inclusive and productive development and employment, 

aviation must continue to develop coherent policies with tourism, 

trade and other transport sectors. A national or regional policy 

framework consistent with ICAO’s standards and policies, and 

with globally accepted good regulatory practices, can unlock the 

full value of aviation. New technologies and procedures should 

also be adopted to further improve connectivity and modernize 

infrastructure while minimizing any possible adverse impacts of this 

growth on the environment. ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

10 

SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 As part of the newly formed International Group of the UK Civil Aviation Authority, CAA International is now extending the impact of the CAA’s expertise across the globe. We have become a social enterprise, reinvesting a sustainable part of any profits we make into the global aviation community. This allows us to deploy the UK CAA’s skills and experience where they are most needed throughout the world. By bringing together experience, technology and resources in an actionable and long-lasting way, we hope to maintain our focus on raising aviation standards worldwide, and help create better aviation for everyone. 

www.caainternational.com 

Part of the UK CAA International Group Together for better aviation 

# We’re going further than ever before to raise aviation standards worldwide. EXPLORE ICAO’S TRAINING SEARCH MECHANISM 

Select from more than 130 ICAO-recognized courses to meet your training needs! 

## FILTER multiple training criteria Fast & easy SEARCH FIND scheduled training sessions worldwide REGISTER online! VISIT ICAO’S GLOBAL AVIATION TRAINING SEARCH MECHANISM AT : WWW.ICAO.INT/TRAINING 1432NEW ICAO AIR TRANSPORT 

# ACCESSIBILITY APP 

## Measuring People’s Access to the 

## International Air Transport System 

ICAO’s data analysis team has launched a new web-based application (“app”) on the iSTARS 3.0 portal that 

enables authorized users of the Integrated Safety Trend Analysis and Reporting System to quickly determine 

the percentage of a State’s population living within 100 kilometres of an aerodrome. 

Center (SEDAC) of NASA. That’s a huge database, coherent with UN 

census data. We then took our own airport data, and filtered from 

the SEDAC database those areas close to international aerodromes 

and secondary aerodromes feeding into international ones. Our cloud 

computer took two days to calculate the ratios for each State.” 

The Air Transport Accessibility app is one of more than 25 apps on 

the iSTARS 3.0 secure portal. Other apps deliver information on air 

navigation implementation, airworthiness, accidents and incidents, 

route networks, dashboards 

such as the Conflict Zones Risk 

Information repository and Universal 

Safety Oversight Audit Programme 

Continuous Monitoring Approach 

(USOAP-CMA) results, a Map Builder 

for data such as USOAP Effective Implementation (EI) scores, State and 

Regional Safety briefings, and more. 

“At ICAO, we’re doing a lot of predictive analysis, trying to find the 

future needs of aviation globally,” Mr Merens said. “We have users 

of information all around the world. It’s important the information is 

reliable, can get there fast, and is available at any time.” 

The “Air Transport Accessibility” app shows that “74 percent 

of the world population has access to international air 

transport,” noted Mr Marco Merens, Chief, Integrated Aviation 

Analysis at ICAO. “For Europe, that rises to 90 percent, but for Africa 

it goes down to 64 percent.” 

The app allows the user to select one of ICAO’s 192 Member States 

and compare that State’s aerodrome accessibility with various 

groups of States – the entire world, an ICAO Region, a PIRG (Planning 

and Implementation Regional 

Group), RAIO (Regional Accident 

and Incident Investigation 

Organization), RASG (Regional 

Aviation Safety Group), or RSOO 

(Regional Safety Oversight 

Organization), a continent, Least 

Developed Countries (LDCs), Land 

Locked Developing Countries 

(LLDCs), and Small Island 

Developing States (SIDS) … even 

special-interest groupings such as 

States with Performance-Based 

Navigation (PBN) implementation 

plans or lithium-battery producing States. 

After entering the two simple parameters, the app will generate a 

summary for the State, a comparison with the selected group (in text and 

graph form), a color-coded choropleth map of the group, and a bar chart 

which can optionally show the percentage of accessibility for every State 

in the group. “You can generate a report for any country and any region 

and get a PDF. Try it,” said Merens. 

The methodology: “We took worldwide population data per square 

kilometres as published by the SocioEconomic Data and Application 

MARCO MERENS 

Chief, Integrated Aviation 

Analysis, ICAO 

# “ It’s important that the 

# information is reliable, 

# can get there fast, and 

# is available at any time  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

13 -

SPECIAL SECTION - AVIATION BENEFITS 2017 THIRD ICAO / UNOOSA SYMPOSIUM 

# FOCUSES ON SPACE HARMONY 

SIMONETTA DI PIPPO 

Director, United Nations Office for 

Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) 

Space 2017 was a continuation and culmination of the series of Aerospace Symposiums on 

sub-orbital commercial operations. started in Montréal, Canada in 2015, with the second held 

in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, in 2016. 

The Vienna Symposium explored existing regulatory mechanisms and operational practices 

in aviation and space transportation, challenges and opportunities related to emerging space 

activities (in particular, future space traffic management), and protection of systems, assets 

and infrastructures. 

Mr Hajime Yoshimura, President of the ICAO Air Navigation Commission, said, “This exciting 

new frontier of transport probably represents one of the most multi-disciplinary challenges 

ahead of us. It cuts across every technical subject in both aviation and space. But it also 

requires a necessary level of harmonization between the governance of international civil 

airspace and outer-space.” 

He noted that “70 years of aviation standards-setting has 

clearly demonstrated that such harmonization is a critical 

enabler to ensure a high degree of safety, security and 

regularity. It also makes sure that the people of the world 

have access to all aspects of the sector. In other words, 

harmonization, makes it fair for everyone.” 

Mr Yoshimura observed that there are many existing 

interface issues between airspace and outer space, 

including space and air law, operational challenges such as 

management of space debris, segregation of traffic, space 

weather information, protection of frequency spectrum, 

utilization of ground facilities, cybersecurity, and application 

of safety management. 

In technology areas, regulatory approvals for licencing and certification must be considered. 

“Risk-based performance standards need to be developed in order that spaceplane 

operations can be more predictable and transparent for all stakeholders.” However, “we 

should keep in mind that over regulation should not kill this young industry.” 

“Given the growing number of benefits derived from space science and technology applications, the conduct 

of space activities by all the main players continues to expand rapidly,” Ms Simon Di Pippo, Director, United 

Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA), told the gathering of representatives from States, industry, 

and international and regional aerospace organizations. 

“Space tools are fundamental to meeting the challenges to humanity and sustainable development and the 

overarching space security environment in its broader sense caters for global space governance.” 

# “ Space tools are fundamental 

# to meeting the challenges 

# to humanity and sustainable 

# development.  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

14 

REPORT | SPACE 2017 EVENT 

ICAO / UNOOSA AEROSPACE 

SYMPOSIUM (SPACE 2017) 

29-31 August 2017, Vienna, Austria 

HOSTS 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs 

(UNOOSA) 

KEY DISCUSSIONS 

Trends in aviation, space activities, 

commercial space transportation and 

sub-orbital operations 

Sustainability of aerospace activities 

Regulatory and practical perspectives for 

aerospace operations and cooperation with 

aerospace stakeholders 

Air traffic management and future space 

traffic management 

years, he explained, “It will be possible to fire airbreathing engines with 

the potential to revolutionize space launches, powering vehicles that can 

take off and land like aircraft, and allowing for flights up to five times the 

speed of sound, opening up the frontier of hypersonic air travel.” 

However, he cautioned, “At this point in time, in the absence of even 

a clear definition of the air-space interface, the regulatory and legal 

aspects of sub-orbital flights and hypersonic travel are still far from being 

addressed in a comprehensive and exhaustive manner.” 

“Considering the current status and the potential benefits, it is probably 

the right time to promote wider initiatives that encompass sub-orbital 

flights and hypersonic travel, and that may create synergies among 

different sectors and actors on a global scale, ultimately making this 

dream a reality,” Mr Ferretti concluded. 

Mr Naser AlRashedi, Director of Space Policy and Regulation, UAE Space 

Agency, emphasized the need for an international mechanism for space 

accident and incident investigation. “Such a mechanism should build 

on the long experience by the aviation sector, while considering the 

differences, and should also cater for areas of common interest by space 

and aviation.” 

UNISPACE+50 IN 2018 

The United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space 

(COPUOS), the only global intergovernmental platform for international 

cooperation in space activities, has set in motion a roadmap toward the 

50th anniversary of the first UN conference on space exploration and 

cooperation, which was held in 1968. Branded as UNISPACE+50, this 

effort aims to become a major milestone for the strengthening of global 

governance of outer space activities. 

BUSY SPACE 

Mr Nico Voorbach, Director ICAO and Industry Affairs for the Civil Air 

Navigation Services Organisation (CANSO), said, “Space is getting busier 

than ever,” growing 5-8 percent annually with 1,400 satellites already in 

operation and more than 80 new launches a year. 

“Clear rules need to be developed and agreed by all stakeholders, to 

accommodate the requirements of users in traditional airspace, as well 

as space-bound vehicles travelling to and from space,” Mr Voorbach 

stated. “Close cooperation and collaboration with organizations 

responsible for space traffic management (STM), airspace/space users 

and ATM, and the global regulators, including ICAO and the United 

Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs.” 

Ms Dorothy Reimold, US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Director 

of Strategic Operations, Commercial Space Transportation, and Chair, 

Space Learning Group, said, “Commercial space transportation is an 

innovative global industry. Public and private sectors are working together 

in new ways, and States can learn from each other and help each other.” 

She noted that several States currently have independent orbital launch 

capability (Russia, United States, Europe, Japan, China, India, Israel, 

Iran, South Korea, North Korea), and the first six of those are competing 

in the commercial market. The US (Virgin Galactic, Blue Origin), Europe 

(Airbus), United Kingdom, Spain, others have reusable launch vehicles 

in development (both sub-orbital and orbital). And several countries are 

considering legislation or national frameworks for commercial sub-orbital 

launch (human space flight), orbital launch, and launch sites. 

Mr Stefano Ferretti, European Space Policy Institute (ESPI) Resident 

Fellow, asked, “Are we on the verge of sub-orbital flights?” Within three 

> SPACE X PHOTO ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017
> 15

Space 2017 addressed elements related to the process toward 

UNISPACE+50 and beyond: 

Legal regulatory mechanisms under international air law and 

space law to ensure safe and sustainable operation of civil 

aviation; suborbital operations, and space activities; 

Air traffic management and future space traffic management; 

Assessing capacity-building needs. 

These are also relevant to the long-term perspective toward 

Space2030, which will connect space governance with the global 

agendas for development. The core pillars of space economy, space 

society, space accessibility and space diplomacy will define the 

outputs for considering space as a tool for sustainable development. 

> SIERRA NEVADA CORPORATION PHOTO

Under the UNOOSA Human Space Technology Initiative (HSTI), 

the United Nations “Dream Chaser” Mission will provide member 

countries, especially developing countries, the opportunity to fly 

payloads for applications such as microgravity science, remote earth 

sensing, and space hardware qualification 

MOHAMMED BIN RASHID (MBR) 

‘GLOBAL AVIATION AWARD’ 

PROVIDE A PLATFORM TO CONNECT AND IMPROVE RELATIONS WITH LEAST DEVELOPED STATES (LDS). STATE WITH MOST IMPROVED QUALITY OF AVIATION. INFRASTRUCTURE OUTSTANDING GLOBAL CONNECTIVITY AWARD. OUTSTANDING RESOURCE CONTRIBUTION TO ICAO PROGRAMS. OUTSTANDING INTERNATIONAL CO -OPERATION PROGRAM AVIATION PERSONALITY OF TRIENNIUM. INNOVATION AWARD (ENCOMPASSING AVATION SAFETY, SECURITY, SUSTAINABILITY, PASSENGER EXPERIENCE). SUPPORT THE ICAO OBJECTIVE OF INCREASED GLOBAL CONNECTIVITY. SUPPORT THE “GLOBAL AVIATION PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT”. PROMOTE INNOVATION AND LIBERALIZATION ACROSS THE INDUSTRY GLOBALLY. 

AWARD OBJECTIVES 

AWARD CATEGORIES 

LAILA ALI BIN HAREB AL MEHEIRI 

ASST. DIRECTOR GENERAL STRATEGY & INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS laila.hareb@gcaa.gov.ae 

MOHAMM 

‘GLOBA 

PROVIDE A PLATFORM TO C AND IMPROVE RELATIONS WIT DEVELOPED STATES (LDS). STATE WITH MOST IMPROVED OF AVIATION. INFRASTRUCTURE OUTSTANDIN CONNECTIVITY AWARD. OUTSTANDING INTERNATION OPERATION PROGRAM SUPPORT THE “GLOBAL AVIATIO FOR DEVELOPMENT”. 

AWARD OBJECTIVES 

AWARD CATEGORIES 

LAILA ALI BIN HAREB AL MEHEIR 

ASST. DIRECTOR GENERAL STRATEGY & laila.hareb@gcaa.gov.ae 

> REPORT | SPACE 2017

# RPAS 2017 & DRONE ENABLE 

# EVENTS EMPHASIZE GLOBAL 

# FRAMEWORK 

EVENTS 

SECOND GLOBAL REMOTELY 

PILOTED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 

SYMPOSIUM (RPAS 2017) 

19-21 September 2017, Montréal, Canada 

DRONE ENABLE, ICAO’S 

UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 

SYSTEMS (UAS) INDUSTRY 

SYMPOSIUM 

22-23 September 2017, Montréal, Canada 

HOST 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

OUTCOMES 

Recognition of the need for an international 

regulatory framework 

ICAO needs to be the focal point, ensure 

global harmonization, standardization 

Unregulated operations in complex 

environments are resulting in aviation 

safety risks 

Harmonized categorization can assist in 

addressing regulatory challenges 

Collaboration by all is crucial 

“Literally thousands of small drones are being sold daily, 

and these are deeply diverse in their characteristics and 

features,” ICAO Council President Dr Olumuyiwa Benard 

Aliu told the licensing authorities, regulators and industry 

representatives gathered in Montréal for the 2nd Global 

Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems Symposium (RPAS 

2017). “We are already seeing new businesses and 

humanitarian operations leveraging these technologies 

and the opportunities they offer. This is occurring in ways 

that we had not envisioned even just a decade ago, and 

this evolution and innovation will only continue as more 

and more people allow their imaginations to take off, 

literally and figuratively.” 

Dr Aliu stressed the importance of a globally coherent regulatory 

framework for the management of unmanned air traffic as well 

as the complexity of this task and the need to place safety first. “States 

are facing increasing pressure to open the door widely for unmanned 

aircraft, and while their socio-economic benefits seem clear, we must 

avoid the tendency to rush headlong into unmanned aircraft system 

operational frameworks which have not benefited from all due diligence 

and the careful regard required for existing airspace users.” ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

17 

REPORT | AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT and lessons learned related to unmanned aircraft system traffic 

management systems (UTM). 

Mr Brian Wynne, President and CEO of the Association for Unmanned 

Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI), said, “We are at the dawn 

of a new renaissance in 

aviation and technology, one 

that requires international 

collaboration and the support 

of agencies such as ICAO 

to reach its full potential. 

Businesses and civil operators 

should be able to reap the full 

benefits of UAS technology 

without unnecessary hurdles. 

Industry stakeholders and 

governments must therefore 

work together on a global level 

to identify common solutions to the industry’s greatest challenges.” 

Mr Gur Kimchi, Vice President, Amazon Prime Air, when asked, “What do 

you need from regulators right now?”, responded: “Uniformity. The same 

civil standards that work worldwide are what’s going to help this industry. 

Authorities should adopt performance-based guidelines, endorse 

common technical standards, and embrace future technologies. Industry 

has to propose and adopt guidelines for interoperability, implement 

technical standards, and build safe and secure systems.” 

Mr Stephen Creamer, Director of the ICAO Air Navigation Bureau, presented 

a concept for a global drone registry. He said the current situation of drone 

registration systems lacks consistency between States (the majority of 

States without any registration system), there is no ability to identify and 

contact operators and no ability to track drones across borders. 

“This is a very exciting and rapidly evolving area of activity, and one 

which is presently requiring us to define hundreds of new amendments 

to no less than 18 of our Convention’s 19 Annexes,” the Council 

President noted. “This broad scope of work led ICAO to very carefully 

prioritize and schedule the SARP (Standards and Recommend 

Practices) development process. As a first step, we are addressing 

the Annexes related to the issuance of certificates. This includes the 

Remote Pilot Licence, Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems Operator 

Certificate, and Certificate of Airworthiness. This initial phase will be 

followed by the amendment of other Annexes that will support the 

safe, secure and efficient integration of remotely piloted aircraft into 

non-segregated airspace and aerodromes.” 

Dr Aliu said it is important to understand and distinguish between 

the different types of unmanned aircraft – and which ones ICAO is 

specifically addressing in its SARPs. 

Any aircraft intended to fly without a pilot on board is an unmanned 

aircraft. However, those that will fully integrate with manned 

aircraft, particularly when conducting operations in accordance 

with instrument flight rules, require all the same basic certificates 

and equipment as manned aircraft. This highly capable part of the 

unmanned aircraft family is referred to officially as “remotely piloted 

aircraft” (RPA). 

“In order to integrate seamlessly, new technologies are demanded. 

Some of which are yet to be invented,” Dr Aliu stated. “We can also 

expect that these technologies will bring benefits to not only the 

unmanned aircraft industry, but lead to new safety performance 

improvements throughout the aviation system.” 

The RPAS 2017 Symposium provided an international platform to 

exchange ideas and share best practices for the further development 

of an RPAS regulatory framework. Topics of the event included the 

new Remote Pilot Licence (RPL), implementation of approved training 

programmes, RPAS operations in the air traffic management (ATM) 

environment, including safety risk management, and impacts on 

human performance. 

FORGING A UTM FRAMEWORK 

Immediately following RPAS 2017, ICAO hosted the Drone Enable 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Industry Symposium – a unique 

opportunity for States, international organizations, industry, academia 

and other stakeholders to share their research, best practices 

DR OLUMUYIWA BENARD ALIU 

President of the ICAO Council 

## “ In order to integrate seamlessly, 

## new technologies are demanded. 

## Some of which are yet to be 

## invented.  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

18 for global harmonization, including registration, identification and 

tracking; communications systems; and geofencing-like systems. 

“Keep your minds as open as possible to how we address these 

problems,” said Fang Liu, ICAO Secretary General. Drones are 

“amazingly versatile tools, and they are also aircraft.” ICAO wants to 

develop UTM solutions that encourage innovation, but “we need to 

determine regulatory approaches which are flexible and adaptive so 

all UAS approaches can make use of them.” 

ICAO’s UAS Advisory Group (UAS-AG) convened immediately after Drone 

Enable to create a UTM global harmonization document to be presented 

at the Second Global Air Navigation Industry Symposium ((GANIS/2) in 

December. The framework wouldn’t be legally binding but could help 

countries set up a harmonized UTM. 

FOLLOW UP 

To view key sessions of the Drone Enable discussions, check out 

SkyTalks on ICAO’s United Aviation website: 

http://www.unitingaviation.com/sky-talks/skytalk-live-streaming-drone-

enable-icaos-unmanned-aircraft-systems-industry-symposium/ 

“As the volume of UA increases, with potential for international use, 

the need for an interoperable, global registry becomes apparent,” 

Mr Creamer said. “ICAO is the natural and logical international 

organization to coordinate efforts for global drone registration.” 

He said participation in the registry would be optional, but necessary to 

benefit from a plug-and-play option (for States without an existing drone 

registry) or API integration (for States with an existing drone registry). 

The goal is an operable international registry by the next Drone 

Enable event, scheduled for September 2018 in China. 

AUVSI’s Wynne said, “Exploring the concept of a global UAS registry 

for all users might help create a culture of safety that transcends 

borders. Registration helps promote accountability and responsibility 

among operators, and a shared database could provide authorities 

with critical information no matter where an operator is flying.” 

The Drone Enable discussions centred around defining a common 

UAS traffic management (UTM) framework with core boundaries 

MARK YOUR CALENDAR 

3RD GLOBAL REMOTELY PILOTED 

AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS SYMPOSIUM 

(RPAS 2018) 

10-12 September 2018, Chengdu, China 

DRONE ENABLE 

13-14 September 2018, Chengdu, China 

> 19 ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017
> REPORT | AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT

M A N A G E M E N T C E R T I F I C AT E I N C I V I L AV I AT I O N 

Offered by Concordia University’s John Molson School of Business in partnership with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) , this business program is clearly set on advancing your aviation management skills and career. 

OVERVIEW 

The objective of this aviation-centric management programme is to enhance the competencies of qualified personnel in the civil aviation community while promoting best practices with ICAO’s TRAINAIR PLUS Programme and global aviation training activities. The programme will be taught at a level equivalent to that of a graduate business programme and will consist of three certificates: Strategic Management, Human Resources Management and Business Planning and Decision-Making. Successful completion of all three certificates will lead to a Management Certificate in Civil Aviation. 

WHO IS THIS PROGRAMME FOR? 

Aviation professionals and managers from Civil Aviation Authorities (CAAs), airlines, aerodrome operators, and other service providers. 

MODE OF DELIVERY 

Courses will be delivered using a hybrid format combining classroom sessions and e-learning, allowing participants to continue to meet their career responsibilities. Classroom sessions will be offered in all regions to accommodate large participation from ICAO Member States and aviation industry, and to keep course fees at reasonable level. 

ADVANCE YOUR AVIATION MANAGEMENT SKILLS AND CAREER MORE INFORMATION concordia.ca/jmsb/aviation THE CURRICULUM 

Online – December 11, 2017 to February 9, 2018 

Certificate in Human Resources Management 

Online – February 9 to March 30, 2018 

Certificate in Business Planning and Decision-Making 

Online – November 6 to December17, 2017 

• Business Analytics 

• Marketing Management 

• Management Accounting and Budgeting • Managing Information Technology 

Classroom (ICAO, Montreal) – December 4 to 8, 2017 

• Business Planning and Forecasting • Project Management • Creative Problem Solving 

• Risk Management • Simulation • International Civil Aviation System 

• Strategic Planning and Innovation • Reputation Management 

• Finance for Strategic Decision-Making • Crafting and Implementing a Winning Strategy • Leading Change • Managing Across Cultures • Business Ethics • Integrative Group Assignment and Presentation • Introduction to Human Resources Management • Organizational Behavior 

• Training and Development 

• Staffing and Succession Planning 

Classroom (ICAO, Montreal) – March 19 to 23, 2018 

• Leading Self 

• Leading and Mobilizing Teams 

• Cross-Cultural Communication 

• Performance Management 

• Lead ing Change 

DURATION 

Six (6) weeks per certificate 

Four (4) online , one (1) in person and one (1) for final exam 

LANGUAGE 

English 

INDIVIDUAL RATE 

$3 ,000 USD per certificate 

CORPORATE RATE 

Register four paid at re gular pr ice of $3, 000 USD Get a fifth seat at no charge 

REGISTRATION 

concordia.ca/jmsb/ aviation aviation @concordia.ca 

M A N A G E M E N T C E R T I F I C AT E I N C I V I L AV I AT I O N 

## "Great learning experience, positive, inspiring." 

Alexis Brathwaite 

> Manager ANS Safety and Air Traffic Services Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority

PARTICIPANT'S TESTIMONIAL 

Certificate in Strategic Management 

Tel.: + 1 514-848-3960 Toll-free: 1 866-333-227 1

Classroom (ICAO, Montreal) – January 29 to February 2, 2018 However, by the early 2030s, ICAO projects that today’s flight and passenger 

volumes will double. “This growth presents challenges to States and industry 

in terms of how to manage the expansion of their local capacity to optimize air 

transport’s socio-economic benefits.” 

Sectoral growth, the Secretary General cautioned, “cannot be permitted to 

negatively impact our key strategic performance targets. Existing levels of aviation 

safety, security, efficiency, passenger facilitation, and environmental protection 

must also improve even as we expand.” 

Goal 2 of the Symposium was “determining unique solutions.” ICAO’s Technical 

Cooperation Programme, overseen by Director Ivan Galan and his team, “is fully 

Goal number one is “managing change,” ICAO Secretary 

General Dr Fang Liu told the gathering of government 

representatives, airport operators, air navigation service 

providers (ANSPs) and other industry professionals at GACS2 

in Athens. “The aviation system has evolved over the decades 

to become an irreplaceable global network connecting the 

world’s cultures and economies. It brings together families and 

friends, and businesses and their customers, to the tune of 10 

million passengers daily on over 100,000 flights. Our sector 

today supports 63.5 million jobs globally, fully one third of world 

trade by value, and contributes more than 2.7 trillion dollars 

annually to global GDP. It also carries over half of the 1.4 billion 

tourists who travel across international borders each year.” 

EVENT 

THE SECOND GLOBAL 

AVIATION COOPERATION 

SYMPOSIUM (GACS2) 

11-13 October 2017, Athens, Greece 

HOSTS 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

Hellenic Civil Aviation Authority 

Athens International Airport 

KEY DISCUSSIONS 

Managing change: building a safe, secure, 

and sustainable aviation community 

Determining unique solutions for capacity-

building through technical cooperation and 

assistance projects 

Promote the role of ICAO’s Technical 

Cooperation Programme in assisting States 

to achieve their goals 

Strengthen institutional and cross-industry 

relationships ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

22 

# GACS2 PROMOTES AVIATION 

# TECHNICAL COOPERATION (evolving the role of inspectors (“from compliance checkers to system 

assessors”) and a common understanding of hazards (using data for 

hazard identification and risk assessment). “Organizations are different; 

we need to understand the uniqueness of each organization.” 

Dr Dimitrios J. Dimitriou, Chairman of the Board of Directors for 

Athens International Airport and an Economics Professor in Planning, 

Management & Economics of Air Transport Infrastructure, addressed 

key challenges in cooperation. He said the 1990s era, which he 

characterized as ‘the mathematisation of business,’ “did not always 

enhance understanding of real-life business.” 

In this century, aviation is leading in the concept of effective decision 

making, including auditing and monitoring and key performance 

indicators (KPIs). Voices are rising toward effective decision making, 

authorization and independency, including: 

More open regulatory framework 

Flexibility in long-term contracts 

Authority to managers 

Less complexity in legal framework 

Standardization in competition and contacts framework 

Use the benefits of globalization, digitalization and new technologies 

The first GACS symposium in 2014 in Montréal, Canada raised 

awareness on the need for improved dialogue and openness regarding 

the needs and contributions of States, ANSPs, Security and Safety 

entities, and other aviation stakeholders. 

aligned with this tradition,” Dr Liu commented. “It seeks to enable States 

to attain the highest possible standards of effective ICAO compliance, 

whether through new infrastructure deployment, human resources 

development, or other aviation development priorities.” 

ICAO’s Technical Cooperation Programme is presently assisting more 

than 100 States and organizations annually with various aviation 

projects, mainly in support of their capacity-building and infrastructure 

development objectives, human resources training programmes, the 

recruitment of expert consultants, and the procurement of civil aviation 

equipment and services. 

Recognizing that many governments in attendance at the Athens event 

are engaged toward achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals 

(SDGs) under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Dr Liu 

noted that aviation cooperation must begin with States’ commitments 

and suitable demonstrations of political will. “Ultimately it leads to the 

physical, human and regulatory resources being put in place which 

permit States to expand their route networks, improve foreign market 

and supply chain access for local suppliers, and in the end brings wide-

ranging and sustainable prosperity benefits to their local populations,” 

Dr Liu explained. 

Mr Giancarlo Buono, Regional Director, Europe Safety and Flight 

Operations for the International Air Transport Association (IATA), 

suggested the collaborative approach to aviation safety requires 

“balancing compliance with performance” and “managing by fact and 

not guess.” He called for less bureaucracy and more expert analysis 

## “The intrinsic value of cooperation in air 

## transport … impacts every stakeholder in our 

## very broad and inclusive global community.  ”

DR FANG LIU 

Secretary General, ICAO 

23 ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

REPORT | NO COUNTRY LEFT BEHIND DIRECTORS GENERAL DISCUSS 

# ASIA-PACIFIC SAFETY, SECURITY, 

# CAPACITY, EMISSIONS 

EVENT 

54TH ASIA-PACIFIC 

DIRECTORS GENERAL OF 

CIVIL AVIATION (APAC DGCA) 

7-11 August 2017, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia 

HOSTS 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

Civil Aviation Authority of Mongolia 

KEY DISCUSSIONS 

The Challenge of Managing Outcome-

Focused and Risk-Based Regulations for 

Asia-Pacific States 

Aviation Safety and Air Navigation 

Economic Development of Air Transport 

Aviation and Environment 

Technical and Regional Cooperation 

Asia-Pacific is a unique region in terms of cultural diversity and 

socio-economic development with the largest aviation market in the 

world. Considering the ever-changing global socio-economics and aviation 

development, a new approach is required to address safety priorities of 

States through introduction of risk-based regulations. While coping with the 

rapid aviation development and challenges faced in implementation of ICAO 

Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs), States need to cooperate 

and collaborate more closely. 

Dr Aliu underscored the need to manage demand against capacity of airport 

and air traffic management (ATM) systems and the urgent need for APAC 

States to apply the Safety Enhancement Initiatives (SEIs) set out by its 

Regional Aviation Safety Group (RASG). He also discussed the challenges to 

infrastructure from volatile regulatory environments, as well as inadequate 

training capacity for skilled aviation professionals. 

The ICAO Council President drew attention to the region’s capacity challenges: 

“ICAO is leading efforts to increase the number of new air routes, implement an 

Asia-Pacific Air Traffic Flow Management System, and to realize a more flexible 

local approach to the sharing of airspace by civil and military operators.” 

He also addressed the essentialness of air transport connectivity for the 

Pacific Island States, mainly arising from their remoteness and small 

populations, and to the resource challenges they face in optimizing aviation’s 

“While the Asia-Pacific presently leads the world in terms of traffic growth, it also faces attendant 

challenges with respect to managing and sustaining it, safely, securely and efficiently,” ICAO Council 

President Dr Olumuyiwa Benard Aliu told the 300 delegates at the 54th Asia-Pacific Directors General 

of Civil Aviation (APAC DGCA) event. ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

24 

REPORT | NO COUNTRY LEFT BEHIND MONGOLIA AVIATION AT 

IMPORTANT JUNCTURE 

In the heart of Central Asia, Mongolia, the fifth largest country in 

Asia, is surrounded by High Altai Rocky Mountains in the west, 

dense forested areas in the north, vast plain in the east, and Gobi 

desert in the south. 

Mongolia’s aviation market is at an important juncture as the 

country prepares to open a new international airport at the capital 

Ulaanbaatar in 2018. The new airport will have capacity to handle 

up to 12 million passengers once construction is fully complete. 

The Mongolian market has huge potential, and increased tourism 

would have an overall economic benefit. 

The Mongolian Civil Aviation Authority (MCAA) signed a 

memorandum of understanding with the Civil Aviation 

Administration of China (CAAC) on increasing cross-border air routes 

during the ICAO Conference of Asia-Pacific DGCAs. 

ICAO Council President Dr Olumuyiwa Benard Aliu highlighted 

Mongolia’s civil aviation and infrastructure commitments, and lauded 

it for the exemplary results it achieved in its most recent safety and 

security audits. He reiterated the commitment of ICAO to work closely 

with Mongolia, saying that together they would improve and augment 

the contributions of its civil aviation sector to the socio-economic 

development and prosperity of its citizens and businesses. 

Mr Dangaa Ganbat, Minister of Road and Transport Development 

of Mongolia, highlighted the State’s current focus on the training of 

its civil aviation personnel and the new airport in development. “For 

Mongolia, a landlocked country with vast territory, air transportation 

is one of the key sectors of national economy. Advantageously 

located between Asia and Europe, Mongolia is duly following 

the ICAO policy recommendations and continues to upgrade 

its air navigation systems by acquiring the latest technical and 

technological innovations. We have succeeded in establishing a 

reliable and safe air navigation service framework and became one 

of the main base platforms of the international transit flights,” the 

Minister noted. 

benefits. “A reliable network of air links within and among island 

countries, and to major air transport hubs, is essential to the 

viability of these countries from humanitarian, political and 

economic perspectives.” 

ICAO Secretary General Dr Fang Liu highlighted how the ICAO 

Regional Office in Bangkok, led by Regional Director Arun Mishra, 

has been ramping up efforts to assist Asia-Pacific States with 

their ICAO compliance. “We’ve been greatly encouraged by the 

enthusiasm and commitments from these States as the Combined 

Action Teams (CAT) process has gotten underway, and are already 

seeing solid results,” the Secretary General said. 

She also commented on ICAO’s efforts to reinforce the global 

aviation security framework, pointing to partnerships with the World 

Customs Organization and relevant UN bodies, and “the need to 

evolve a common security approach while maintaining a keen 

focus on our complementary goals for a more streamlined and 

unobstructive passenger and cargo facilitation experience.” 

In their Conference Declaration, the Directors General committed to: 

Implement an effective State Safety Programme (SSP) by 2022, 

achieve a USOAP EI score higher or equal to the global average by 

2022; certify all aerodromes used for international operations by 

2020; and implement programmes relating to runway safety, loss of 

control in flight and controlled flight into terrain; 

Timely implementation of the Asia/Pacific Seamless Air 

Traffic Management (ATM) Plan to enhance ATM capacity and 

harmonization in the region; 

Establish an accident investigation authority that is independent 

from State aviation authorities and other entities that could 

interfere with the conduct or objectivity of an investigation or where 

appropriate develop a bilateral, sub-regional or regional partnership 

to support the establishment of accident investigation capabilities to 

serve the region or sub-region; and 

In line with the ICAO initiative on Next Generation of Aviation 

Professionals (NGAP), accord priority to human capital development 

to provide sufficient qualified and competent aviation professionals 

to support the Region’s growing needs. 

To see the conference presentations, go to: 

http://dgca54.mn/presentations/ 

> MONGOLIAN PARLIAMENT BUILDING

ICAO Council President Dr Olumuyiwa Benard 

Aliu (centre) and ICAO Secretary General Dr 

Fang Liu (right) exchange gifts and greetings 

with Mongolia’s Minister and Chief of Cabinet 

for the Secretariat of the Government, Mr 

Jimiyan Munkhbat. 

> 25 ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017
> REPORT | NO COUNTRY LEFT BEHIND

# DREAM 

26  ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 S SOAR The most important number to remember about 30-year-old 

Shaesta Waiz’s record-setting round-the-world flight is not 

the 24,816 nautical miles flown in 176 flight in 2017 hours 

across 145 days, not the 30 stops in 22 countries, but the 

3,000 young lives she touched in 32 outreach events. 

27 ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 “Every time I open the door of an aircraft, I ask myself, ‘How did 

a girl with my background become so lucky? The truth is, anyone 

can be me,” remarks Captain Shaesta Waiz. 

Born in a refugee camp into a family fleeing the Afghan-Soviet war. Grew 

up in an underprivileged neighborhood in northern California in the 

United States. Took her first ride on an airplane at age 19. 

“I went inside the airplane. I sat down. I was sweating. I was thinking that 

the plane was probably going to launch into the sky like a rocket and it 

was going to be like a roller coaster. But when the plane took off – my life 

completely changed. I fell in love with aviation,” she recalls. 

That led her to Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Florida, where 

she founded the Women’s Ambassadors Program in 2011 to increase 

female enrollment, which grew from 13 to 22 percent in less than three 

years through a modeled mentor program. 

Then came the idea for Dreams Soar, a mission to inspire the next 

generation of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) and 

aviation professionals. 

“I was able to get in front of 3,000 kids from all over the world and talk 

about Dreams Soar. The most important part of all these events was that 

the kids, especially the young girls, could see that you can come from 

nothing and achieve your wildest dreams if you work hard at it, and you 

work persistent, and you apply yourself,” Capt. Waiz says. 

“When I went to Afghanistan, I was blown away. There were about 300 

people, mostly women, with flowers.” Capt. Waiz is considering starting 

a school in her native country that will allow young girls to pursue STEM 

educations. “It would enable and empower women in the country, 

and they can use their knowledge to help Afghan people with many 

difficulties they face.” 

The first stop on her global circumnavigation was Columbus, Ohio, 

hometown of the late Geraldine “Jerrie” Mock, the first woman to fly solo 

around the world in 1964 and who had been an inspiration and mentor 

to Capt. Waiz. 

On 17 May, to celebrate the 90th Anniversary of the first nonstop 

transatlantic flight by Charles Lindbergh, she landed her 2001 Beechcraft 

Bonanza A36 in Montréal, Canada to participate in the International 

Aviation Women’s Association Connect event at ICAO Headquarters. 

“ICAO has been honoured to be a main Dreams Soar supporter 

throughout Shaesta’s campaign,” commented ICAO’s current (and first 

female) Secretary General, Dr Fang Liu. “Shaesta’s objectives align so 

well not only with our established NGAP programme, but also the new 

Gender Equality Programme we have recently launched. We have been 

very grateful for this unique opportunity to help her inspire so many 

young, enthusiastic women and girls.” 

According to Boeing and the International Society of Women Airline Pilots, 

only 6 percent of airline pilots worldwide are women. 

“I have a very strong passion for aviation that I want to share. I want to 

show women that they can succeed in anything – including flying around 

the world,” Capt. Waiz says. “My aviation dreams have had a huge impact 

in making me the pilot and the woman I am today, and I’m very grateful 

for ICAO’s recognition and support.” 

Dreams Soar’s historic global solo flight departed 13 May 2017 and 

returned 4 October 2017 to Daytona Beach, Florida. 

For more about Capt. Waiz’s 

Dreams Soar adventure, visit 

http://dreamssoar.org/ 

For more information about 

ICAO’s Next Generation of 

Aviation Professionals (NGAP) 

programme, visit 

https://www.icao.int/safety/ 

ngap/Pages/default.aspx  CAPTAIN SHAESTA WAIZ 

Youngest woman to fly solo around the globe 

in a single-engine plane 

## “ It’s important that people actually 

## see a woman pilot flying in the 

## aircraft. Seeing is believing.” 

“ICAO has been a huge help since Dreams Soar was first conceived, introducing me to aviation officials in so many of 

the countries … providing flight safety and route advice, and helping to organize the global support and cooperation.” 

ICAO’s support for Dreams Soar is part of its Next Generation of Aviation Professionals (NGAP) programme, focused on 

attracting young people to fill the hundreds of thousands of career positions coming available for new pilots and other 

skilled air transport personnel. 

DREAMS SOAR 

28  ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 19 - 23 February 

> Nairobi, Kenya
> 5 – 9 March
> Montréal, Canada
> 28 May - 1 June
> Montréal, Canada
> 12 – 16 March
> Paris, France
> 16 – 20 April
> Dakar, Senegal
> 14 – 18 May
> Bangkok, Thailand

## unitingaviation.com/journal/pbn2018 

# Secure your spot today! 

ICAO’s latest workshop simplifies guidance from the perspective of air operators and state regulators. State regulators will learn how to guide the air operator through the operational approval process. Air operators will learn: how to carry out a PBN operations approval assessment efficiently; their obligations for PBN approvals; the tasks required in each step of the process; the validity of a foreign operator’s approval within a state; and when an airline should apply and where the approval will be valid. The workshop also includes the learnings and findings fr from States that have been early to adopt PBN. BILINGUALISM IN THE SKY 

## Pilot and Air Traffic Controller Communication 

## in a Foreign Language 

DR FRANCOIS GROSJEAN INTERVIEWS 

DR JUDITH BÜRKI-COHEN. 

Well, they really shouldn’t. One important reason is the so-called 

party line, i.e. a source of information for pilots and for air traffic 

controllers. The airspace is divided into sectors that communicate 

on the same radar frequency. As a pilot, I can increase my situation 

awareness by listening to who else is on the same frequency. 

This tells me who is near me and whether they encounter any 

weather that I should know about. I may even catch an air traffic 

controller’s mistake, such as clearing me for the same runway as 

another airplane. 

Pilots and controllers speaking in languages other than English 

deprive non-English speaking pilots flying in the same airspace 

of the information in the party line, and they thus diminish their 

situation awareness. 

Flying is one of the safest ways of traveling so 

communication in English, even though it is in a foreign 

language for many, seems to work very well. What are 

the procedures that are in place to make it so efficient? 

The most important aspect is the strictly regulated phraseology 

and communication procedures that aim at avoiding 

misunderstandings. That is why it is so critical that all pilots and air 

traffic controllers adhere to these procedures, which afford multiple 

occasions to catch errors. 

What percentage of communication between pilots 

and air traffic controllers involves English as a 

foreign language for one or both parties, would you say? 

In non-English speaking countries, near 100 percent, because few 

air traffic controllers and only some pilots are native speakers of 

English. In countries where English is the official language, it will 

depend on the percentage of international flights or international 

student pilots. This will vary according to region. 

Who is responsible for making sure that both air traffic 

controllers and pilots are sufficiently proficient to talk to 

one another in English? 

The civil aviation authorities in each country, which are affiliated with 

the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) headquartered in 

Canada. For all pilots and air traffic controllers, it requires proficiency 

in aviation phraseology. Since March 2011, ICAO also requires 

general English language proficiency for pilots and controllers flying 

internationally or interacting with international flights. 

Is English always respected or do pilots and controllers who 

share the same language, e.g. a German pilot speaking to a 

German controller, slip into their native language? 

There are some 100,000 commercial flights each day in the world, which means that literally millions of 

interactions take place between pilots and air traffic controllers, very often in a foreign language since 

English is the international language of civil aviation. This entails a special form of bilingualism as it is very 

domain-specific and has to be optimal at all times. How does it take place? How efficient is it? Are there 

breakdowns and if so, what are they due to? What still needs to be improved? 

Dr. Judith Bürki-Cohen, formerly a senior scientist at the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Office of the 

Secretary, Research and Technology, has worked extensively on these questions. ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

30 

AVIATION ENGLISH yields just 10 reports filed in the past 10 years. However, there are 

many unreported incidents involving pilots flying into non-English 

speaking territory, pilots using airports with foreign students, pilots 

communicating with non-native English speaking crew, and of course 

air traffic controllers communicating with international flights or pilots. 

Not only may pilots and air controllers have different 

first languages influencing their English but they might 

also come from different cultures. How does this affect 

communication? 

You may be thinking of the 1990 Avianca crash near JFK airport, 

where 73 of the 158 passengers died. This is a perfect example 

of James Reason’s Swiss Cheese Model, where several “holes” in 

the system have to line up to result in an accident. Yes, the Avianca 

copilot may have been intimidated by the controller’s assertive 

manner, and a certain “macho” culture may have prevented him 

from successfully communicating the seriousness of the situation. 

This is all conjecture, however. 

The facts are that the crew did not use the correct phraseology, 

which would have required them to declare a fuel emergency and 

request an emergency landing. Also, the crew had failed to obtain 

weather information before and during the flight and were unaware 

of the serious weather around JFK airport. Thus, they did not have 

enough fuel to handle the resulting delays at this notoriously busy 

airport. Moreover, the captain missed the first approach and had 

to go around for a second try. Finally, a less busy controller might 

have further inquired after hearing the non-standard phrase “we’re 

running out of fuel,” especially with an international crew. 

You give specific recommendations for how air traffic 

controllers should talk to foreign pilots speaking English. 

What are they? 

Controllers should be aware that international pilots may be less 

familiar with the phraseology or that regional phraseologies may 

differ. Controllers should be especially careful with numbers and 

stick to giving them in single digits instead of grouping them, that is, 

“eight” “three” instead of “eighty three.” Grouping occurs differently 

for different languages (three and eighty in German, or four times 

twenty and three in French). Units for weights, distances, barometric 

pressure etc. may also be different in different countries. 

Controllers should speak “staccato,” that is, break the instruction 

up into its component words by inserting short pauses. Recognizing 

where one word ends and the next begins is notoriously difficult for 

listeners of a foreign language. And, of course, controllers should 

pay extra attention to complete and correct readback. Finally, 

keeping instructions short will facilitate correct readback and save 

time over trying to cram too much information into one clearance. 

This article is reprinted by permission from Psychology Today. 

One procedural requirement, for instance, is careful “readback” 

by the pilot of what the controller has said, and “hearback” by the 

controller. The latter is supposed to listen to the pilot’s readback 

and catch any readback errors. 

Of course, errors can go unnoticed, especially in a congested 

airspace. Efforts are underway to shift routine conversations 

to “datalink” via satellite, where air traffic controllers can 

communicate with pilots via text messages. 

There are some instances where communication 

between pilots and air controllers break down though. 

Can you tell us how much is due to faulty English as 

compared to other reasons? 

In addition to readback and hearback errors, there are many 

reasons why communication breakdowns happen. Faulty English is 

just one of them and restricted to areas with international flights or 

pilots. Use of non-standard phraseology may or may not be due to 

lack of English proficiency. There are also stuck microphones which 

block an entire frequency and there is frequency congestion where 

a pilot cannot get a word in. 

Another problem is airplane callsign confusions, where a pilot 

may take a clearance for another airplane with a similar sounding 

callsign. Certainly, all these issues are not helped with lack of 

English proficiency as a compounding factor. 

How important is accent in communication breakdown 

since a controller and a pilot might each have a different 

English accent? Would you have an example of an 

incident due to this? 

There are certainly complaints from both pilots and controllers, and 

incidences where accents may have played a role. A quick search of 

an official reporting system in the United States for “foreign accent” 

# “ As a pilot, I can 

# increase my situation 

# awareness by listening 

# to who else is on the 

# same frequency.  ”ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

31 

AVIATION ENGLISH UAE CREATES 

# GLOBAL AVIATION AWARDS 

## Supporting the  No Country Left Behind  programme, 

## initial awards to be presented at ICAO Assembly 40 in 2019 

From the first commercial flight arriving in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in 1932, the 

UAE aviation sector has flourished. The UAE is now home to one of the world’s busiest 

international airports and the largest international airlines. The aviation industry is 

a major contributor to the UAE economy and has the potential to become a major 

source of the UAE’s post-oil-diversification portfolio. Recently the UAE announced that 

the Emirates Flight Information Region (FIR) will be transformed into the world’s first 

airspace structure to be completely based on Performance-Based Navigation (PBN). 

The UAE has also been exhibiting regional and international leadership through its 

Cooperation Programmes and by maintaining a seat at the ICAO Council. The State is 

also ranked as the top ICAO Member State in compliance level with ICAO requirements 

under the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP). 

The UAE’s global aviation success story is thanks in large part to the visionary 

leadership of the UAE’s Vice President and Prime Minister, Sheikh Mohammed bin 

Rashid Al Maktoum, and his passion for aviation and the significance placed on aviation 

toward wider global economic development. 

In just a few decades the aviation sector has had a transformative effect on the UAE 

economy, and we believe that it is time to celebrate the achievements of the aviation 

industry globally and to acknowledge and promote the far-reaching impacts that 

aviation has on global trade thanks to the connectivity that it affords. 

We believe that ICAO’s  No Country Left Behind  (NCLB) initiative presents an opportunity 

for an award scheme that rewards the development of the aviation industry across the 

board. With this in view, we have launched the Mohammed Bin Rashid “Global Aviation 

Awards” that coincide with the triennial ICAO Assembly in Montréal, Canada. 

The objective of the award scheme is to provide a platform to connect and improve 

relations with Least Developed States (LDS), support the ICAO Strategic Objective 

of increased global connectivity, support global aviation plans for development, and 

promote innovation and liberalization across the industry globally. 

The award scheme consists of six distinct categories, each designed to support these 

objectives and represent the unique mix that is the aviation business. The categories include: 

State with Most Improved Quality of Aviation Infrastructure 

Outstanding Global Connectivity Award 

Outstanding Resource Contribution to ICAO Programmes 

Outstanding International Cooperation Programme 

Aviation Personality of the Triennium 

Innovation Award (encompassing aviation safety, security, sustainability, 

passenger experience) 

SAIF MOHAMMED AL SUWAIDI 

Director General, UAE General 

Civil Aviation Authority ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

32 

NEW GCAA AWARD THE EMERGING 

# ERA OF ELECTRICS 

## No need for headphones nor avgas. 

## Companies large and small are revving 

## up electric aircraft projects. Realistic? 

## For some aviation applications, yes. 

## For others, perhaps a little premature. 

## ICAO Journal Editor Rick Adams looks 

## at the field of power brokers. 

> 33 ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017
> ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT

AB INITIO TRAINERS? 

Despite the hype of recent announcements about regional 

airline-size aircraft, the initial application of electric propulsion is more 

likely ab initio flight training. “The transition from training on an electric 

airplane is ideally aligned with a turbine aircraft like an airliner,” said 

George Bye, founder of Bye Aerospace in Englewood, Colorado, US, and 

designer of the transonic Javelin advanced jet. He was also FlightSafety 

International’s project manager for the US Air Force T-6 turboprop 

trainer programme. 

“Electric airplanes behave much more like a turbine aircraft than an 

internal combustion engine Cessna or Piper. The turbine aircraft is very 

smooth; the electric aircraft is very smooth. We manage RPM, torque, 

temperatures – just like the turbine aircraft does.” 

Bye Aerospace subsidiary Aero Electric Aircraft Corp. (AEAC) is developing 

a four-seat version of its Sun Flyer, which it hopes will be the first 

all-electric trainer aircraft to be certified by the US Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) under Part 23 regulations. Bye told me they expect 

to fly the prototype “this winter” and “the certification will take a couple of 

years” with deliveries commencing shortly after. 

AEAC is working with Redbird Flight Simulations (Austin, Texas, US) to offer 

a comprehensive training system for the Sun Flyer. Redbird founder Jerry 

Gregoire said, “I got interested in the project because we were looking for 

less expensive solutions for flight training. We loved the simplicity.” 

Redbird has built a couple of prototype simulators for the Sun Flyer, 

based on their three-axis MCX multi-crew trainer, and is developing a 

training curriculum. Delivering a cockpit-specific replica of the aircraft will 

require further aircraft performance data. 

“As simulators go, this is going to be a pretty simple one. It’s basically 

an electric fan with a rheostat on it. It ought to be a pretty easy-handling 

aircraft,” Gregoire said. 

There will, of course, be transition training required for pilots to move 

to a piston or turboprop aircraft. “This aircraft is a highly simplified 

environment. A motor with no propulsion latency or a torque curve. 

We don’t have to worry about how long it takes to spin an engine up 

or how do you keep from cold-shocking it. It can’t be over-revved,” 

Gregoire explained. 

He added: “It does, however, provide the ideal platform where a 

pilot can learn all the really important things about flying and aircraft 

handling. Then make the transition to a more complicated propulsion 

system afterward.” 

“I would think there’d be a fair amount of simulator training to get 

them used to a larger, heavier aircraft,” noted Bye. “But the transition 

is much smoother when you’re using an electric propulsion system 

leading into turbine than it would be managing an internal combustion 

engine trainer – there’s mixture, prop and a number of things that 

make it a challenge.” 

AEAC has about 100 deposits for the US$350,000 aircraft, including an 

order of 25 from Spartan College of Aeronautics and Technology in Tulsa, 

Oklahoma, US, as well as the New York-based Academy of Aviation Part 

141 flight school. 

A Slovenian light aircraft manufacturer, Pipstrel (from the Latin word 

for bat), is already producing a two-seat, all-electric trainer aircraft, the 

US$117,000 Alpha Electro – originally branded the WattsUp. Pipistrel 

reports “substantial interest” from flight training operations based in 

Minneapolis, Florida and Indiana. 

A training programme targeted for veterans and low-income youth in 

California’s Central Valley has ordered four Alpha Electro aircraft, but is 

currently stymied from starting because of a preamble clause in the FAA’s 

2004 Light Sport Utility rule that requires LSA aircraft to have “a single, 

reciprocating engine, if powered.” 

A Part 61 flight school known as Aero Squad, operated by Tomorrow’s 

Aeronautical Museum in inner-city Los Angeles, has petitioned the FAA 

JERRY GREGOIRE 

Founder, Redbird Flight Simulations 

# “ … the ideal platform 

# where a pilot can learn 

# all the really important 

# things about flying …  ”

Aside from glass cockpits and digital fly-by-wire, basic commercial aircraft technology has changed little in the 

past three or four decades. But the next 5-10 years could see a revolution of sorts. Researchers are racing to 

design, develop and commercialize passenger aircraft that reduce emissions and noise pollution with Tesla-type 

battery power or cruise above the congested ground traffic of megacities. 

What’s the status of electric aircraft dreams? Where might they fit into the future commercial aviation scheme? ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

34 

ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT said, “This is a critical activity, so that the pilots get experience with our 

experimental wing, and experimental motors before we actually put 

them on the airplane. That way, we are optimizing the time in the flight 

test phase of the project so that the aircraft is not tied up with the pilots 

learning the performance at that time.” The simulator will be updated as 

the X-57’s configuration goes through design transitions. The Maxwell is 

expected to fly as early as next year using a modified P2006T fuselage 

from Italian manufacturer Tecnam. 

IN THE INTERIM, HYBRIDS 

Boeing has put a toe into the electric waters via its HorizonX joint 

venture capital backing of Zunum Aero (Kirkland, Washington, US), 

which hopes to certify and deliver a hybrid-electric 12-passenger 

aircraft by 2022 to serve regional point-to-point and hub feeder routes. 

“Back in 1980, there were close to 300 small carriers in this country. 

They averaged about 20 seats and about 150-mile stage lengths. 

A lot of secondary cities have seen their air service decline as the 

airlines have pulled out of hubs or combined their hubs,” said Matt 

Knapp, Zunum Aero chief technology officer and co-founder. JetBlue’s 

Technology Ventures arm is another investor in Zunum, whose name 

comes from the Mayan word for hummingbird. 

Airbus has a roadmap for future electric-powered aircraft designs, 

including the E-Fan 2.0, a hybrid/electric collaboration with Siemens, 

and eventually “an electrically powered airliner.” Airbus Group’s 

E-Aircraft System House near Munich, Germany is planned to open by 

late 2018. 

EasyJet announced in September a partnership with US firm Wright 

Electric (Cambridge, Massachusetts) for a battery-powered aircraft 

to handle flights under two hours, or 335 miles, which represent 20 

percent of the European regional carrier’s flights. Wright has built a two-

seater prototype; the next step is a 10-seater aircraft, then a single aisle 

with 120-passenger capacity. Timeframe? “Within a decade.” 

to change the definition to “a single, non-turbine engine, if powered” 

on the premise that the word reciprocating was included “to avoid the 

complications of turbine and jet aircraft being introduced into the light 

sport aircraft category … of low-performance, simple, easy-to-operate 

aircraft.” European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) versions of LSA 

and ultralight rules make no mention of propulsion type, so electric 

powerplants are acceptable. 

Thus far, though, the FAA has not budged, claiming, “The technological 

and training issues for certification and operation of electric engines go 

beyond the intent for simple, easy-to-maintain, recreational aircraft.” 

X-FACTOR REVIVED 

Test pilots and engineers at NASA’s Armstrong Flight Research 

Center (Edwards, California, US) are flying a simulator designed to the 

specifications of the new X-57 aircraft, which features a unique electric 

propulsion system and is NASA’s first X-plane project in two decades. The 

X-Plane programme was introduced in the 1940s to develop a plane that 

could fly faster than the speed of sound, eventually achieved by Chuck 

Yeager in the X-1. 

Also known by the unwieldy name, SCEPTOR (Scalable Convergent 

Electric Propulsion Technology Operations Research), the X-57 “Maxwell” 

is named for Edinburgh, Scotland-born physicist James Clerk Maxwell, 

best known for his theory of electromagnetism. The X-57 design includes 

14 motors, seven on each wing. During takeoff and landing, six small 

motors on each wing kick on for about 30 seconds. Once moving, the 

propellers of those 12 engines fold back flush with the wing and two 

larger end-wing propellers take over. 

The NASA Armstrong team has designed multiple failure modes into 

the simulation scenarios to evaluate aircraft performance, as well as 

reaction time. This helps develop emergency procedures specific to the 

experimental aircraft. Sean Clarke, principal investigator for the X-57, ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

> 35

ELECTRIC SCEPTICS 

Will electric aircraft eventually replace today’s turbine-powered 

commercial aircraft? Richard Anderson, Director of Embry-Riddle 

Aeronautical University’s flight research center and professor of 

aerospace engineering, noted, “A lot of the technical advances that 

happen start in smaller airplanes. There will be a market for smaller, fully 

electric airplanes.” 

Teal Group Vice-President Richard Aboulafia calls the electric aircraft 

concepts “1950s Popular Mechanics cover stories.” He added, “The 

essence of futurism is the tendency to overstate the impact and 

readiness of exciting new technologies.” 

Aeronautical consultant Bjorn Fehrm predicted, “Electrical aircraft will 

come, just not as fast as many think.” He cautions that current battery 

technology “leaves a lot to be desired. A battery needs 20 times more 

space than jet fuel for the same energy content. The inefficiencies make 

the battery virtually impossible as an energy store for longer-range 

aircraft. In addition, the battery has four times higher maintenance 

costs than gas turbines; it needs replacement after 1,500 charge 

cycles. The consequence is a battery-driven aircraft can only be used for 

short-range operations.” 

‘ROUND THE NEIGHBORHOOD 

“Electric aircraft (and quad-copters) will make sense as urban commuters 

at first,” Fehrm opined. “They can be made quieter and more neighbor-

friendly than gas turbine or piston aircraft (no noise, no fuel or exhaust 

odors).” 

Indeed, in October, the Volocopter VC200, claiming to be the world’s first 

certified multicopter, flew its two-seat, all-electric 18-rotor “flying taxi” in 

Dubai, UAE, for the first time (in an unmanned flight). Volocopter GmbH 

(Bruchsal, Germany) has attracted Florian Reuter as CEO (formerly 

Siemens) and CTO Jan-Hendrik Boelens (formerly Airbus Helicopters), 

along with investments from Daimler and Intel. 

Dubai aims to have 25 percent of its passenger transportation via 

“autonomous means” by 2030. Singapore has also announced its intent 

to deploy air taxis. 

Others in the race for urban airspace are Chinese company Ehang, which 

has had one-seater, 100-kilometre per hour passenger drones hovering 

above the sand dunes near Dubai during test flights, and the Russian 

flying motorcycle, Hoversurf Scorpion. 

On-demand ride service Uber, which has been experimenting with 

autonomous automobiles, ambitiously aims to deploy electric vertical 

takeoff and landing (VTOL) “Uber Elevate” air taxis by 2020 in Dubai 

and Dallas, Texas, US. Uber is partnered with Pipistrel, Brazil’s Embraer, 

Mooney International (Kerrville, Texas), and Bell Helicopter (Fort Worth, 

Texas), as well as Aurora Flight Sciences (Manassas, Virginia), which 

is being acquired by Boeing. Aurora has a US Defense Department 

contract to develop an unpiloted electric VTOL, the LightningStrike, 

which generates 3 megawatts (4,000 horsepower) to power 24 ducted 

fans on its wings. 

Airbus is developing an e-VTOL aircraft for its CityBus initiative called 

Vahana through A3, its Silicon Valley outpost. The Airbus air taxi uses 

multiple rotors for hover capability, plus wings and a rear-mounted 

propeller for forward flight. 

Few experts expect aviation authorities to approve free flight of low-altitude 

“commuter aircraft” in urban canyons. Most likely, air taxis will operate 

similar to aerial rail systems – passengers will board an aircraft at one 

“station” and be deposited at another station or heliport in the network. 

However, a California company known as Passenger Drone will allow you 

to “take over any time via the joystick on board or using the touch avionics 

displays.” Normally, a passenger would simply input their destination and 

leave the driving to the computer. “Our aerial vehicles can be 100 percent 

remotely controlled by 4G technology, allowing an operator located as far 

away as the EU or Asia to fly a North America-based aircraft safely and 

efficiently,” the company claims. The car-size aircraft with 16 rotors has a 

range of 25 minutes at speeds up to 45 miles per hour. 

This article is reprinted by permission from The Journal of Civil 

Aviation, Halldale Media. 

Rick Adams, Editor of ICAO Journal, is a Fellow of the Royal 

Aeronautical Society (FRAeS). 

# “ Electrical aircraft will come, 

# just not as fast as many think.  ”

BJORN FEHRM 

Aeronautical Consultant ICAO JOURNAL – ISSUE 4 2017 

36 The World Civil Aviation Report is available as a hard copy or as a subscription which also includes access to value-added content via a web-based Reference Centre. 

unitingaviation.com/journal/wcar2 

Value-Added Benefits  ICAO Information 

Data and Statistics 

A digital version of the report is included in the reference centre. 

References to relevant ICAO documents and access to newsletters. 

Learn about programme updates, upcoming events, products and tools. 

Download unique and unbiased traffic data and statistics from ICAO. 

eBook Version 

Access the Online Reference Centre 

Be Seen. Gain More Exposure 

# NEW 

The ICAO World Civil Aviation Report provides our global community with a comprehensive set of unique facts and figures on the state of the international air transport. Review the key developments in aviation as well as future trends and associated initiatives. 

Reserve your copy of the latest edition of ICAO’s flagship publication 

# THE WORLD CIVIL AVIATION REPORT  2ND EDITION 

Advertise in the report for a unique opportunity to reach high-level air transport decision makers. 

Contact mcr @icao.int for more information. w w w . c e i a . n e t / s e c u r i t y / e m i s 

For more information on the EMIS series , contact your CEIA representative at infosecurity@ceia-spa.com 

MEET ECAC 

PERFORMANCE STANDARD 

TSA 

QUALIFIED 

# EMIS ® AUTOMATIC SCREENING FOR NON-METALLIC CARGO 

# FULLY AUTOMATIC DETECTION 

� Detect detonators and metal components of explosive devices 

� Low-intensity electromagnetic field: no ionizing radiation 

� No dedicated operator needed 

� Fast, real-time analysis 

� Complete data logging and traceability 

¬ Flowers and perishable goods 

¬ Paper products 

¬ Textiles and Clothing 

¬ Plastic and wooden products 

INSPECTION OF 

EMIS 130160 

for palletized cargo
