Title: Wikipedia:No original research/Noticeboard/Archive 52 - Wikipedia

URL Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research/Noticeboard/Archive_52

Published Time: Mon, 27 Oct 2025 04:32:05 GMT

Markdown Content:
Could someone please cast eyes on 2021 Canadian church burnings? It appears to be based on a list compiled by the unreliable source _True North_. The reference has been removed but the material remains. Elinruby (talk) 18:33, 1 July 2024 (UTC)

The description of what fires occurred probably looks like the list from _True North_ because _True North_ listed the fires that occurred. Since _True North_ is a deprecated source, it's not used. Instead, numerous reliable sources (around 20 in total) are used that independently verify the fires and the relationship between them. By the metric you describe, any accurate statement could be discounted if it is accurately described in a deprecated source. In any case, that also wouldn't be original research. ~ Pbritti (talk) 18:40, 1 July 2024 (UTC)As you know quite well, since we have now discussed this multiple times, it is the implied attribution that I am questioning, as well as your framing of the fires as some sort of retaliatory attack on the Catholic church. None of that is ANYWHERE in the sources. And when you find yourself saying things like 'accurately described in a deprecated source" then it may be time to revise your metric for accuracy. Yes, there are one or two sources for each specific fire saying that it happened. The entire premise of the article is still however undemonstrated, three years after the fact. Elinruby (talk) 19:29, 1 July 2024 (UTC)That's incorrect: every reliable source, investigators, and tribal officials all say the most likely cause was retaliation for the gravesites. See this 2024 CBC News report on the church fires, this _NYT_ story, this _Guardian_ story, and every other cited piece on the article. Trudeau even made a statement unambiguously connecting the two. In the meantime, you have suggested that the fires were just natural occurrences. If you can provide a reliable source that says there isn't a connection, go for it. ~ Pbritti (talk) 19:53, 1 July 2024 (UTC)To be clear, you are asking me to prove that an unproven theory is unproven. *You* need to prove it is not, by proving it. Also I do not claim the fires all had natural causes. Or even any of them for that matter. I simply do not know, and I am saying that there is no evidence that they are all retaliatory arsons. Three years later when some portion of them would surely have gotten through the criminal justice system by now if that were the case. Elinruby (talk) 22:49, 1 July 2024 (UTC)
*   Furthermore, please describe Justin Trudeau's credentials as an arson investigator, and discuss how "I could understand why someone might do this" supports the proposition that someone of a given ethnicity in fact did. And please stop misquoting me; it's a really bad habit Elinruby (talk) 22:53, 1 July 2024 (UTC)

I'm fairly certain that a major take away of everything here is that the Canadian government has, for more than a century, had a propensity towards failing to address crimes against Indigenous peoples. The good news is that your personal denialism does not prevent the utilization of RSs. ~ Pbritti (talk) 23:40, 1 July 2024 (UTC)You are accusing me of denialism. Please illuminate me as to the train of thought that led you there. Elinruby (talk) 11:09, 2 July 2024 (UTC)
Also, yes, you did suggest that this could just have been natural, most recently here. You then inserted _actual_ original research into the article. ~ Pbritti (talk) 00:17, 2 July 2024 (UTC)

Yeah, that is a diff, what is its point here? I am quoting you. You said that less than a month ago at ANI, do you remember that? What I get out of it is that you have absolutely no idea about a wildfire season. Meanwhile, Lytton is an example of an extremely large fire in the immediate time period that was neither an accident nor an arson, since it was started per local consensus by a train.[1] It is classified as "man-made" btw, and so is the fire that was started by the upstanding citizen off the Coaquihalla who while having an argument with his girlfriend drove at top speed down a forest road with a barbeque grill going in the back of his pickup truck. In drought conditions surrounded by wildfires. [2] I do not object to an article about retaliatory arsons if we can find some to write about, incidentally. Elinruby (talk) 05:41, 2 July 2024 (UTC)I have nominated the article for deletion at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/2021 Canadian church burnings. Interested editors are encouraged to participate. _**Tar****nis****hed****Path**_**talk**02:45, 2 July 2024 (UTC)The article was created based on list published by Aleteia, the Catholic on-line newspaper.[3] We avoid OR by reporting possible connections published in reliable sources.Your mention of True North btw links to a direction. TFD (talk) 03:45, 2 July 2024 (UTC)Yeah welll the reliability of _Aleteia_ is currently being questioned at RSN based on some other examples of the excellence of their reporting. Elinruby (talk) 05:41, 2 July 2024 (UTC)I might see if I can get some more reliable support for a potential list, e.g. from local (reputable) news sources from the areas where incidents took place.I'd be interested in if there could be some sort of consensus for the criteria that make an incident 'count' for potentially being part of a list - e.g. a specific time period they occurred in, whether they were believed to be arson, if they occurred in a specific region, etc.I'd like to see some description and delineation of how the incidents have been lied about (e.g. by disinformation sources like True North) and misrepresented to whip up fear and furor to support far-right conspiracies. Fluorescent Jellyfish (talk) 06:56, 2 July 2024 (UTC)@Fluorescent Jellyfish: I would say go to town, but this is clearly not the article Pbritti wants to write. He just categorized it as an article about Catholicism, which is, yes, mentioned, but that is what he thinks the article is about. It would actually be quite interesting to recast this as a journalism article, and maybe that would even save us all from typing the same thing over and over again for the rest of our lives. There didn't use to be an active journalism project but maybe that has changed. Elinruby (talk) 10:55, 2 July 2024 (UTC)As for what would count: if this is a spinoff of the gravesites article I think the standard should be quite high. If this is a list of fires in June 2021 in Canada, you wouldn't have that. At least, when I worked on wildfire articles before, it was, I think, a category --2018 wildfires in California. If this is a list of suspected arsons in late June 2021 in Canada, the next question is why. Why would you have that category? I don't think you should, unless there are a whole lot of other lists like it. And by the way I keep meaning to look up the sample size on that CBC poll. The point I am making with the nationwide scope however is that things are being grouped into single sentences with no indication of why. These are groups of people who may or may not have ever even heard of each other. Elinruby (talk) 11:09, 2 July 2024 (UTC)@Fluorescent Jellyfish: maybe the place to start is where the church burnings (we can't even call them arsons for crying out loud) first became discussed in the context of the graves. Probably it is something like what happened with "mass grave", I suspect, but that is just a theory. Some reporter assumed that this was helpful context. But in terms of Wikipedia that definitely *would be* OR, is the problem. Useful question for disinformation research though. Do the academic journals discuss this fire idea, do you know? I have only seen a discussion of the "they said mass graves" trope, but I haven't searched specifically for this. 18:18, 2 July 2024 (UTC)
for discussion:[4][5] and aha, our good friends RT [6] But we are looking for "earliest" -- maybe a leading question here? Elinruby (talk) 19:43, 2 July 2024 (UTC) Then there is [7], which quotes something called the Catholic Civil Rights League. which, aha, maintains a database of "church attacks". Elinruby (talk) 19:51, 2 July 2024 (UTC) This early report [8] on the other hand specifically says Chief Crow, who is in his eighth year as chief, says he can only speculate on why the fires are being set.Elinruby (talk) 19:55, 2 July 2024 (UTC) He is quoted elsewhere as saying the fires are "suspicious," without specifics. A lot of the early reports mention a Sgt. Jason Bayda of the Penticton South Okanagan Royal Canadian Mounted Police said in a statement that the police were “looking to determine any possible connection to the church fires. Links to the statement are now giving 404 errors. Elinruby (talk) 20:05, 2 July 2024 (UTC) Castanet, which is an RS for the BC interior, quotes Crow more fully [9]: I really don't condone the actions of whoever's done this, but it is under investigation. We'll have to wait and see," Crow said Something called churchleaders.com [10] picked up their story framing it this way from something called "RNS", which I so far have not identified.

Major observation so far: if you seach on "kamloops graves church fires" you get a whole bunch of Catholic media in the search returns. Elinruby (talk) 20:16, 2 July 2024 (UTC)

Ok, I'm confused. What's the issue here? Pbritti has supplied sources for the contested claim. Nobody's challenged those sources. So what OR are we discussing exactly? **5225 C**(talk•contributions) 10:23, 2 July 2024 (UTC)giggle. Yes, you are confused. Several of the sources have in fact been challenged, see RSN. Some excellent sources remain, but only for the fact that some people three years ago said that they would be mad too. And that the local RCMP put out a press release. The story evaporated. Only person ever convicted for anything was mentally and and mad at her boyfriend. But we have an article that says that three years ago there was speculation that something or other -- it isn't entirely clear what, but it's obviously Bad....so we have a list of fires in June 2021 that might or might not have something to do with bodies in Kamloops. Maybe. An elder or an academic says I can Understand why someone would -- this is not proof that someone did.
At least some of The fires in the article obviously happened. The question is why and what happened then. Elinruby (talk) 10:43, 2 July 2024 (UTC)

When you manage to get the CBC, BBC, NYT, Guardian, WSJ, and NPR deprecated as sources at RSN, feel welcome to reopen discussion. In the meantime, feel welcome to personally stick to your theory that the 200+% increase in church fires is just a fluke. ~ Pbritti (talk) 14:46, 2 July 2024 (UTC)**I don't have a theory and neither should you.** That is the point here. All those are very fine sources but they don't support the idea that there is anything here to have a theory about. Meanwhile since my position that you are misrepresenting is immediately about your comment, I am letting go of the idea that your repeated problems with this have something to do with your memoryaking tem merely has t. Elinruby (talk) 18:10, 2 July 2024 (UTC)I spot-checked the BBC, CBS and WSJ sources. They all draw a connection between the fires and the gravesites story. This is speculation, but it’s speculation being done by reliable sources and the people they are quoting - not speculation by Wikipedia editors. So it does not look like WP:OR. The premise of the article is that there has been an unusual pattern of fires, and notable people have commented on it. This is not the article to document every Canadian church that caught fire in 2021. It’s an article about a notably unusual pattern of fires. If the article includes mention of a fire that has not been linked to a wider pattern, then _that_ would be WP:SYNTH. Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 20:14, 2 July 2024 (UTC)edit conflict six times trying to get something said in the past 10 minutes.... I give up.Moxy🍁 20:44, 2 July 2024 (UTC)My apologies @Moxy: I am done now and the floor is yours. Elinruby (talk) 20:52, 2 July 2024 (UTC)Who is doing the linking though? The RS tends to mention the proximity in time, only. The Federalist isn't shy about drawing a connection [11] mind you but this is not RS. The "unusual pattern" is that at a time when literally half of British Columbia was on fire[12], there were "suspicious" fires that sparked some speculation. The OR is in framing the fires in particular as a group of related events when there is no evidence of that whatsoever, at least not in the article, or that I have been able to find so far. Elinruby (talk) 20:28, 2 July 2024 (UTC) The Daily Mail is also pushing an explicit revenge motive [13] The New York Times linked them merely as coming at a particularly raw moment, just weeks after the unmarked graves of 215 children were found and said While the circumstances remained murky, investigators said one line of inquiry was arson, including the possibility that the Indigenous communities had been targeted although it does not rule out anger as a cause either. Elinruby (talk) 20:39, 2 July 2024 (UTC) Last, the Penticton Western News, part of a chain of local RS publications, gives a fuller RCMP quote: “Should our investigations deem these fires as arson, the RCMP will be looking at all possible motives and allow the facts and evidence to direct our investigative action,” said Sgt. Jason Bayda, media relations officer for the Penticton South Okanagan RCMP. “We are sensitive to the recent events, but won’t speculate on a motive.”Elinruby (talk) 20:49, 2 July 2024 (UTC)Ironically, Elinruby pressed for the removal of the only arson (that of St. Gregory Coptic Church) that explicitly contradicted the RS consensus that this is likely retaliation for the gravesites. Indeed, the reason they supporting removing it was the perpetrator's claim that that it was over domestic strife, despite an overwhelming amount of coverage in RSs initially suggesting there was a relationship to the other fires. If Elinruby really wanted to challenge the established narrative, they wouldn't have insisted on excluding that particular fire. ~ Pbritti (talk) 21:06, 2 July 2024 (UTC)Are there reliable sources which speculate that the cause of the pattern of fires was due to natural wildfires / climate / similar? Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 21:15, 2 July 2024 (UTC)there are literally thousands of sources but to answer that question I need to know which fires. The two in the southeast that are close together? Elinruby (talk) 04:48, 3 July 2024 (UTC)I just want to know if any reliable source has offered the theory that the pattern of fires has a natural explanation (in which case that can be mentioned in the article), or if that’s just your theory (in which case it’s OR). Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 07:03, 3 July 2024 (UTC)What pattern? There are a lot of sources, yes. None of them say that these is a link except for the NY Post and the Daily Mail and some really obscure other sites, either Catholic or right wing. By the way "Kamloops graves church fires" produces zero relevant results at JSTOR. It's all about hits like "Church St" in addresses. Plus one American site ranting about blood libel, just to double down on the inappropriateness. Since a now-topic-banned editor essentially gutted Canadian Indian residential school gravesites, I have been going through sources for the reconstruction. Pretty confident in saying that in 2021 RS were saying things like "these two fires came on the heels of the announcement of ground-penetrating radar results." Now these fires are completely off their radar and the top hits about graves in Kamloops right now are all whackadoodle sources. Elinruby (talk) 03:52, 3 July 2024 (UTC)Is CBC a reliable source? [14]:
> Thirty-three churches have burned to the ground across Canada, since the discovery of possible unmarked children's graves at the former Kamloops Indian Residential School in May, 2021. In most cases, officials have blamed arsonists. CBC’s Terry Reith details his investigation into the pattern of arson, and how it’s tied to Canada’s dark residential school history.

Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 06:50, 3 July 2024 (UTC)
You're still saying "pattern". Maybe this will help:[15]. The pattern of fires in the British Columbia exterior was that they were so extensive all public infrastructure broke down and this was preceded by an extended period of temperatures in the 50 degree Celsius range and followed by extensive landslides. The stores ran out of food and no more could be delivered because all the highways broke. They stopped running trains to avoid setting even more fires. There is a pattern there if only that these events were close in time. These fires Pbritti so desperately wants to highlight are also related in that they were in the same time frame.

The entire province was under a state of emergency [16] and they were sending food up here by helicopter. Much the same was true where those fires were, probably, but no, no source singles out the four or five fires Pbritti claims are linked even though some of them are hundreds and hundreds of miles apart and any link would imply actual organized terrorism. That's not completely impossible, but it's really unlikely and it it did exist I think it would be more effective. I mean, an organized conspiracy to damage a door. Think about it.

What insurrection we did have in that timeframe involved tractor-trailers blockading the national capital. Why would anyone mess around with an abandoned church in the truly remote and obscure Hazelton? Vancouver Island is also literally another world from Hazelton, but we're already having trouble with the concept that stuff burns in British Columbia all the time. But A) "man-made fire" is not synonymous with "arson", for one improper synth, and includes trains, power tools, poorly attended campfires and yes, arson, as well as yahoos who consume too much grievance porn on YouTube perhaps. B) you are asking me for my own synth to counter his apparently uncritical acceptance of religious materials and whacko sources, and Wikipedia is not a matter of faith. It goes by RS. If there are no RS there is no topic. You did hear me say there are no journal articles about this alleged pattern, right? Yes, he keeps waving that cbc link around, but *it* doesn't say there is a link either. It is, yes, reliable. For the fact that there were fires and some of them were suspicious. It isn't reliable for saying that all these fires were post hoc ergo proctor hoc, because it simply doesn't say that. Sigh. I of sort expected the PR noticeboard to know what OR is. It isn't 'we need to update the article if we really must keep it,", OR is "of course there is a conspiracy, check out all the fringe sources that agree with me!" Double sigh. Elinruby (talk) 11:59, 3 July 2024 (UTC)

I said pattern because we have RS that says pattern. I haven’t seen you cite any source which disputes this. Your reasoning above is OR. Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 13:41, 3 July 2024 (UTC)The CBC said "pattern" as in, "a pattern of increase in a certain type of fire in a small sample of fire events". Maybe I even believe them given it's the CBC, but something in the back of my mind is telling me that I should look up degrees of significance. Assuming the sampling is valid, though, and the calculations are gold standard, for the sake of the argument, because again, I have questions, but let's pretend: _it's still three-year-old speculation that possibly didn't age well_. No matter what. Certainly in three years time, some fire investigator somewhere found something out. That is the problem with articles about this type of breaking news story. They have to be updated or they start to be worse than not having an article at all. So the article needs to be updated if we keep it.And what is the current topic of this article? Maybe I am missing something. _Selected police blotter items from 2021_? One of these patterns is not like the other. If it wasn't notable enough for the hyper-local online news outlets **then**, or more likely the RCMP were all drafted to direct traffic or whatnot, then why why why are we hosting an article based on these really really subpar sources now? (partial answer) see comment below where Pbritti says I should have let the mentally ill woman who started a fire because she was mad at her boyfriend stay in the article, because then I would have had a better argument. This is what we are dealing with here. Yes, that happened, and the clearly unrelated episode is already gone, and now we are dealing with those where we just do not know and should not guess. WP:ONUS still applies and yes the article pointlessly discusses one less fire.
Pbritti also still has not answered the question about his affiliations with the Catholic Church btw. Elinruby (talk) 14:32, 3 July 2024 (UTC)

Because it's an absurd, false accusation that warrants no reply. Nor does your WALLOFTEXT or persistent 1AM struggle. Seeing consensus that there's no issue, we're done here. ~ Pbritti (talk) 15:07, 3 July 2024 (UTC)'a) it is not an accusation.b) to the extent that I am accusing you of anything at all at the moment, it is of being unaccountably stubborn about this strange little synth that seems to be happening here.c) Oh and then there is flinging wild accusations, but that's to the side for the moment. Right now I just want to know the topic of this article, please. I mean, the church burned down in Lytton, but I don't see it in this article. So what is the category? List of fires some guy called suspicious once? Scottish law has a possible verdict of "not proven", I hear, and that is where I am on that, personally d) seriously, what is up with all the Catholic sources?e) are you saying you never worked for, interned with, attended or volunteered at any organization that might have a stake in how these events are perceived? All I need is yes or no. You seem to be saying no, but I am not quite certain. In which case, I eagerly await an explanation for your strong interest in a string of fires on the other side of the continent. It feels like a very specific interest.There may be many reasons for that of course and no doubt a lot of them are none of my business. I am getting from RSN that a couple of them the sources might not be bad, just very devout. But why would you use them here? Is this your primary reading list here in the sources? Elinruby (talk) 18:10, 3 July 2024 (UTC)I was compensated while contracted to the United South and Eastern Tribes, an inter-tribal non-profit representing 33 US federally recognized tribes that promotes Native sovereignty and lobbies to improve conditions in the US's Indian Country. I was also contracted to work with the US Department of the Interior to teach Native students civics skills to better advocate for restitution of damages caused by American government policies, including the US boarding school system. Both teaching positions have been my favorite experiences working. Since working in these positions, I have performed few edits related directly to the residential school system, as my extreme bias against the schools could interfere with my ability to be impartial. I have never been financially compensated by any organization related to the school burnings but I've been aware of them since they began in June 2021, hence my focus on them. Whether you still believe the attacks on Indigenous churches were fake news that was only voiced by click-bait websites ([17]) despite dozens of reliable sources being furnished to connect them, I don't care. Do not bother me again. ~ Pbritti (talk) 18:59, 3 July 2024 (UTC)template it is for the _additional_ misrepresentation of the positions of another editors, after multiple warnings. I do thank you for the above reply, but I did not limit the question to paid positions. Are you certain you didn't miss something? I am sure you enjoyed answering it even less than I enjoyed asking it. Elinruby (talk) 01:24, 4 July 2024 (UTC)I have missed nothing. I am also aware of your statements about me on other websites. Cut the badgering. ~ Pbritti (talk) 01:45, 4 July 2024 (UTC)if that is your final answer then that is your final answer. I have no idea what you are talking about. So shall we remove some unsourced leaps of logic from the article then? I'll start after supper. Elinruby (talk) 02:58, 4 July 2024 (UTC)I would have to agree with @Pbritti that many reliable sources do mention the possibility that the church arsons may have some sort of link to the findings of potential unmarked graves at residential schools. For instance, beyond the articles in CBC, etc., which mention such a possibility, some Indigenous leaders have also suggested there may be a link. For example, in this article from Global News, both Chief Clarence Louie (chief of the Osoyoos Indian Band, where a church was burnt) and Grand Chief Stewart Phillip (of the Union of BC Indian Chiefs) appeared to suggest that some church arsons may have been associated with anger about the findings at residential schools.If that theory is correct? No idea. I wouldn't be surprised if it was, or if it wasn't, or if a few were and a few weren't! The events themselves - a number of arsons of churches, which made the news - did occur, though we don't know if they were connected. However, many people speculated they were connected. I also think the events were taken up and folded into a conspiracy theory (mostly about the idea of Christianity, and white people, being under attack) and the number and facts were misrepresented by many far-right sources. It can be valuable to mention that some people theorised the churches were burnt for reasons of anger in response to the findings at residential schools, because, well, that theorizing occurred. It also allows us to discuss how that possibility was used and lied about by the far-right.So, two things can be true at once.We should certainly take care to ensure the accuracy of the article, which I think we can all agree. Also, part of the circumstances around these arsons was the conjecture, by many people and sources, that it may have been driven by anger. Whether that's true or not? Unclear. But the suggestions certainly did exist. Fluorescent Jellyfish (talk) 04:21, 4 July 2024 (UTC)**Yes, I agree:** So let's write that article not the Church-under-attack article that Pbritti is trying to write here. I think this noticeboard is living up to its reputation and there is little point in further discussion here, especially since some people now seem to have automagically gotten the idea that I am attacking Pbritti for his faith. Just a coincidence of course and _certainly_ not retaliation for the level-2 template for aspersions I gave him moments before. I am going to ping you from somewhere else. This (I guess?) is now at Arbcom but I think it is being conflated into something else about the Mormons along with some other stuff about Muhammed. Anyway, if these two still do not see how cherry-picked the sampling is, I don't think I will be able to convince them of that myself, and maybe this _should_ be at Arbcom. Save your carpals, and let's talk p-values at the the other article.Elinruby (talk) 05:40, 4 July 2024 (UTC)Mormons and Muhammed..... what does this have to do with anything we're talking about. I'm wondering if this account has been compromised? Moxy🍁 17:46, 4 July 2024 (UTC)Funny, I was wondering the same thing about you. You never used to refuse to read before. Go ask Clovermoss; it's her clarification request. Elinruby (talk) 04:40, 6 July 2024 (UTC)Elinruby is talking about this. I only added the first seven parties to the clarification request, _another editor_ added more (to include Elinruby among others). Essentially, I was asking ArbCom if a principle from a previous case is still applicable in certain circumstances, since people have linked to it in three different matters recently. It's not a case request and I doubt ArbCom is going to do anything more than say "yes, this principle is still applicable" or "no, it's not". The principle in question states: Editors are expected to refrain from making unnecessary references to the actual or perceived racial, religious, or ethnic background of fellow editors. Such references should be made only if they clearly serve a legitimate purpose. In the context of a noticeboard discussion or dispute resolution, it will rarely serve a valid purpose to seek to classify the participants in the discussion on this basis.I think this is the first time I've posted to the no original research noticeboard. I'm hesitant to get myself super involved here because this discussion looks incredibly heated and I'm not sure I want to sign myself up for that but maybe having an extra set of eyes will help add a new perspective. There's a bunch of background reading I'd like to do first so I don't accidentally make things worse. After that, I'd probably want to set up some kind of table on relevant talk pages where I compare statements made in wikivoice to what a source actually says since at least one editor is concerned about original research. At least that's my plan. I have some other things on my plate right now and it might take me awhile to actually do all that. Clovermoss🍀(talk)04:56, 6 July 2024 (UTC)the short version here is that in a context where thousands of fires were burning an editor has created an article sourced to militant-faith-under-attack publications to try to have Wikipedia say that the church is under attack. Based on a half dozen of those thousands of fires. There are some good sources for individual fires but they are for the individual fires only.This really is just a sideshow to the main issue though and I think we should see what if anything Arbcom does about the private evidence. Not really upset about being added, as it saved me a trip to COIN maybe, but Moxy is very invested in portraying me as unworthy of being read for whatever reason (see WikiProject Canada) so I was just answering that. I personally strongly doubt we are going to get a yes or no answer on such a broad request, and I personally think Horse Eye's Back should have refrained from the point of view of his position, since afaict this falls under one of the delineated exceptions. But I am happy to leave this in Barkeep's hands. If you are interested in the topic I would not start here; this discussion was primarily BEFORE and is mostly notable for the mind-bending assertion that it is the editor saying that the sources don't support that who is doing OR. A table such as you described would be useful, and if you are taking suggestions I would start with all the source misrepresentation I have been noting in edit summaries at the Canadian Indian residential school gravesites article starting around the last week in May Elinruby (talk) 06:09, 6 July 2024 (UTC)You keep saying that, but every time someone reads the article and the sources, they end up realizing your claims are false. You seem to believe that the article is somehow biased, false, or original research. However, you've failed to convince anyone of this over the last month and a half. Move on. ~ Pbritti (talk) 12:38, 6 July 2024 (UTC)No. It doesn't matter how often you say it, your premise is a formal fallacy and although I know you are accustomed to indignation getting you what you want I know it's a tactic. What's the topic of the article? It's just a string of police-blotter items that your defending-the-faith sources used to gin up donations.You also don't have consensus either, no matter how many times you say *that*. You say a lot of things. Elinruby (talk) 15:37, 6 July 2024 (UTC)**the point that you are missing is that I am not out to prove anything, just saying that _you_ have not**Elinruby (talk) 21:33, 2 July 2024 (UTC)If a fire was speculated in RS to be linked to the pattern, but later proven not to be linked, then both of those facts can be covered in the article, with due weight. The initial speculation and the subsequent resolution are both part of the evolution of the story. Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 21:22, 2 July 2024 (UTC)There isn't a lot of proof of anything. That's kinda the problem. Recent coverage is definitely limited to fringe and Catholic sources. But yes, one idea is to report the distortion of RS coverage in non-RS sources. Fluorescent Jellyfish mentioned that also, which would mean reframing it as a journalism story. I got stuck on what its title would be, though. "Hoax" is not demonstrated either. Well, maybe in journals. I should check that next. Elinruby (talk) 21:33, 2 July 2024 (UTC)CBC News is fringe? Also, such a reframing would be original research. ~ Pbritti (talk) 21:47, 2 July 2024 (UTC)Not if there are sources for the analysis. I am looking into it, and am still waiting, btw, to see _your_ sources per WP:ONUS that say there is a pattern. And listen, I think this is the third warning: quit misquoting me. I have previously warned you several times about this and if you ignore this warning as well, I am going to start templating you. People are supposed to be able to believe what you say. By the way, you never answered the question about why your article uses so many Catholic sources when better-known RS are available. I find that odd. Are you affiliated with one of these publications, perhaps? Do you or your present or former employers or schools have any affiliation to any entity with a stake in public perceptions of June 2021? Elinruby (talk) 03:50, 3 July 2024 (UTC)No original research says that articles cannot present opinions that are not sourced to reliable sources. It does not say that opinions published in reliable sources cannot be reported. So long as reliable sources report comments on possible links between residential schools and church fires, it is not OR to mention them. TFD (talk) 00:53, 5 July 2024 (UTC)
not as individual fires, no. But this is not that. Elinruby (talk) 06:19, 6 July 2024 (UTC)

? TFD (talk) 14:23, 6 July 2024 (UTC)If you want me to answer a question you are gyoing to have to use your words. The OR is the vast conspiracy to attack churches, in case that is what you are not understanding. If that's not it. you are going to have to tell me. Elinruby (talk) 19:38, 6 July 2024 (UTC)Our article does not mention a vast conspiracy to attack churches. Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 20:09, 6 July 2024 (UTC)They keep claiming there's an issue, but haven't provided evidence for those claims. When you point out what they've said, they claim they're facing retaliation or personal attacks. We can move on. ~ Pbritti (talk) 20:28, 6 July 2024 (UTC)
### ooo ooo I found an article about arsons in 2021!

oops it's not about churches. Does that make it not part of a pattern? Summer of 2021 is our timeframe though, aww. Seriously, I am looking for an article like this.which was published in the home area of those two fires in the southeast, so... arrest, followup, trial as to any of the fires in the article??? I don't know where you were in the summer of 2021 but I was in the British Columbia interior obsessively tracking the out of control wildfires in the area and volunteering to help wildfire refugees -- almost entirely indigenous, but that is just the local demographics --anyway, helping wildfire refugees get food and find out where they could go or even get to. Anyway, back to this article. I said the publisher was Black Box Media before. My mistake, it is Black _Press_ Media. I have discussed their reliability over at RSN; I said I relied on them for stuff like road closures and think they are excellent to good for local news. Did not get an argument about it, but here is an example of their work, for the record. There are quite a few related small-town papers like this with the same format, look, owner and policies. They are professional and when I say they are reliable for road closures, DriveBC is not, btw, and road closures can be really really important around here. They might not immediately have every incident but if they say a road is closed, it is closed unless they updated it and you really do have to do the 200-mile detour. Seriously, where are the stories about these fires at churches? It's been three years now. These outlets are online but it isn't exaggerating much to say they would put out a special edition for the santa's parade. A new park bench would be front-page material. It beggars belief that they would not cover arrests or statements about a fire at a church anywhere in or around their distribution are. Where is the RS coverage like this of these church fires? Elinruby (talk) 13:52, 3 July 2024 (UTC)

I have genuinely no idea where you’re going with this. Time for a break? Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 18:31, 3 July 2024 (UTC)(ec)You're the one asking questions. I did come in here to append a note however, which is below.Elinruby (talk) 18:38, 3 July 2024 (UTC)
### btw I found an acquittal for one of the alleged arsons on the True North list

This source isn't real informative but it clearly says that one of the two men arrested for arson in Fort Chipewyan one was acquitted and the other one had previously received a suspended sentence [18] Source is Postmedia and should be at be very least ok btw Elinruby (talk) 18:38, 3 July 2024 (UTC)

Being acqa juitted sounds like something the Spanish Inquisition might do to you. **E****Eng**10:51, 6 July 2024 (UTC)bad mousepad. Fixed Elinruby (talk) 11:02, 6 July 2024 (UTC)Those on this noticeboard may wish to read Talk:2021 Canadian church burnings#Text source integrity analysis. Clovermoss🍀(talk)23:43, 11 July 2024 (UTC)
See Rust (programming language)#In academic research paragraph 1. I wrote it, but I'm a little bit unsure about whether it would be WP:SYNTH to use the _existence_ of sources to imply something and not the content of them, or how I categorized some sources in the sentence for properties of the language itself as well as the utility the language provides for writing software used for research. 0x**Deadbeef**→∞ (talk to me) 18:14, 17 July 2024 (UTC)

No, this is par for the course. JDiala (talk) 09:33, 18 July 2024 (UTC)
On Talk:Russian invasion of Ukraine (specifically the "Mentioning NATO in lead" and "Misrepresentation of WP:ONUS" sections), we are having an ongoing discussion about interpretations of WP:OR. Some of the sources in that article, particularly in the "background" section, utilize sources from prior to 2022, which was the year the invasion began. The user Mr rnddude has stated that he believes, whenever editing an article about an ongoing or recent event, it is WP:OR to make use of _any_ sources published prior to that event. His logic seems to be that any reliable source authored prior to 2022 would not know there would be an invasion in 2022, and so attempting to connect their work to the invasion is an instance of OR. On the basis of this belief, he is attempting to remove all pre-2022 sources from the article altogether and is also reverting edits which introduce pre-2022 sources into the article.

Myself and another editor, Chino-Catane, expressed a concern that his viewpoint on this matter may not be mainstream, as many other articles regarding ongoing or recent geopolitical events (including homepage-linked articles and GA articles) do not follow this standard and allow for some sources published prior to the event's occurrence especially in the "background" (or similar) sections. Mr rnddude however is insisting that his position is the correct one.

Is Mr rnddude correct? And if so, does this mean that existing articles which make use of pre-event sources need significant overhauls? Thanks. JDiala (talk) 00:32, 18 July 2024 (UTC)

I haven't looked at the specific discussion or material that is contested there, but there are background statements for which it would be fine to use older sources. A hypothetical example: one can cite a reliable source from 2021 that says that Putin began his fourth term as President of Russia in 2018.It depends on the nature of the statements for which the pre-2022 source is being cited. Editors should definitely be careful of synthesis directly relating pre-2022 sources to post-2022 events. — MarkH 21 talk 00:56, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I know a lot of people who hold Mr rndude's view. More broadly, they (not necessarily including Mr here anymore) hold that every source used in an article should be about that article's subject. It's a consistent and reasonable position. I disagree slightly in most cases and strongly in a few exceptional cases (none of which are relevant here). For this article, I think those folks are mostly right, since the invasion is such a well covered topic. There might be a hundred or more reliable sources that describe the background to the invasion. If one can't be found that mentions a particular background detail, it probably should not be included.I'd be unlikely to challenge obvious, uncontested, entirely neutral facts, like Mark's example, but if someone did challenge them, I'd fall back pretty quick. Maybe Putin's 2018 election isn't a detail worth mentioning, if no RS are mentioning it. Firefangledfeathers (talk / contribs) 02:02, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I agree that editors should definitely be careful of synthesis. But wouldn't this kind of rule have rather problematic consequences in all sorts of areas, for scientific topics for example, the ongoing event of scientific research, where you have 'pre-event' conjectures/hypotheses and experimental results/discoveries. It doesn't seem like OR to connect published hypotheses about gravitational waves, for example, that pre-date observations/results, to the experimental results. A post-event only rule for sources seems too restrictive. Obviously, it's all context dependent. Sean.hoyland (talk) 02:35, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I think sources published before the outbreak of the war about the possibility of a war could (or even should) be cited in a background section. Borsoka (talk) 02:55, 18 July 2024 (UTC)
*   I think one needs _some_ modern-day RS that connect directly the subject of the page (the invasion) with specific events of past that appear in the "Background" section. Otherwise, this will be WP:SYN. However, as soon as we have and use such RS, nothing prevents from using _additional_ older sources that only describe events in the "Background" section. My very best wishes (talk) 03:30, 18 July 2024 (UTC)

This is for such specific example. But in general, **no**, there is no such requirement. An article on subject X may include various aspects or subcategories, A,B,C (for example, an article about enzymes can include parts about hydrolases, transferases, etc.), and the sources can be about these aspects A,B,C, not necessarily directly on the _whole_ subject X. Well, in this example no one will dispute that hydrolases and transferases are enzymes (hence belong to the page). This may be much less clear for historical events. In some cases, the connection may be so trivial that it does not require supporting references. But if the connection was disputed, then providing some supporting RS is necessary to avoid WP:OR. My very best wishes (talk) 15:32, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I do not have time to address this whole section. I will briefly reproduce my actual statements, as having read the talk page response, I do not for a moment trust that Jdiala has accurately summarised them here. My statements at the talk page regarding OR are as follows: The way to write a background for this article is to cite present, up-to-date sources that provide the background information and analyses themselves. You do not need, nor should you be referring to, outdated sources to achieve this. You will be hard pressed to present a convincing argument for how a source that cannot so much as discuss the article's subject is directly related to it. - The last comment here refers to the abundant use of sources that pre-date not only the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but the whole war that started in _2014_. Compile a selection of sources on the Russian invasion of Ukraine that provide background coverage on NATO-Russia / NATO-Ukraine relations and an analysis on their impact leading up to the invasion. Write a paragraph or dedicated section about it from those sources.You may not use sources that do not discuss an article subject to make claims about the article subject. Present that statement to any admin you like, they will tell you some variant of: _no shit_. - You can feel the frustration of dealing with this user at this point. Particularly their incessant insistence on abusing the word 'fringe' with regards the preceding statements. The 'pre-invasion statements' section is a composition of original research through the use of sources unrelated to, and without comment on, the article topic: "To demonstrate that you are not adding original research, you must be able to **cite reliable, published sources that are directly related to the topic of the article** and directly support[b] the material being presented". None of that should be transferred here, and all of it should be removed from the prelude article. Do not base whole sections of an article on sources that do not and can not comment on the article topic. - This was a comment I made in an unrelated discussion that cites the specific wording of WP:OR. Mr rnddude (talk) 03:39, 18 July 2024 (UTC)JDiala - You say that [o]n the basis of this belief, he is attempting to remove all pre-2022 sources from the article altogether and is also reverting edits which introduce pre-2022 sources into the article. I have done neither of these things. I have not removed or attempted to remove all pre-2022 sources from the article, nor have I been reverting additions to the article. This is, as you have presented it, a bold-faced fabrication. Mr rnddude (talk) 05:47, 18 July 2024 (UTC)Mr rnddude, I perhaps should have been more circumspect with my wording, and I should also have been clear that it is not just you but rather a few other editors as well (e.g., My very best wishes) involved in the discussion; these latter editors were the ones reverting the new edits by Chino. I can also concede that this was not always the only argument for removal, but it was a significant one as indicated by how many bytes of text were spent discussing it. I apologize if you felt I misrepresented your views.Putting aside these quibbles, I maintain that I made a good-faith attempt to describe your point of view based on what you said in the talk page discussion. The user ManyAreasExpert stated "please don't base [the NATO discussion] on outdated sources, as, after the start of the invasion, **every** pre-2022 source is outdated, and **will be deleted**", which was based on his interpretation of OR. This struck me as a strong, absolutist position, and it was what led to that user's discussion with Chino and I. You then later chimed in saying that you felt ManyAreasExpert's citations of OR were "accurate" and that "outdated" sources should not be referred to. You offered no qualification in your support for ManyAreasExpert's position. Based on this, I inferred that you too felt that "every pre-2022 source is outdated" and should "be deleted", as the person you were defending, ManyAreasExpert, said exactly this. JDiala (talk) 06:24, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I'd say _mostly_ yes, sources should be in the context of the article's subject outside of obvious essential facts. Sources are just as necessary when verifying relevance as they are when verifying facts. I recently wrote a short essay about how I think articles like this should be written. The big ugly alien (talk) 05:38, 18 July 2024 (UTC)
*   If a recent source indicates that topic A is relevant to the article, then there is nothing wrong with using an older source to flesh out content about topic A. It isn't automatically SYNTH. In the example of the Ukraine invasion, I don't see anything wrong with using an older source for information on how Ukraine achieved independence from the USSR, because these two things are frequently presented together in modern sources. It would only be SYNTH if editorial conclusions regarding the invasion were drawn from the older source. The underlying confusion here derives from the "directly related to the topic of the article" clause which is an example of poor wording that does not unambiguously express either the intent of the policy or of common practice. The "topic of the article" is not just what is narrowly defined by its title, and in this example past events which, according to RS, are relevant to the invasion are included in the topic of the article. Zero talk 05:55, 18 July 2024 (UTC)

Mr rnddude is incorrect. Adding sources from prior to an event in a background section is not automatically WP:OR or WP:SYNTH (to be more specific). _**Tar****nis****hed****Path**_**talk**06:19, 18 July 2024 (UTC)Not automatically, agree. But it's easy to imagine that happening, and UNDUE stuff may creep in as well. I have not looked at the specific article under discussion. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:08, 18 July 2024 (UTC)I agree, that background sections can get a bit long and some editors may then attempt to COAT in their view of history. But if the argument is that having background sections, which use sources prior to an event in that the article is in relation to, is necessarily original research then I think that's patently wrong and far off common practice. _**Tar****nis****hed****Path**_**talk**05:32, 19 July 2024 (UTC)TarnishedPath - I'll try to be brief. It is not my contention that the mere presence or inclusion of sources from prior to an event is automatically WP:OR or WP:SYNTH. My contention is that basing large tracts or whole sections of an article on such sources constitutes original research. The presence of a stray older source in the background is a distraction, particularly as at present there is a stray current source in that section. Of the present citations: 16 pre-date the event (~half are older than the whole conflict itself), 5 are contemporaneous, and a few are undated but I'll assume they are contemporaneous. That is an over-reliance on sources that don't and can't comment on the present conflict. Contrasting with the other presently on-going major conflict, the background section to the Israel-Hamas war has a mere 2 pre October 7th, 2023 sources and approximately 40 post October 7th, 2023 sources. That is a chasm in approach and without doubt the latter is far superior in quality to the former. I don't think any pre-2022 source is _necessary_ for the article, there are ample current sources that cover all of the relevant subject matter, but if there is a reliable source from 2021 that says that Putin began his fourth term as President of Russia in 2018 or other such minutiae as MarkH21 presented as an example it doesn't matter remotely to me. I'd prefer – and were I writing such a section myself would employ only – those sources that either 1) speak directly on the topic of the article or 2) are referenced by sources that speak directly on the topic of the article. That's reflective of my actual editorial approach. Mr rnddude (talk) 01:42, 19 July 2024 (UTC)I'll have a look later. _**Tar****nis****hed****Path**_**talk**05:36, 19 July 2024 (UTC)We are in no need to generalize here. And the vice versa, if we can't generalize, it does not mean that we are allowed to dive into OR and synthesis on which sources are relevant to the event and which are not.We have a specific article and a situation where a huge amount of post-2022 analyses are available for use. If some editor wants to keep pre-2022 sources to make a conclusion which post-2022 sources do confirm? Just use post-2022 source! If we want to use pre-2022 sources for a conclusion for which there is no post-2022 sources? The answer is obvious. ManyAreasExpert (talk) 20:09, 18 July 2024 (UTC)It is OR. The reason you include what preceded the event is to explain what caused the event. Saying something caused the event is OR and must be sourced. If something is relevant to the invasion, then you should be able to find a recent source that says that. TFD (talk) 05:54, 19 July 2024 (UTC)
The article late modern period (currently a redirect) was originally created without any actual sources defining the topic. It was just assumed that the existence of the early modern period meant there had to be a late "equivalent". But the term is actually very marginally used among historians and is often specific to the a period of English literature. It seems to be mostly based on the misunderstanding of how the modern period is defined, which is either c. 1500 until today _or_ c. 1800 until today, depending on the context.

Almost a year ago, there was a clear and umabigious request[19] to provide sources to define the "late modern period" at talk:late modern period up for several months. No sources that actually describe the term unambiguously as "the period following the early modern period" have been provided, only references to search hits for the phrase "late modern" or "late modern period" in prose.

From what I can tell, there are several users who want to flat-out ignore WP:OR and even WP:N in order to keep late modern period because it "feels" logical and convenient. Periodization is in my view treated as though it was merely a subjective layout issue rather than something has to be verifiable and balanaced. It's as if a lot of Wikipedians think it's okay to disregard sources in favor of their own take on how history should be written and organized.

I would appreciate input on this over at talk:late modern period to help build a more sensible consensus around this. Peter Isotalo 23:05, 9 July 2024 (UTC)

Note that the BLAR is now being discussed at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Late modern period. The big ugly alien (talk) 13:19, 20 July 2024 (UTC)
There is a dispute on the Jordan Peterson article Talk page concerning the climate change section of the article. One key question is: how should editors use primary and/or secondary sources to decide what the article should say about Peterson's contributions to the debate on climate science and climate policy? Additional input from experienced NORN contributors would be appreciated. Newimpartial (talk) 20:45, 26 July 2024 (UTC)

In the wiki on INRA it is stater that this is (or maybe) the first institute for agricultural research in Europe. However, in the wiki on the ‘history of Wageningen University and research you can read that the institute DLO (governmental Agricultural Research Service) was founded in 1877, and several new sub-institutes from 1888 onwards. —Preceding unsigned comment added by 2A02:A456:35A:1:B4A4:136B:BFEF:40EF (talk) 16:04, 27 July 2024 (UTC)

I'd be interested to get more thoughts on where to draw the line between what qualifies as "original research" vs "reasonable paraphrasing" on articles about Law, when quoting directly the actual text of law (e.g., quoting the constitution, or a text of law).

For example, in "Draft talk:Contravention in French criminal law", one paragraph states:

_Article 34 of the Constitution, which pertains to the scope of the law, does not include provisions concerning contraventional offenses, in contrast to crimes and misdemeanors: "The law establishes the rules concerning: [...] the determination of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as the penalties applicable to them._

My opinion was that it would be acceptable for this paragraph to rely only on a primary source (article 34 of the constitution), since the first sentence only makes non-controversial statements that can be easily checked by opening the actual text of the law (i.e., that article 34 doesn't contain any statement related to contraventions but contains statements related to crimes and misdemeanors), and the second paragraph is just a translated quote from that article.

However, in this discussion, @Mathglot was of the opinion that this would qualify as original research unless it is supported by a secondary source.

I agree that other parts of the draft are likely problematic, but I'd be interested in getting more opinions on that particular paragraph, to get better lens on how I should think about OR on legal topics in general. I feel like law (especially in civil law countries) typically relies a lot more on primary sources than other domains such as science where primary sources cannot always be trusted (e.g., due to bias of the authors). Hence I would have expected a lot more weight be given to primary sources given they are the "source of truth" of an entire legal system.

7804j (talk) 13:59, 29 July 2024 (UTC)

Mathglot is right here. As Wikipedia editors we should not be assumed to have the legal expertise to understand the important factors of laws and court rulings to be able to quote or directly paraphrase them. Thus we must rely on secondary sources that are reliable for this type of reporting to help us explain laws or the importance parts of court rulings that we can include. —M asem (t) 14:18, 29 July 2024 (UTC)Hi, 7804j, I plan to leave this discussion primarily to others unless called upon, but wanted to clarify something. In your OP above, you said: "...when quoting directly the actual text of law", but then later you talk about having a paragraph "...to rely only on a primary source", and that seems quite different to me. I read the former as meaning you want to copy the law word-for-word and double-quote it (no problem), and in the second, you want to have a paragraph that "relies" on the law, by which I understand not word for word, and not double-quoted, i.e., somebody's rewording, or interpretation (big problem).So I think we need to be clear about which situation you are talking about here. As the linked discussion was solely about the second case (paraphrased), I'm assuming that is your main intent here, but if I'm wrong about that, please clarify. In connection with an article that is well-sourced to our standards, I have no objection to copying text from a law or Constitution directly into a Wikipedia article, as long as it is word-for-word exact, enclosed in double quotes, properly cited, and reasonably brief. (Long extracts, or even the entire French criminal code is public domain, and you may copy the whole thing if you wish—if it isn't already—to Wikisource, and then link to it from the article.) But I believe you are not asking about that case, but a loose paraphrase of the law, a very different situation, and in my view, that is off-limits. Mathglot (talk) 03:31, 30 July 2024 (UTC)
There is a dispute at Sgian-dubh around original resarch and sourcing. Short version, I removed an amount of text that I considered OR, synthesis or wasn't actually in the sources cited. One or two editors have repeatedly reverted, with reasoning that IMO amounts to "it doesn't need to be sourced". I would appreciate others taking a look. // Hippo43 (talk) 15:33, 13 August 2024 (UTC)

White ethnostate has an entire section listing "Historical attempts to create White ethnostates". The problem is that there are zero sources describing any of these as "attempts to create White ethnostates". Editors came to the conclusion that they are by taking the definition of "White ethnostate" from one source and then applying it to historical events described in other sources, which is textbook WP:SYNTH. The entire section needs to be removed. I proposed doing so on the talk page, but editors there don't consider this an OR problem, even though they admit the term "White ethnostate" was coined recently and there are no sources applying it to the historical events in question. Un assiolo (talk) 13:22, 10 August 2024 (UTC)

for context i highly recommend reading the whole discussion at Talk:White ethnostate#Nazi Germany as a "White ethnostate", especially User:Grayfell comment "_**One of the problems here is that the article is not about the term 'white ethnostate', it is about the concept of a white ethnostate. We requires that sources directly support attached statements, but we do not require that they use any specific wording to do so. "Ethnostate" is a relatively recent term which appears to have been coined around 1990, and reliable sources are free to use other terms to describe this concept.**_" wikipedia is not a dictionary Gooduserdude (talk) 14:51, 10 August 2024 (UTC)Suppose this were about a different term – for example, _fascism_. Would it be acceptable to take a definition of fascism from one source and combine it with a source describing a politician's words or actions, and then claim the politician is a fascist, without a source explicitly saying so? Clearly not. How is this any different?"Ethnostate" is a very specific term with a very specific meaning, while the "historical attempts" described are generic racism. That is why I am nitpicking about sources: there are no sources because these historical events do not fit the definition. --Un assiolo (talk) 16:04, 10 August 2024 (UTC)This is textbook OR. Editors are not to connect past events with modern concepts unless a source does so for them. In this particular case, it's particularly dubious. Nazi Germany didn't believe in "white" supremacy (ask the Slavs); they believed in Nordic/Aryan supremacy. JDiala (talk) 21:37, 16 August 2024 (UTC)
I think an editor is trying to create their own "term" with the incel related "Elliot Rodger effect", which I cannot source to anything. Suggestions the article should be renamed Legacy of the 2014 Isla Vista killings, were ignored and a redirect created. I suspect there is OR in this article (the title is OR), and that this should be merged with 2014 Isla Vista killings. Thoughts? Aszx5000 (talk) 15:52, 18 August 2024 (UTC)

Yeah, this term straight up does not exist. It barely even exists on incel message boards, never mind any reliable source. Its clearly an attempt at riffing off the Columbine effect, but it just does not exist and should not be the name of the article. Macxcxz (talk) 20:57, 19 August 2024 (UTC)I also think that as well as renaming to Legacy of the 2014 Isla Vista killings is should also be merged with 2014 Isla Vista killings as it is a contentious topic (i.e. 2014 Isla Vista killings is ECP locked). Aszx5000 (talk) 10:04, 20 August 2024 (UTC)Definitely should be renamed but I'd even argue the article should be deleted entirely / merged into the main page of its parent article, which is what I've argued on the AfD someone created. StewdioMACK (talk) 14:54, 20 August 2024 (UTC)
I was having another look at this article, is this a possible hoax, trash article? Govvy (talk) 13:03, 19 August 2024 (UTC)

The battle itself looks like fiction, but a campaign does seem to have occured in Jammu during that year. In fact it's odd this has an article and not Battle of Sialkot, which does seem to have happened based on the sources from Hari Singh Nalwa. Seems a new article for Sialkot is needed with an aftermath section detailing events in Jammu during 1808. HetmanTheResearcher (talk) 04:21, 22 August 2024 (UTC)
Feedback on what the reliable sources allow us to say about the motivations and goals of Mahatma Gandhi's last hunger strike is requested at: Talk:Mahatma Gandhi RfC on Mahatma Gandhi's last hunger strike Fowler&fowler«Talk»14:26, 22 August 2024 (UTC)

I think this is a very problematic article written like an essay and seems to have been concocted from various sources - almost none of which are about the topic "Political marriages in India" - and thus feels like WP:OR. Would appreciate more views on it. thanks. Aszx5000 (talk) 09:43, 23 August 2024 (UTC)

The article Screams Without Words has a couple of disagreements on its talk page, including ones that hinge on whether there is SYNTH in the article. A very small number of editors are involved and fresh eyes would be beneficial. Please see the talk page section "Yura Karol" in particular. BobFromBrockley (talk) 07:48, 24 August 2024 (UTC)

The page states that Tim Walz achieved the rank of Command Sergeant Major however this is inaccurate because he did not complete the requirements to maintain and keep that rank and was instead later demoted. For further information see: https://youtube.com/sVMkvv8PQhk—Preceding unsigned comment added by 2600:1700:2090:105F:5DD2:8686:3633:9D5B (talk) 00:13, 14 August 2024 (UTC)

_The page states that Tim Walz achieved the rank of Command Sergeant Major_ He _did_ attain that rank._to maintain and keep that rank and was instead later demoted_ How can you be demoted from something you never attained?Answer should be proof enough for you. Lostsandwich (talk) 05:34, 14 August 2024 (UTC)The article does not mention the demotion. It should. Blueboar (talk) 10:31, 14 August 2024 (UTC)1) Why _should_ it? Noting the highest rank attained is the policy for infoboxes.2) It does mention it. Lostsandwich (talk) 11:33, 14 August 2024 (UTC)How is this original research? Seems like it's directly from multiple sources that are cited. It's also mentioned in the article that he didn't fulfill the requirements to retain the position.Per the Tim Walz Wikipedia page: "public affairs officer for the Minnesota National Guard in 2018 said it was "legitimate for Walz to say he served as a command sergeant major", while Walz's former battalion commander, John Kolb, described his usage of the title as "frocking"."This isn't the place for this dispute, rather, you should use the talk page to gain consensus for changing it. —BerryForPerpetuity(talk)23:24, 15 August 2024 (UTC)Apparently, the National Guard will reduce someone's rank after retirement because of their short service in that rank. But how is that different from Donald Trump who achieved the rank of commander in chief but lost that rank when he left the presidency? It certainly doesn't mean he was never commander in chief. TFD (talk) 02:16, 16 August 2024 (UTC)"Commander in chief" is a title, not a rank. It is attached to the office, unlike rank, which is attached to an individual (enlisted) or their commission (officers).⇒SWAT Jester Shoot Blues, Tell VileRat!07:57, 24 August 2024 (UTC)
Please see Wikipedia talk:Broad-concept article#WP:SYNTH. --Altenmann>talk 23:07, 3 September 2024 (UTC)

I have summarized this at Talk:Monolatry#LDS_section_OR. My contention is that the entire section on LDS is textbook OR. The dispute is with @Nathantibbitts13579:. I believe that, if you look at the diff edit summaries, there is no point in trying to debate content. SamuelRiv (talk) 03:05, 10 September 2024 (UTC)

From a quick look, you appear to be correct. We'd need secondary sources discussing the topic in detail and describing the LDS as monolatrous to justify inclusion of anything in relation to that organisation in the article. AndyTheGrump (talk) 03:13, 10 September 2024 (UTC)
Recently, editor LenLen499833 has removed a large, well-sourced chunk of content from the article Early life of Joseph Stalin, specifically related to an affair between Stalin and an underage girl. The editor argued that the removed content did not stem from reliable sources, despite the fact that it was based on the work of several highly respected Stalin biographers such as Simon Sebag Montefiore and Stephen Kotkin. In my opinion, their arguments against the researchers (see the 2nd section titled "Relation with Lidia Pereprygina" on Talk:Early life of Joseph Stalin) are original research: They basically say that they know better than the published researchers because of a) a dubious birth record for an alleged child of Stalin's affair, and b) doubts about some of the sources used by the biographers.

I tried to explain WP:No original research to them, without much success. Then, I requested third-party opinions from other editors who had often edited Stalin articles. One responded, and suggested that we rewrite the section to clearly attribute claims and showcase any valid concerns over the historicity of the affair. I agreed to the idea, but LenLen499833 opposed any restoration of the sourced content because they believe that all of it is just false / lies, based of their own interpretation of the matter.

As I cannot find common ground with LenLen499833, I wanted to ask here whether their removal of content is indeed original research or whether I'm in the wrong in this regard. Thanks in advance. Applodion (talk) 21:00, 10 September 2024 (UTC)

If there are sources that discuss the alleged affair and child, and you are merely reporting what _they_ say (without going _beyond_ what they say), then you are not in violation of WP:NOR. The material does not originate with Wikipedia. There may be issues with _other_ policies and guidelines, but not NOR. Blueboar (talk) 13:25, 11 September 2024 (UTC)@Blueboar: My question concerned whether LenLen499833's arguments constituted OR - i.e. whether it was fine to remove an entire well-sourced section of content based on LenLen499833's interpretation of birth registers and primary sources. Applodion (talk) 14:13, 11 September 2024 (UTC)Any arguments in talk page is not OR: this policy is about _article content_. Regarding primary sources: our policies say that primary sources should be used only as a corroboration of the article content based on secondary sources. Because a Wikipedian is not in a position to judge primary sources. Heck, today we even cannot be sure that the sources found online are authentic.:-) That said, yes, the issue is **NOT OR**, but article content and must be discussed on article talk page. We have a procedure for dispute resolution. Initially it was between you two, then you had a third opinion. Pleas suggest a compromise solution along the lines I outlined in the article talk page (provide the suggested text in the talk)). If this will not help, the next step is invoking broader community via WP:RFC. --Altenmann>talk 16:58, 11 September 2024 (UTC)
~40% of the article Stellar engine consists of a section, primarily written by one editor, on why published designs for star-moving megastructures contradict physics and could never exist in the real world. There are no references to sources, reliable or otherwise, for the assertations made in the section.

It seems like the entire section should be removed as original research, but since I haven't edited Wikipedia before and the starter guides recommend only doing small edits at first, and later edits to the article have not removed the section but instead modified it to state that these are opinions not yet supported by scientific literature, I thought maybe I should ask about it here first? I'm not sure if this is the right way to go about this, sorry if not. Mhazandaren (talk) 15:33, 14 September 2024 (UTC)

@Mhazandaren, I understand your hesitancy in removing the content yourself. I've removed it and notified the editor of the need for reliable sources. **Schazjmd**_(talk)_ 15:48, 14 September 2024 (UTC)Alright! Mhazandaren (talk) 16:16, 14 September 2024 (UTC)
Alastair Sweeny (edit| talk| history| protect| delete| links| watch| logs| views)

This article was posted directly or indirectly by the subject himself, as a self-promotional item. There is no external documentation because no one external has ever written about him. This article has been deleted before in the early 2000s, again because it was only self-promotional.Ron B. Thomson (talk) 14:49, 15 September 2024 (UTC)

This seems more appropriate a topic for Articles for Deletion than here, since it concerns the whole article and not just a part. Recon rabbit 15:44, 17 September 2024 (UTC)
There is an edit war in New Democratic Party about its political position, with multiple users breaking the 3-edit rule. In the talk page, it looks like some users are trying to change the political position based on original research and based on other wikipedia pages (ie. by arguing that certain ideological words correspond with certain political positions on other pages), and that the words in RS "don't have absolute meanings". Argenator (talk) 00:19, 20 September 2024 (UTC)

Spworld2 has added 1989 as the year of formation in Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (AP faction) citing a source that does not say about the year of year of formation of Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (AP faction), while Spworld2 added 1926 as the year of formation of Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (EK faction). Is this original research?. Having nothing to discuss Spworld2 resort to the use of the WP:CONFLICT which Spworld2 clearly has since Spworld2 is not ready to produce the sources for Spworld2's claim, which is also EK Samastha's claim of being itself the original or real Samastha. Neutralhappy (talk) 08:53, 21 August 2024 (UTC)

The source Spworld2 used to say the formation of Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (AP faction) was in 1989, **in the infobox**, is this one. This source does not say about the formation of Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (AP faction), rather the split of Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama in 1989. So kindly remove it from the infobox. Neutralhappy (talk) 09:04, 21 August 2024 (UTC)I have informed Spworld2 about this discussion. Neutralhappy (talk) 09:09, 21 August 2024 (UTC)a discussion going on - Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view/Noticeboard#Samastha_Kerala_Jem-iyyathul_Ulama_(AP_faction)_&_Samastha_Kerala_Jem-iyyathul_Ulama_(EK_faction)Spworld2 (talk) 11:02, 21 August 2024 (UTC)Asking about the same dispute on two noticeboards is not helpful.That said… I don’t see an Original Research issue here. BOTH of the modern organizations claim to be the “true” continuation of the original. There are plenty of sources that note that this is the case. There are also sources that support the claims of one or the other. What I am getting at is this: _none_ of the “foundation” dates originate here on WP, with a WP editor. It is a dispute that exists out there, in the real world. So it isn’t “original” for WP to state _any_ of these dates.As for the WP:NPOV question regarding which which “foundation” date should go with which faction - I would ask others to assist at the other discussion (over at _that_ noticeboard). I won’t address that question here. All I am saying _here_ is that I don’t see a WP:NOR violation in any of this. Blueboar (talk) 12:43, 21 August 2024 (UTC)But the sources Spworld2 cited do not support the claim. If there is no source to support it it is original research. If it is not original research, both Samasthas should have the same date of formation. Neutralhappy (talk) 13:13, 21 August 2024 (UTC)There several other unsourced content in the article Samastha Kerala Jem-iyyathul Ulama (AP faction). Neutralhappy (talk) 18:34, 14 September 2024 (UTC)**Why this discussion on WP:ORN started is that WP:NPOVN says**:
> This page is not a forum for discussions unrelated to the neutral point of view. We have a separate noticeboard for concerns about original research (material made up by a Wikipedia editor), and another dedicated noticeboard for questions about contextual reliability of a source.

 Because it is not permitted to discuss the matter of orginal research on WP:NPOVN, the aspect of original research on the matter was taken to WP:ORN Neutralhappy (talk) 23:13, 22 September 2024 (UTC)
**Myers–Briggs Type Indicator** has an RfC for possible consensus. A discussion is taking place. If you would like to participate in the discussion, you are invited to add your comments on the **discussion page**. Thank you. Vells (talk) 05:22, 24 September 2024 (UTC)

An editor has carved out an event on a day in the Military operations during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus#23 July 1974 to create the Battle of Nicosia Airport. No credible sources that anybody can find - including the editor in question - uses the term "Battle of Nicosia Airport". Would appreciate any other input into this. Aszx5000 (talk) 19:01, 26 September 2024 (UTC)

Is the lead WP:SYNTH? Talk:Zionism#WP:SYNTH_in_lead**Andre**🚐23:53, 10 October 2024 (UTC)

I often see instances of SYNTH being invoked in what I believe to be a fallacious manner to justify exclusion of content. Like UNDUE, I perceive that SYNTH is often invoked in CT articles in a way that suggests the actual objection is IDONTLIKEIT. that said, I might be wrong.

SYNTH says:

> Do not combine material from multiple sources to state or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by any of the sources. Similarly, do not combine different parts of one source to state or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by the source. If one reliable source says A and another reliable source says B, do not join A and B together to imply a conclusion C not mentioned by either of the sources

so, if one reliable source says:

> Former President Trump has for **several days** now spread **lies and spouted conspiracy theories** about the federal government’s response to Hurricane Helene. The **disinformation** is causing confusion among those most desperate for help and answers.[20]

and another reliable source says:

> Former President Donald Trump has delivered a barrage of **lies and distortions** about the federal response to Hurricane Helene ... **Over a span of six days**, in public comments and social media posts, Trump has used his powerful megaphone to endorse or invent false or unsubstantiated claims.[21]

while a third reliable source says:

> Republican and Democratic politicians and officials have in recent days resorted to pleading with people to stop spreading false information related to Hurricane Helene, with many saying that rumors and conspiracy theories are **hampering recovery efforts** ... The false claims have primarily taken hold among media, politicians and influencers who support former President Donald Trump and come at a particularly crucial juncture, with less than a month until the 2024 election. Trump used his high-profile return to Butler, Pennsylvania, where he was nearly killed by a gunman, to continue to spread false claims about FEMA.[22]

would it be SYNTH for an edit to say:

> By October 7, press outlets were reporting Trump had engaged in several days of spreading lies, distortions, disinformation and conspiracy theories which public officials said created confusion and hindered recovery efforts

in my view, citing multiple sources which together create a composite edit is not the same as SYNTH. soibangla (talk) 23:41, 9 October 2024 (UTC)

This is not an issue for AN. You should bring this to WP:NORN. voorts (talk/contributions) 00:03, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Yes, that's an example of SYNTH.Alpha3031 (t • c) 04:20, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Specifically, soibangla, we need a source that explicitly links the misinformation that Trump has spread to the misinformation hampering recovery efforts. From only the text of the sources, there could be some specific things A that Trump is saying, and some specific thing B that's hampering recovery efforts, both of which are misinformation, but with different content. To link A and B without a source saying so would be original research. Alpha3031 (t • c) 04:28, 10 October 2024 (UTC)If this is a dispute regarding a particular article and edits (as you seem to be citing), then you should also link and include them. Context does matter.But given the text read on its surface, and if the sources are in fact RS for the article, and that they are a representative sample of "press outlets", then your final sentence is fine to summarize. However, in my opinion, again without any context (because you haven't given it), it should take a more conservative approach to summarizing a combination of sources fairly -- one should think more towards intersection rather than union. Not all three sources used the same descriptors, but your summary listed all the descriptors with an "and" connector -- this seems like too much. If each source says two words, then maybe you should only say two words; if each source uses a different word, maybe connect with "or" instead of "and".Edit: reading User:Alpha3031's addition above: this is why I need context, to find out what shades of meaning are at issue, and how much info is in the sources, given that I'm not gonna be reading them. If the NBC News source is the only one saying that the rumors are "hampering recovery efforts", but it does not tie any of that to Trump's public information apparatus and his own conspiracy mongering, and if the other sources _do not_ make that connection either, then the sentence is simple synth. I.e. PBS reports Trump spreads conspiracy theories; NBC reports conspiracy theories hamper efforts; wikitext says Trump spreads conspiracy theories which hamper efforts = Synth. 04:41, 10 October 2024 (UTC) SamuelRiv (talk) 04:41, 10 October 2024 (UTC)but PBS reports "The [Trump] disinformation is causing confusion among those most desperate for help and answers" and CNN reports "Trump has used his powerful megaphone to endorse or invent false or unsubstantiated claims," while NBC reports "The false claims have primarily taken hold among media, politicians and influencers who support former President Donald Trump" **and** "rumors and conspiracy theories are hampering recovery efforts." I do not see the resultant edit as synth. soibangla (talk) 05:13, 10 October 2024 (UTC)I'd say the easiest way to eliminate OR concerns would be the two sentence version, without stating in wikivoice that disinfo A and disinfo B are the same. The first sentence can say that there are lies and distortions are 1) spread by Trump and 2) causing confusion, and the second can say disinformation is hindering efforts, _without_ attributing the disinformation. The particular article and article talk discussion seems to be here, by the way. Alpha3031 (t • c) 05:52, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Here's the link for context: Talk:Hurricane Helene#there is no SYNTH in this edit.I came to the same conclusion as Alpha3031 and SamuelRiv. There is synthesis here. We can say: 
*   Trump has spread disinformation about the federal response[1][2] and FEMA.[3]
*   By October 7, press outlets were reporting Trump had spread disinformation about the federal response for several days.[1][2]
*   Disinformation spread by Trump about the federal response is causing confusion for those affected by the hurricane.[1]
*   Trump spread misinformation about the federal response through public comments and social media posts.[2]
*   Public officials have asked those spreading false information about the hurricane to stop and that it has hindered recovery efforts.[3]

So then we could come up with text like "By October 7, press outlets were reporting Trump had spread disinformation about the federal response for several days,[1][2] in public comments and social media posts,[2] and that it was causing confusion for those affected by the hurricane.[1]" You could also use "Public officials have said that disinformation about the federal response hindered recovery efforts.[3]" But you can't put those next to each other in a way that implies they're the same exact disinformation, because implied synth works the same way as any other synth. I'd also discourage using "lies", because that doesn't fit with Wikipedia's impartial tone, which is going to be slightly different from a journalistic tone. The big ugly alien (talk) 06:00, 10 October 2024 (UTC)what is the difference between "implied synth" and "any other synth?" I'd also discourage using "lies" except that's what two reliable source actually say, and one says "_dis_ information" which is deliberate, rather than "_mis_ information" which can be inadvertent. I suppose there could be strong consternation by some that after years of reporting Trump speaks "falsehoods," reliable sources now report he's _lying_. this consternation gives rise to my concerns of some editors using any means, including allegations of synth, to exclude well-sourced content because they just don't like it. soibangla (talk) 06:24, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Let's explain wp:synth in the abstract as it applies here. RS #1 says "A is causing B". RS #2 says "B is causing C". We can summarize #1 and #2, but we _cannot say_ "A is causing the B that is causing C".Why not? It seems like basic logic, right? Well the real world doesn't work like that, because every real statement has particular scope with particular omission. "A is causing B" as said by a real source RS #1 about a real event does not necessarily mean it is causing _all_ known B, such that when real source RS #2 talks about B, it _must_ be encompassed within the set defined by RS #1. There are many ways to exploit this kind of logic-language disconnect to simply lie (using only true statements), which is part of why synth rules can seem pretty strict. SamuelRiv (talk) 16:52, 10 October 2024 (UTC)the edit does not say A causes B and B causes C. rather, it says A causes part of C and B causes another part of C.A = lies, disinformation, conspiracy theories B = lies, distortions C = lies, distortions, disinformation and conspiracy theories soibangla (talk) 17:06, 10 October 2024 (UTC)A = Trump, B = disinformation etc, C = hampering recovery efforts. SamuelRiv (talk) 17:30, 10 October 2024 (UTC)It is synth because it is saying something not stated in any of the sources, that public official say Donald Trump's spreading of misinformation has hindered recovery efforts. In fact, it is probable that the officials specifically chose not to lay the blame on Donald Trump.Also, per WEIGHT, if we want articles to state a conclusion, then there should be a source that explicitly says that.In fact, while you can say that Trump spread misinformation in articles about him, you cannot add that spreading misinformation has harmed recovery efforts, because that would be implicit synth. It would imply that Trump had hindered recovery efforts through spreading false information.Wikipedia articles should not make accusations against Trump, or any other subject, but should report explicit accusations that have been reliably reported. TFD (talk) 10:24, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Yes that is pure synth because no source says that **Trump ... created confusion and hindered recovery efforts**. _**Tar****nis****hed****Path**_**talk**10:30, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Yes one does, the second source. It's even in the quote above, but here's an even more explicit part of the transcript:
> **Geoff Bennett**: As you note in the piece, the spread of rumors and misinformation has always been a problem during major disasters, especially when the usual channels of communication break down. But what's the real-world harm inflicted by lies and conspiracy theories about the hurricane relief effort?

> **Juliette Kayyem**: Well, there's a couple of direct impacts. The first is how the government works and functions. It needs the support of communities and populations. If there's distrust, rumors, all sorts of rampant lies being spread, in particular by the former President Trump, it makes the work of government more difficult.

In the context of an interview about hurricane relief I feel that's pretty clear. Loki (talk) 17:37, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Bingo! That's a perfect example of why we like RS that do the SYNTH for us. We must not do it, but we can quote them connecting the dots because that is not forbidden. They provide the connection, then we write it. Then we also provide more sources that describe who is providing the disinformation, and we also provide more sources showing how authorities and aid workers describe the problems caused by all these lies. In the end, we may also add evidence that Russia is also spreading these lies, if that is the case, and since Trump often repeats Russian disinformation almost immediately after it appears, that information would also be good to add if it can be cited to RS. -- Valjean (talk) (PING me) 19:17, 10 October 2024 (UTC)I don't know about what the totality of all sources on the topic say, but if you are talking about only the three sources quoted in the original post of this thread, then yes, this is obviously synthesis under any sane reading of policy. This is almost exactly the same thing as the examples given at WP:SYNTH.The extreme obviousness with which this violates the policy makes me suspect that the question is not being asked in good faith. ****jp**×**g**🗯️**11:02, 10 October 2024 (UTC)The original content was added by them here to the Hurricane Helene article. PackMecEng (talk) 12:59, 10 October 2024 (UTC)it is a good faith question, but you can go ahead and question my sanity if you like. soibangla (talk) 13:06, 10 October 2024 (UTC)I am not trying to "question your sanity" [sic]. I simply note that you have been here for eleven years and made twenty-six thousand edits, many thousands of them in extremely contentious current-events articles, and thousands more in intense arguments about arcane nuances of policies. It seems, to me, quite unlikely that you are unaware of what WP:SYNTH says. ****jp**×**g**🗯️**07:35, 11 October 2024 (UTC)I have participated in a good number of PAG discussions over the years in which even seasoned admins have disagreed in their interpretations. Some insist the interpretations are plainly obvious and unambiguous, while others disagree and suggest alternative interpretations. I do not claim to have comprehensive understanding of PAG as many of them never arise during the regular course of my contributions of content, and I spend minimal time hanging around the back rooms to watch the latest drama. I have observed a good number of disputes over the specific interpretation of synth, which can seem nettlesome to some, including me, as it does not seem among the most unambiguous of PAG. Now, people can think that makes me an idiot, but I fail to see how my request for a clarification might have some bad faith component to it. soibangla (talk) 08:19, 11 October 2024 (UTC)I understand why people think it's WP:SYNTH, and also your reading of WP:SYNTH isn't right either, but I do think that it's actually not WP:SYNTH because the second source (the PBS one) does explicitly say that the misinformation spread by Trump is hampering the hurricane relief effort.Even the quote you posted does (or at least I don't know how else to read The disinformation is causing confusion among those most desperate for help and answers), but if you click through to the interview it's even more explicit. Loki (talk) 17:32, 10 October 2024 (UTC)If there is a more relevant quote from the article, then I would be glad to read it, but there is no world in which "those most desperate for help and answers" is equivalent to "the hurricane relief effort". That isn't just a logical jump, that is some Evel Knievel stuff. Are the _aid workers_ the most desperate for help and answers? Don't they generally know the _most_ about the state of the disaster? There was a wildfire near my house a couple months ago, and people were posting random dumb speculation about it on Facebook, and as far as I can tell the sum total of the effect on the firefighting process from this was zero. Why is it such a problem to just write something that accurately represents what the sources say? I get that there is an election coming up, and it's really important, et cetera, but I really think we should just try to follow the policies rather than break them on purpose. ****jp**×**g**🗯️**07:41, 11 October 2024 (UTC)It is very clearly a reference to the hurricane relief effort in context.Also, I think that before you roll in saying that ssomeone's position is so absurd they aren't acting in good faith, you should at least read the sources they're basing it on yourself, right?Loki (talk) 11:19, 11 October 2024 (UTC)@JPxG: you write "as far as I can tell the sum total of the effect on the firefighting process from this was zero." That may have been the case with that fire, but in this case, these lies are motivating people to threaten the lives of FEMA aid workers and officials. That's one reason this is so important. It is serious business, and your concerns that we get it right are very warranted. Now we just need to agree on how to do that. No one is trying to deliberately "break" policies, so AGF. Good faith editors can disagree, discuss, and come to a consensus, maybe a compromise, and we can all do it civilly and remain friends. Don't give up on your fellow editors too quickly. So keep up the good work. -- Valjean (talk) (PING me) 16:07, 11 October 2024 (UTC)
this slight rephrasing has been suggested. is this synth?

> By October 7, press outlets were reporting Trump had engaged in several days of spreading lies, distortions, disinformation and conspiracy theories. Public officials said this disinformation created confusion and hindered recovery efforts.

soibangla (talk) 13:55, 10 October 2024 (UTC)

A bit late to the party, but here's my 2¢:You are attributing some negative action to a living person - something which should cause you to exercise caution. Contentious material about living people, that is unsourced or poorly sourced—whether the material is negative, positive, neutral, or just questionable—must be removed immediately and without waiting for discussion. In my rulebook if you are unsure if the sources unequivocally support what you are trying to say, you should drop this altogether.No information about living people should carry insinuations about these people unless the foundation is rock-solid. Only the first source supports the suggestion that Donald Trump's misinformation is hindering efforts, and even then the dialogue does not attribute it to "public officials", only to the former assistant secretary at the Department of Homeland Security. In the other two, the relation to Trump is at best tangential. The second source only says that he spread bullshit about the response to Hurricane Helene, while the third source only says that Trump spread bullshit about FEMA in general during his second rally in Butler, Pa. Neither the second nor the third source says about the impact his words may have had.At most you can write that PBS anchor Geoff Bennett and Juliette Kayyem, a former senior official in the Department of Homeland Security, assessed that through multi-day efforts at spreading disinformation and conspiracy theories about the federal government response, former President Donald Trump was sowing confusion and hampering recovery efforts. But then again if it's due is another good question. Szmenderowiecki (talk) 22:32, 10 October 2024 (UTC)If you are citing this to the sources that you gave in the initial post of this thread, then yes, as has been said at great length, that is synthesis -- and not some kind of confusing tricky edge-case situation, but the most obvious and straightforward possible example. ****jp**×**g**🗯️**07:20, 11 October 2024 (UTC)You are saying that public officials said that disinformation from Trump created confusion and hindered recovery efforts. The problem is that public officials did not say that. Presumably they made a conscious effort not to say that, so the statement is a BLP violation against them. TFD (talk) 16:30, 11 October 2024 (UTC)
Could someone else please explain to Rulesfan why the following statements added to 2024 AFL Women's season (and several follow-up statements at the article's talk page) are original research, given that none of the sources they've provided at the talk page explicity state them:

*   Brighton Homes Arena had scheduled Brisbane's men's team being to unveil their premiership cup at at the end of the AFLW match with AFLW ticketholders and club members receiving admission [...]
*   Many of the 6,102 in attendance at the Brighton Homes Arena were there for the premiership cup reveal which directly followed the conclusion of the women's game.

I'm being accused of gatekeeping and having an agenda, but Rulesfan is still refusing to provide sources that explicity state what they're trying to add. I don't see how the content is needed anyway – this is all about a larger (but not record) home crowd that could come down to a variety of factors, including that the Brisbane v Adelaide rivalry is up there as the biggest in the AFLW, not just those mentioned at the talk page – so I don't think that it's notable/relevant enough to be included regardless, but I would still like to resolve this; thanks. **4TheWynne**(talk•contribs)05:49, 11 October 2024 (UTC)

Thank you for crowdsourcing your affirmation 4TheWynne. This may finally justify your consistent deleting of sourced information. As for the Brisbane Adelaide rivalry you may wish to review crowds for Brighton Homes Arena. https://www.austadiums.com/stadiums/springfield-central-stadium/crowds Last year's crowd for this "rivarlry" was 2,544 ... well below average for the venue. Perhaps actually reading the references provided, applying some common sense and a little Occam's razor is preferable to the Ostrich effect here. Just saying. --Rulesfan (talk) 07:27, 11 October 2024 (UTC)@Rulesfan: we don't use our "common sense" or "Occam's razor" to make claims on Wikipedia articles. We need reliable sources for any claims we make. If you're not happy about this, you're welcome to join some other project, start a blog or whatever where you can do such things. Unless a reliable secondary source has compared this years crowd to last year's crowd and said that this year's crowd was unusually large, we cannot make such a claim in our article; let alone that it was unusually large because of the unvealing of men's team. If reliable sources have mentioned that the unvealing happened after the game, you might be able to mention it subject to WP:UNDUE etc without connecting it to the crowd size. This would be largely be based on the level of coverage in reliable secondary sources and similar factors. If you only have few reliable secondary sources which mentioned it compared to the number which mentioned the match, this might very well be undue especially for the lead. Even if you aren't suggesting we include it in the article, your OR that the reason for the large crowd size is because of this connection is ultimately only of limited consideration when it comes to due weight consideration when RSes haven't made such a connection. Nil Einne (talk) 13:48, 11 October 2024 (UTC)I think it is important to point out and have provided sufficient reliable sources to support the claims you've mentioned above, including the notability of the crowd size, but despite this, 4TheWynne has deleted them multiple times. 4TheWynne is well aware of the numerous articles which highlight the problem of poor AFLW crowds this season. I think it needs a counterweight as the article gives readers the false impression that one off large crowds are due to the current popularity of the AFLW competition whereas they are most definitely not.
The facts from the cited sources:

*   Several communications were sent from the club and venue themselves that indicated this was not a standard AFLW match but a combined AFL AFLW event. The club sold tickets specifically to witness the unveiling of the men's 2024 AFL Premiership Cup at Brighton Homes Arena which was officially known as "Sunday Fan Day". "QLD: **We'll see you after the AFLW game** at Brighton Homes Arena. Sunday 5pm-7pm. QLDers will **need to purchase a ticket** to the AFLW **to manage stadium capacity**."[1][2] They were clearly expecting a larger than usual AFLW crowd and much larger than last year's 2,544 if they were expecting the venue to be at capacity which is 8,000.

*   The crowd was described as "huge" and directly attribed to the unveiling of the men's premiership cup described as "impossible to deny" - "But it was **impossible to deny the infectious momentum of an AFL premiership** as a boisterous maroon **crowd packed Brighton Homes Arena**. Those who stuck around **welcomed Brisbane’s victorious AFL team home after they touched down during the second half.**" "The Lions have a three-point lead going into the final quarter with a **huge crowd** building up at Springfield ahead of the **arrival of the men’s side following their premiership win in Melbourne on Saturday**."[3][4]

Rulesfan, you need to clean up your act and stop speaking for me.

*   Several communications were sent from the club and venue themselves that indicated this was not a standard AFLW match but a combined AFL AFLW event. OK, where are they? You've been asked multiple times to provide them.
*   The club sold tickets specifically to witness the unveiling of the men's 2024 AFL Premiership Cup. You still haven't provided a source that explicity states this.
*   "[I]mpossible to deny the infectious momentum of an AFL premiership" ≠ The crowd was [...] directly attribed to the unveiling of the men's premiership cup.

Read WP:SYNTH:

> Do not combine material from multiple sources to state or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by any of the sources. Similarly, do not combine different parts of one source to state or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by the source. If one reliable source says A and another reliable source says B, do not join A and B together to imply a conclusion C not mentioned by either of the sources.

Rulesfan has continued to add this disputed content wthout consensus, this time wording it: "The match at Brighton Homes Arena was a designated as the Brisbane Lions Fan Day with AFL members requiring tickets to the AFLW match to attend the men's official 2024 AFL Premiership celebrations scheduled for the conclusion of the match". Yes, we can agree that the Lions' fan day took place that day, but that's the only thing explicity stated in any of the sources, with only one (the _Age_ source) adequately connecting it to the match, but not the rest; for one, as above, they _still_ haven't provided a source that any of this was to do with premiership celebrations/unveiling the cup, and my other point remains: even if they did, is the content really needed? **4TheWynne**(talk•contribs)04:42, 12 October 2024 (UTC)

So in summary, even if someone takes out any "perceived" conclusion that hurts your butt you still remove it (without acknowledging the sources provided), because "YOU don't think its not needed" because you don't like the facts or want anyone else editing the article. That has nothing to do with original research, its just classic gatekeeping. What is your actual objection? At this point who cares about the crowd, yes it was a record home and away crowd for the venue (does this have citations besides Austadiums no because the stadium is only two years old and averages more than half empty), the point is that it wasn't solely an AFLW event, which I think is a pretty important one in keeping an event about the AFLW impartial. Otherwise its like saying that a band is popular because it was support act for a big name performer. FWIW multiple of these sources connect it to the match, you're just choosing to ignore them.
*   Several communications were sent from the club and venue themselves that indicated this was not a standard AFLW match but a combined AFL AFLW event.The club sold tickets specifically to witness the unveiling of the men's 2024 AFL Premiership Cup. The cup is part of the celebrations, but yeah since its implied in the news... I'm happy with "celebrate the premiership" thats kind of the point of the fan days really. Here you go straight from the source:[5]

References

1.   **^**Sunday Fan Day! Brisbane Lions X 3:39 AM 29 September 2024 15.2K Views
2.   **^**Finals Hub: Fan Days from Brisbane Lions 26 September 2024
3.   **^**Lions AFLW to attempt to back up men’s win By Marnie Vinall for The Age 29 September 2024
4.   **^**Lions’ dream weekend as rivals’ unbeaten run ended in dramatic fashion — Sunday AFLW wrap By Eliza Reilly, Max Hatzoglou and Jason Phelan from Newswire 29 September 2024
5.   **^**Finals Hub: Fan Days from Brisbane Lions 26 September 2024

Need some help please. there is a person on the Turkmun Hazaras tribe page keeps reverting my edits and deleting my sources essentially saying that his sources contradicts me. He says "A number of writers have dealt and considered this Hazara tribe to be of the Turkoman race or descent" and he then further says "which if you force me, I will present them to you,". I asked for these writers/sources and he refuses to show them to me or even cite them in his edit. Theres alot more to be said... —Preceding unsigned comment added by Mioncraft (talk • contribs) 05:53, 13 October 2024 (UTC)

Two statements I included at Can't Catch Me Now have been flagged as potential WP:NOR issues by Pbritti at its FAC. These include "Dan Nigro returned as her principal collaborator on the follow-up album, Guts (2023)" (cited to Billboard, USA Today, Variety; Nigro produced and co-wrote every single track on the album) and "The album was released to critical acclaim in September 2023" (currently cited to BBC News; can potentially be cited to Metacritic, where it is designated with "universal acclaim"). From my understanding, Pbritti interprets the sentence "you must be able to cite reliable, published sources that are _directly related_ to the topic of the article" to mean that a source used to include details in the Background section must have been published after the song "Can't Catch Me Now" was released and include a mention of it too. Would appreciate uninvolved opinions on this. Thank you.--_**N****Ø**_ 13:37, 13 October 2024 (UTC)

Unmentioned above is that there appears to be little basis for the inclusion of multiple sentences cited solely to sources well pre-dating the release of the song the article is about. If reliable sources do not find a need to draw certain connections, then those connections are necessarily original to the editor who adds them to Wikipedia. Particularly objectionable is the mention of "critical acclaim" about a previous album, sourced not to anything about the article's subject. The FAC in question is a strong candidate, but I do not see why a this kind of article can dispense with policy. ~ Pbritti (talk) 17:07, 13 October 2024 (UTC)Hi Pbritti, I have changed the referencing for _Guts_ being critically acclaimed to this source and this source, which state "The new track from Rodrigo comes just two months after the release of her critically acclaimed second studio album, 'Guts'", and added this source which begins by talking about Can't Catch Me Now for the statement that Nigro was the main collaborator on _Guts_, which also states "Rodrigo and her co-writer and producer Dan Nigro assembled 'Guts' as the follow-up to Rodrigo's Grammy-winning 2021 debut, 'Sour'". Happy with this as a compromise. Let me know if this resolves your issues.--_**N****Ø**_ 17:38, 13 October 2024 (UTC)@MaranoFan: On the move at the moment but, AGFing that these sources are as described, this would be more than acceptable solution to my concerns. I'm deeply appreciative that you took that step and look forward to seeing your hard work receive a much-deserve promotion at FAC. Thank you for your diligence, cooperativeness, and communication and apologies for any ire my concerns caused, especially since they appear poorly communicated. ~ Pbritti (talk) 17:55, 13 October 2024 (UTC)Thanks. Until such time that you have gone through the sources and revised the comments at the FAC accordingly, it is best we keep seeking third party opinions. We still need clarity on the general policy interpretation since your interpretation of it is inconsistent with what I have seen enforced at FAC. I can't say I agree with the original criticisms just because it was possible to find replacements here.--_**N****Ø**_ 04:11, 14 October 2024 (UTC)
Hello. On the articles on the 1600 meter and 3200 meter track events, I added an equivalent world bests section which converted the world record indoor and outdoor mile or two mile times to a 1600m or 3200m equivalent time (also adding these to the list of world records in athletics section). Does this count as Original Research? I used the MileSplit Conversion Calculator that gave equivalent times, which is cited for its ease of use and accuracy.

To clarify, these are **equivalent** times, not necessarily the actual split the athlete came through at for 1600m or 3200m en route to 1 mile or 2 miles (though given the distances are nearly the same the times wouldn't be too different). Bringing up this point, if I were to go back into the video of a mile or two mile world record race and estimate what the athlete split at 1600m or 3200m based on the clock, would that count as OR? Better yet, what if I went into the official splits section of a world record run to pull the 1600m or 3200m split? Is that original research?

I feel like this is a gray area as times are technically calculations. Please advise. KnowledgeIsPower9281 (talk) 14:19, 17 October 2024 (UTC)

How would the equivalent be calculated? Did you just adjust the distance (1 mile = 1609 meters)? _That does not work_!A track time is _always_ significantly faster. A rubberized track has energy-restorative properties (think like a spring) and water drainage, optimized for track running shoes, while road or turf have none of that.(This is also why track times from the 1930s, on crushed cinders, were so much slower btw -- one can do a comparative adjustment by taking modern runner's times on tracks versus other surfaces and finding a functional distribution, and they did that with like the 1930s Olympic runners, demonstrating that say Jesse Owens would likely still be an Olympic-level runner today -- that's the difference of modern tracks. If you find such an adjustment function online, you may or may not get away with applying it (editors will probably consider that WP:Synth), but at least you can link it). SamuelRiv (talk) 14:53, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Hello @SamuelRiv. I appreciate the input, but you misunderstood my post. What I mean by **equivalent** is that, upon plugging in the mile or two mile world record time, the milesplit calculator took the average speed of the mile or two mile world record and then converted what the equivalent time at that pace would be for the shorter distance, with 1600m being 9.344m short of 1 mile, and 3200m being 18.688m short of 2 miles. Therefore, it is an equivalent world best and the equivalent time would be similar to the actual time given 1600m and 3200m are not far from 1 mile or 2 miles respectively. KnowledgeIsPower9281 (talk) 15:00, 17 October 2024 (UTC)When I say **equivalent** I do **not** mean, for instance, what Hicham El Guerrouj's mile world record would be today on modern tracks in modern spikes. In this example, I am referring to what Hicham El Guerrouj's equivalent time would be when he comes through the 1600m mark at his mile world record tempo (3:41.84 thru 1600m, 3:43.13 for mile). The equivalent and actual time will be within several tenths of a second of each other given the 9.344m difference. KnowledgeIsPower9281 (talk) 15:02, 17 October 2024 (UTC)You can give a distance adjustment maybe in a table, for purposes of sorting, but where it's in prose in that separate section it's just misleading. (While I'd say a 1-mile-to-1600m adjustment is perfectly defensible on a table with both on a standard track, the calculator becomes patently ridiculous when it has distance-adjusted times for the indoor short tracks.) The correct way to do it in prose, if you have the source, is as it is said for Webb: Webb was timed in 3:51.83 for 1600m (en route to the high school mile record in 3:53.43). 1500m-to-1600m btw also cannot be adjusted in this way, and would require a statistical table for conversion. (Again, if you can find such a good proper calculator, then you can try linking it.) SamuelRiv (talk) 15:12, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Also, if you have high school records, I'm not sure why you wouldn't include indoor and cross-country records. They're slower, but that's because they're different races. SamuelRiv (talk) 15:14, 17 October 2024 (UTC)
Hi! I've been getting into Tic-tac-toe variants and testing them out with friends. Most of them are interesting, and we've refined them to be more complex, fair, and fun! An example of a small modification is Tilt-Tac-Toe, which is played like a game of Ultimate tic-tac-toe, except the center game is rotated 45 degrees. This means that, for example, playing in the top corner of the center game will send the other player to the top edge game. Center corners are more powerful as a result! This can also be combined with ulimate^2 TTT, also known as ultimate TTT level 3, for even more craziness! Another more complicated variant is Trifect Tac Toe, played with 3 people on a 5x5 board. The concept is that each symbol counts as the next in a cycle, allowing one player to incorporate another's into their 5 in a row. (for example, if the cycle was O->X->S->O, OOXOX would be a win for X). I would like to share these variants on Wikipedia, but they don't have sources. And as a high school student, I can't make anything more than a blog post. Can these types of unopinionated original creative ideas be added? Primius Maximus (talk) 21:28, 17 October 2024 (UTC)

Wikipedia is not the place for your original research, which this clearly would be. **Remsense**‥**论**21:34, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Is the Tic-tac-toe variant page not supposed to display a list of variant ideas? I, again, created a few entirely on my own that aren't found anywhere else (that I know of). If Wikipedia is not the place, what is? Primius Maximus (talk) 21:59, 17 October 2024 (UTC)We are an encyclopedia, which roughly means that we present topics in a way that reflects how they are discussed in existing reliable sources. Actually, if you would like to create an educational resource discussing and exploring this subject, I recommend our sister project Wikiversity! **Remsense**‥**论**22:04, 17 October 2024 (UTC)
User:Ramblersen2 has created many articles on notable buildings in Denmark, containing very detailed information about all known previous inhabitants (of the current and former buildings on the same location), compiled from census records. Frederiksberggade 1 is the most recent example. Example paragraph:

At the 1801 census, No. 140 was home to 45 residents in eight households. Jacob Rosted resided in the building with his wife Frideriche Dau. a maid and two lodgers (carpenters).[1] Anne Christine Linne., a widow, resided in the building with two sons (aged 12 and 15), a maid and two students.[2] Gertrud Marie Greis, a widow teacher, resided in the building with a maid, Peder Armstrøm (a planter from Saint Croix and the latter's 11-year-old black servant.[3] Johan Gotlieb Blau, a pharmacist, resided in the building with his wife Christine Winkler, their two children (aged three and five), two maids, three pharmacists, two pharmacist's apprentices and a caretaker.[4] Philip Gebhart von Thun (1756–1828), a captain in the Royal Danish Navy, resided in the building with his wife Anette Mathisen, a two-year-old daughter and two maids.[5] Rasmus Larsen, a beer seller (_øltapper_), resided in the building with his wife Marie Hansen and their eight-year-old daughter.[6] Ole Hansen, a barkeeper, resided in the building with his wife Juliane Hobroem their trhree children (aged 13 to 18) and a maid.[7] Niels Andersen, a beer seller, resided in the building with his wife Anne Cathrine Jensen and their two children (aged two and three).[8]

1.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Jacob Rosted". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
2.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Anne Christine Linne". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
3.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Gertrud Marie Greis". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
4.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Johan Gotlieb Blau". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
5.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Philip Gebhart Thun". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
6.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Rasmus Larsen". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
7.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Ole Hansem". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.
8.   **^**"Folketælling - 1801 - Niels Andersen". _Danishfamilysearch.dk_ (in Danish). Retrieved 11 August 2024.

We have a disagreement whether such information is acceptable or should be removed. Fram (talk) 14:12, 1 October 2024 (UTC)

@Fram, is there a discussion anywhere other than in edit summaries? I think it's unencyclopedic trivia that should be excluded, but I'd like to hear Ramblersen2's argument for inclusion first. **Schazjmd**_(talk)_ 14:33, 1 October 2024 (UTC)User talk:Ramblersen2#WP:OR. I had also informed them of this discussion, as their input is of course necessary. Fram (talk) 14:36, 1 October 2024 (UTC)I have for quite some time worked on creating articles on all heritage listed buildings in Denmark. In some cases, typically in inner Copenhagen, it is difficult to find sources with more than very basic information. As a supplement to other available sources, I have then relied on information from the earliest available census records (typically 1787, 1801, 1840 and sometimes a few more) in piecing together the early history of the property/building. I think the information from the census records is instrumental in highlighting what sort of people lived in the building, what sort of businesses were operated from the premises etc. In many cases, the same people have contributed to the evolution of the property by adapting then, constructing warehouses etc. If we have an article on a marginally notable (typically heritage listed) building, I think we may just as well make it an informative one, rather than leaving it as a fairly uninformative start-class article. The information from the census records is always supplemented by all the other sources I can dig up, old illustrations etc. I don't think it is correct to refer to published information from census records as "primary sources" or "original research". But I have been in doubt as to how I should present the information to avoid it turning into something that might qualify as original research. And I have then ended up going with the form that seemed to get the best ratings by a range of different reviewers over a quite long period of time. And I have wanted to stick to a somewhat consistent approach. In some cases, I can see that it seems more relevant than in other. In some cases, it would no doubt be better to provide a summary of the composition of residents.Ramblersen2 (talk) 16:08, 1 October 2024 (UTC)I could see an argument for a brief paragraph _summarizing_ "what sort of people lived in the building, what sort of businesses were operated...". But a prose-list that is merely a directory of residents from over 200 years ago? How is that relevant or helpful? **Schazjmd**_(talk)_ 16:12, 1 October 2024 (UTC)It should be removed. That amount of excessive intricate detail is not related to how or why the building is notable in the first place. This type of detail - Peter Christian Kierkegaard resided in the first-floor apartment to the left with the theology student Otto Harald Benedictus Boisen - is not relevant or notable information about the building.In order for any named resident to be included in the article, they must be notable themselves. For example, see: Notable residents of the Dakota or Notable residents of the Brentmore or Notable residents of The San Remo. Also see WP:NBUILDING for the guidelines on notability for buildings. And danishfamilysearch.dk is a questionable source as well, since it appears to allow user generated content.**_Isaidnoway_****_(talk)_**15:35, 2 October 2024 (UTC)I was going to comment the same, but it's already been done. danishfamilysearch.dk appears to be user generated content (you can create an account here[23]), so shouldn't be used for any verification purposes. -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 15:44, 2 October 2024 (UTC)I don't think there is any problem with using danishfamilysearch.dk. Creating an account gives you access to more daily page views and you can transcribe untranscribed census records but the page publishes the original census record which is not user generated content.Ramblersen2 (talk) 22:13, 2 October 2024 (UTC)Yes, danishfamilysearch.dk is an unreliable source and when are you going to remove all those excessive details from the article?**_Isaidnoway_****_(talk)_**17:22, 6 October 2024 (UTC)Indeed. And even if the transcriptions or images of census records is unimpeachable, they're WP:PRIMARY and not normally used as sources. **E****Eng**06:23, 10 October 2024 (UTC)There's a giant world of these articles, all sourced primarily to danishfamilysearch.dk. Can somebody go through [24] and assess these articles? There seems to be oodles of WP:CRUFT in need of removal. Allan Nonymous (talk) 14:06, 10 October 2024 (UTC)
I will try again: Danishfamilysearch is not a user-generated source. The page publishes the original census records, you just need to press "original kilde" ("original source") to see the original census record. Another thing is that the information is also published by the Danish National Archives (see for instance here. Surely what matters for the information to be a valid source is weather it has been published and it has. The link makes it easy to check the source but is not what makes it a valid, published source (just like you can use a book as a source even if you don't provide an online link to the book. Information from census records are routinely used by recognised historians in articles on individual buildings in Copenhagen, see for instance Ida Haugsted[da]'s article _Gips og voks på Østergade og Værnedamsvej' or Allan Tønnesen's_ Et hus i Amaliegade _(I can provide you with lots and lots of other examples). Why wouldn't Wikipedia accept a source which is good enough for historians and scientific magazines?Ramblersen2 (talk) 17:50, 10 October 2024 (UTC)_

Wikipedia generally avoids primary sources unless absolutely necessary. Allan Nonymous (talk) 18:36, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Even that's an overstatement. We don't use primary sources as some kind of last resort because nothing else's available, but rather we use them in very narrow circumstances (generally, to illustrate some point make in a secondary source). If those circumstances don't hold, we don't use the primary source, even if absolutely nothing else is available. **E****Eng**19:10, 10 October 2024 (UTC)Ramblersen2, there are a lot reasons we don't use primary sources except in very narrow circumstances. For example, census records are often just plain wrong. An historian writing a bio of person X will not only look at the census record for where X lived, but will also use letters, business documents, and other sources to confirm what the census says; in their publication, they'll present their scholarly understanding of the best reconstruction of the historical facts, and our article can then draw on that. But we editors lack the resources to do such sifting and research, and indeed it's beyond our remit to do so even if we had such resources. So we don't use census records directly -- we wait for a secondary source to do so, and if that doesn't happen, then that material doesn't go in the article.Beyond just the question of the accuracy of a census record, there's a question of, well, just plain what belongs in an article. If secondary sources on a particular building haven't seen fit to list its every occupant over the centuries, there's a reason for that: it's trivia.A final point: Let's say that an historian says his research shows that Mr. Famous Person lived at 14 Wissenspoor in 1750. In addition to reporting that in the article, that would be a good time to go the the census and get the original handwritten census record, and include it as an image in the article. _That's_ an OK use of the primary source, because we're using it for illustration, not as a fact source. There's a great example at Phineas_Gage#Death_and_exhumation -- a cemetery record. It's there for illustration, but NOT as a fact source. Indeed, the cemetery record gives the subject's middle initial as _B_, which is incorrect -- again, that's why we don't use primary sources for facts.I hope the above helps. **E****Eng**19:10, 10 October 2024 (UTC)EEng says it a lot nicer than I could. Allan Nonymous (talk) 19:22, 10 October 2024 (UTC)I haven't had my grumpy pills yet this morning. **E****Eng**19:28, 10 October 2024 (UTC)
Here is a quote from Wikipedia's guidelines: "_Primary sources that have been reputably published may be used in Wikipedia, but only with care, because it is easy to misuse them.[e] Any interpretation of primary source material requires a reliable secondary source for that interpretation. While a primary source is generally the best source for its own contents, even over a summary of the primary source elsewhere, do not put undue weight on its contents. A primary source may be used on Wikipedia only to make straightforward, descriptive statements of facts that can be verified by any educated person with access to the primary source but without further, specialized knowledge_.". I can easily understand the point that I have provided "excessively detailed information" but I have done so in an effort to make absolutely sure that I was only making "traightforward, descriptive statements of fact". And I do think that the information contains a lot of relevant information about the history of a given building: The type of residents, associated businesses (In Copenhagen, membership of a given craftsman's guild or merchant's guild, was typically attached to the ownership specific properties), notable residents or the hierarchy between different floors etc. In articles on notable buildings (typically because they are heritage listed) that are not major landmarks and where few other sources can be found, I really don't get the problem withy including such information. And having produced a lot of articles on buildings over a long period of time (several years), I can conclude that a wide range of new-page patrollers and page-raters have not seemed to have a problem with the approach either.Ramblersen2 (talk) 19:38, 10 October 2024 (UTC)

Look, we realize this is disappointing, and it's annoying that you've put so much effort into this aspect of hundreds of articles (see this search [25] of article space), but even repeating what the census entry nominally asserts is an interpretation -- you're taking it as fact. Look, again, at my example (linked above) of Phineas Gage's cemetery record -- it's got his very _name_ incorrect. These kinds of records are often just wrong, and that's why we don't use them in the was you are using them. Furthermore, your very statement contains a lot of relevant information ... type of residents ... notable residents ... hierarchy between different floors etc shows you're trying to imply stuff that we as editors are not supposed to be implying. If a notable person lived there, then there will be secondary sources on that person mentioning that; we don't come to that conclusion ourselves. If there's something interesting about the hierarchy between floors, then when some social historian comments on that in a secondary source, we can include that; but we don't marshall data to imply that ourselves.And to be perfectly blunt: your articles are great! The architecture, the history! But the long sections on Jan Marinsen and his wife and their three kids and their two maids and their cow and their chickens are nothing but cruft-trivia. They need to go. **E****Eng**19:57, 10 October 2024 (UTC)And I can see that lots of other perfectly relevant information based on other sources have to go as well. Yes that is indeeded super "disappointing".Ramblersen2 (talk) 20:27, 10 October 2024 (UTC) How can the deletion of the entire History section of a page such as Nyhavn 17 not qualify as vandalism (compare here)? I get the point that mentioning random tenants at diffent census records is considered irrelevant but just deleting all information on the origins of the property, cadastral numbers (the building's only address until 1859), information on notable previous owners based on other sources, notable former residents based on other sources, map details, images...everything? Does such an approach really leav e it as a better article?Ramblersen2 (talk) 21:02, 10 October 2024 (UTC)I don't know, and I don't have time to look into it. It does happen that when an article is full of cruft, the cleanup throws some good stuff out with it. What I suggest you do is use that article as a vehicle for working out with other editors what is and is not appropriate for that kind of article in general. Open a discussion on the talk page. **E****Eng**Things like cadastral numbers _are_ trivia though. And considering Wikipedia:Contributor copyright investigations#Ramblersen2, getting rid of most text and only adding relevant, copyvio-free text back afterwards may well be the wisest approach. Fram (talk) 07:21, 11 October 2024 (UTC)So now pretty much everything is just rejected as trivia. In spite of the fact that it is covered in secondary sources and is the sort of information that is covered in lots of published articles on individual buildings. Weather the information violates any copyrighted material should be pretty easy to determine, considering that the secondary sources are so limited.Ramblersen2 (talk) 10:06, 11 October 2024 (UTC)If it's covered in secondary sources we can probably use it; if it's merely "the sort of thing" that's covered in secondary sources, then we probably can't use it. **E****Eng**09:46, 12 October 2024 (UTC)User:EEng: But the secondary sources are there. Take Nyhavn 67 as an example: User Allan Nonymous has simply deleting the entire history section of the article on the basis that it is "fandom". This book has been published about the history of the book. And the deleted section contained a number of other secondary sources, supplemented with some primary sources used in acorance with Wikipedia's guidelines (withy care and without interpretations). And yet all coverage of the history of a historic building is rejected as "fandom"? I can see from User:Allan Nonumous' talk page that an administrator (User:Liz) has criticized him for listing way too many articles for deletion. As I see it, he is still applying his own, eclectic criteria for what to delete. An article about an individual building is am article on a quite specific subject, it will obviously only interest a very limited number of people. But I do think that the average reader of an article about a historic building will expect to find information on the history of the building. Yes the relevance of some informations can no doubt be debated. Other information could no doubt be presented in another way. And an extra source should and could no doubt be added. But simply deleting the entire section on the basis that it is "famdom" is absurd. And it makes it impossible to fix the mentioned issues in a way that improves the article.Ramblersen2 (talk) 12:21, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Having only momentarily glanced at what was removed, it does seem that possibly _some_ might be appropriately restored -- as I said already, It does happen that when an article is full of cruft, the cleanup throws some good stuff out with it. But I'm not sure what your statement that But the secondary sources are there refers to. It looks like most if not all of the removed material was sourced to this Danishfamilysearch site, and so can't be included.Look, let me suggest this: of all these articles you're talking about, pick the one on the most famous building -- the one other editors are most likely to take at least _some_ interest in. Then ask a few editors to join you in a discussion on that article's talk page about what does and doesn't appropriately belong in the article. (This is likely to be a lot less than you'd like, but that's the nature of the collaborative process.) Then try to apply that experience to another article, and ask one of the friendly editors from the first article to take a look.I wish I could offer to participate, but I just haven't got the time. Good luck. **E****Eng**06:51, 18 October 2024 (UTC)User talk:EEng: Thanks for the constructive reply and tone. It would have been a good suggestion if this discussion had come up a little (or rather a lot) earlier) but it is simply too many articles and too little that will be left (if only some new-page patrollers or page raters had raised these concerns a little earlier). So I have decided simply to quit Wikipedia. And if everything is deleted, so be it. Sorry to have wasted your time with this.Ramblersen2 (talk) 09:38, 18 October 2024 (UTC)
Information from the article: _"Marco Polo was born around 1254 in Venice, but the exact date and place of birth are archivally unknown."_[26]

Part of the source says that Polo **"was born around 1254 in Venice"**, other part of the sources says that **"exact date and place of birth are archivally unknown"**.

I assume that the editors combined those two groups of sources and and put informations into one sentence, however in my opinion this is where the synthesis and OR took place. Given that not all sources ie probably none say what the quote from the article says(full context). Some say that **Polo was born in Venice**, others say that **his place of birth is archivally unknown**. This wording from the article (given that the context of the birth in Venice is presented as a fact) can also mean that Polo was born in Venice but the exact place (part of the city, suburb, street, etc) is not known archivally.

To avoid the OR context and synthesis and ultimately to respect the sources, I suggest that formulation of the second part of the sentence be like this: "however, there is no archival material which would prove that Polo was born in Venice". I would love to hear your opinion. Mikola22 (talk) 05:38, 19 October 2024 (UTC)

My opinion is that such emphasis would be inappropriate WP:DOUBT and appropriate attribution would be to follow the last paragraph of that subsection ("general consensus") and not give equal validity to options that, as far as I'm aware, have not gained acceptance. Alpha3031 (t • c) 13:49, 19 October 2024 (UTC)Try to explain a little more clearly because I didn't understand you. Some authors claim that Polo was born in Venice, others that it is not known from the archives where he was born. Otherwise, it is primarily historical information used by some historians. According to you it shouldn't be in the article ie this information? Mikola22 (talk) 14:36, 19 October 2024 (UTC)It is not appropriate to phrase the second sentence in a manner that casts doubt on the first unless the source used explicitly does so, and it should be appropriately attributed to indicate the relative prominence of that doubt. If you want to state obliquely that the subject might not be born in Venice, find a secondary source that says that as well as how common that view is. Alpha3031 (t • c) 00:22, 20 October 2024 (UTC)You can see from the article that there are several sources that talk about Korcula ie Dalmatia as the place of birth. However, this is about the fact that there are no archival sources that say where he was born, and this is stated by a couple of sources. Someone put that information in the context of first part of the sentence and his birth in Venice. All together it should be synthesis and OR.The problem is if it is all together in the context, it is not clear which place is not archivally established, birthplace in Venice, part of Venice, etc. If it cannot be written more clearly, then the two pieces of information should be written separately.1. "Marco Polo was born around 1254 in Venice". 2."Exact date and place of birth are archivally unknown, according to some sources it could be Dalmatia, according to others could be Korcula or neither Korcula nor Venice."This is what can be confirmed from the sources and in such formulation is not a synthesis or OR. Mikola22 (talk) 05:10, 20 October 2024 (UTC)
There is currently an ongoing dispute at Talk:Society for Evidence-Based Gender Medicine#Arbitrary break (Conversion therapy) concerning the source linking SEGM and promotion of conversion therapy. The quote from the relevant source is as follows:

> Dr. Malone and fellow SEGM member Dr. Colin Wright have asserted, “Counseling can help gender dysphoric adolescents resolve any trauma or thought processes that have caused them to desire an opposite sexed body.” In my opinion, these statements are transphobic and reductive and favor a model of care in which children are encouraged to live as their sex assigned at birth. [... rest of the quote is MEDORG notes]

It is asserted that the entire source, post In my opinion, should be excluded as WP:RSOPINION, and that it is WP:SYNTH to consider the quote from Malone and Wright as verifying favor a model of care in which children are encouraged to live as their sex assigned at birth as a factual statement. Editors are invited to join the discussion on the article talk page. I have also posted this at WP:NPOVN#SEGM and conversion therapy since both noticeboards seem relevant. Alpha3031 (t • c) 00:22, 20 October 2024 (UTC)

I will note here as well that the quote as presented in this source removes the opening proviso "But in most cases", which changes the tone somewhat.Also, I think you are not accurately describing my objection to the subsequent MEDORG statements. It is not an arbitrary claim that "everything after the opinion is opinion". The issue is that what _relates_ the subsequent statements to the quote is a statement of opinion. The form is (paraphrasing):
*   Here's a quote
*   _In my opinion_ it is conversion therapy
*   Here's information about conversion therapy

The MEDORG information is all totally factual - but the basis for presenting the two alongside each other as if they are related is opinion. That added, I welcome some outside input.Void if removed (talk) 07:42, 20 October 2024 (UTC)
I am working on an article about a SCOTUS decision. And to emphasize its notability, I checked GoogleScholar and found, that it was cited 2377 times as of today. Is the "2377" original research or not? There is no other way to provide a reference for such infor, if you want recent data. Here is the article draft: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Georgia-Pacific_Corp._v._United_States_Plywood_Corp. —Preceding unsigned comment added by Walter Tau (talk • contribs) 20:35, 14 October 2024 (UTC)

Scholar doesn't always have an accurate number for citation count, at least for academic citations (I doubt for law too). [Edit: thus it would not be intrinsically verifiable and thus it's OR.] But more to the point, let's say you put the citation count in the article text. Is 2377 a lot? A lot for a scotus decision? A lot for a modern scotus decision? Any way you cut it, to give any reader some comprehension (who is not a legal scholar themselves), you'd need a secondary source to contextualize such a number.It reminds me of a joke I think from a Kip Thorne book. Carl Sagan was famous for saying "billions and billions" when communicating so-called "astronomical numbers" (but it of course never mattered what precisely the number actually was). But since then, citing the trillions of the US GDP, trade deficit, and debt in the news, Thorne(?) suggests instead calling them "economic numbers". The point is no matter what the number or the name, it's meaningless in communication. SamuelRiv (talk) 21:19, 14 October 2024 (UTC)If you say that a case has been cited numerous times, it is an implicit statement about its significance, which is OR. You should use a source that explains its significance.Also, it isn't meaningful information that a case has been frequently cited unless you mention what aspect of the case was cited. Often what lawyers find interesting about a case may be something minor, sometimes even dicta. TFD (talk) 22:18, 14 October 2024 (UTC)Thank you all for your comments. I forgot to mention (and this is clearly stated in my draft here):
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Georgia-Pacific_Corp._v._United_States_Plywood_Corp. "According to Google Scholar on 2024-10-14, [3] [original research?] this decisions has been cited 2377 times, making it THE MOST CITED DECISION OF THE USFEDERAL COURTS IN 1971.[4]" [4] Slottje, Daniel (25 October 2006). Economic Damages in Intellectual Property: A Hands-On Guide to Litigation. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-05625-7. I am citing a book from 2006 that explicitly states, that it was the most cited decision of US Federal courts in 1971. AND then, I add updated citation count from Google Scholar today. (I can check how this number compares with all other cases from 2006 -but then I will get really worried about OR. It seems to me, that citing a 2006 book, which explicitly states, that is was highest cited decision of 1971 proves the notability of this case. (The question of notability for a wiki-article is the reason I decided to research the number of citations). If this is not the right way to prove notability, than what is? —Preceding unsigned comment added by Walter Tau (talk • contribs) 11:31, 15 October 2024 (UTC)

The same thing that demonstrates notability of anything. Have multiple reliable and independent sources written about the subject in reasonable depth? Seraphimblade Talk to me 12:22, 15 October 2024 (UTC)If you say "it has a citation count of 2377 on Google Scholar as of October 2024" instead of that it has been cited 2377 times, then that'd be accurate and imo not OR. _You need to lead with Slottje, not Google_ -- Slottje is your sole source for the case being well-cited, while the Google count is just a bit of flavor sprinkles (and should probably be in a footnote and definitely not in the lede prose).To add to and amend my previous reply, GS has stability in indexing its citation counts I think (it's search results that are unstable). At issue is that GS indexes across all subjects, so it includes counts of, say, non-legal history or sociology papers that may cite the case. LawCite also provides a citation index for 318 FSupp 1116, but it's not a complete count (I believe the stars go up to three). The place I can think to get a complete law-only citation count would be Lexis Nexis or Westlaw, the former which you can access at some libraries. Regardless, it's not necessary or usually even useful information for article prose, per my previous reply. SamuelRiv (talk) 13:39, 15 October 2024 (UTC)As a note when including the Slottje details, it should include the date if that publication, eg "As if 2006, this case was the mist-cited in other US legal cases" M asem (t) 14:04, 15 October 2024 (UTC)If Slottje is saying it's the most cited case of 1971, then it would take a significant change in existing law or historical scholarship for that fact to change going forward, and anyone can check the date of publication by the source. The "as of" is only necessary for a rapidly-changing fact, such the raw number of citations this month. SamuelRiv (talk) 14:39, 15 October 2024 (UTC)It's actually necessary in all cases. Article text should be as accurate a thousand years from now as today, so if something _could_ conceivably change, it needs an "as of", whether such a change is likely or not. That also provides a temporal context. Seraphimblade Talk to me 00:49, 16 October 2024 (UTC)
*   Under no circumstances should Google hits or citation counts be used in articles, period. Same goes for WestLaw or whatever. There are too many uncertainties and provisos to what the results mean. This is a superb example of why secondary sources are used instead -- a scholarly paper on the influence of this case will know how to use tools in an expert manner to give meaningful numerical results, if such results are appropriate. **E****Eng**07:34, 17 October 2024 (UTC)

Exactly this. Is _Foo v. Bar_ showing a citation count of 2000 significant? I'd have no idea. Is that more impressive for a newer case than an older one? Probably, but how much so and over what time frame? A legal scholar will be able to actually interpret and contextualize that number, and say "Yeah, that's really a lot" or "That's not all that impressive" or "That number is rather artificially inflated." Seraphimblade Talk to me 10:18, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Thank you all for your comments. May we get back now to my original question: what is the most appropriate way to show a notability of court case? I proposed to show
1) how the case is ranked in terms of the number of citations it received among all other cases that year at the appropriate level (Federal or State). 2) someone objected to it, because the ranking may depend on the database used (which should NOT be true, because this a finite and well-know number of court cases in the US for each year - unlike the number of citations a journal article receives). 3) the fact, that the case is cited in a textbook does not mean much. This is because unlike the Laws of Physics, the Laws of Men change often. Even, if an old book mentions Baker v. Nelson as highly cited, it is not a good law today. 4) I feel, that Wikipedia must have an explicit policy on case law notability. If such policy does not exist today, should we make it?

The most appropriate way to show the notability of court cases is the same as the appropriate way to show the notability of anything, and already exists. Have reliable and independent sources extensively _noted_ it, by writing a good deal about it? Seraphimblade Talk to me 13:18, 17 October 2024 (UTC)If Slottje says it's the most cited law of 1971, then that's the appropriate way to show notability in the lede, as you have done. As I said before, the inclusion of a Google Scholar count in that sentence is unnecessary (and definitely problematic especially to be in the lede).All that said, I don't see in Slottje where it says that _Georgia-Pacific_ is the most-cited case of 1971, so you have to provide a page number. It does say on p.4 that it is among "several of the most significant cases [in IP law on economic damages]", and a significant part of the book is about applying "_Georgia-Pacific_ analysis" in legal practice.Imo if _a single other source_ confirms that "_Georgia-Pacific_ analysis" is an existing term of art in law, then the article clears notability by a mile. Citation counts mean nothing by comparison. SamuelRiv (talk) 14:43, 17 October 2024 (UTC)Agree, if the point is 'it's influential' number of cites does not even do it for most readers, it sounds rather like trivia -- go to where you always have to go for 'it's influential' or even 'number of cites matters', a scholar who writes those things, don't try to put that together yourself with data (that is original research). (besides which, the OP has an error as to time in the way they have tried to jam those two things together) Alanscottwalker (talk) 11:14, 21 October 2024 (UTC)
*   List of wars involving Gujarat(edit | talk | history | links | watch | logs)

The creator, User:JingJongPascal created an originally researched list of supposed wars, inventing the names of supposed wars, and supplying broken citations by copying them from other articles obviously (sfn without the full citation). When asked to identify the source and to quote the part of the source which discusses the ostensible thing which they named "Fourth Gujarat-Rajput War", they said: there is nothing like that in book. They previously explained that they invented the names of the wars. They then clarified that I should refer to Wikipedia content at Karna I#Other campaigns, which they've linked from "Fourth Gujarat-Rajput War", to see how whoever edited that article described the event. I was able to connect a paragraph from that section with the purported "Fourth Gujarat-Rajput War", based on JingJongPascal's provided "R. B. Singh (1964). History of the Chāhamānas p.125"; the last section has this citation.

The section is as follows:

Two relatively late texts suggest that Karna was defeated by the Chahamana king Durlabharaja III. The 14th century text _Prabandha Kosha_ claims that Durlabha defeated the Gurjara king, brought him to the Chahamana capital Ajmer in chains and forced him to sell yogurt in a market. The 15th century _Hammira Mahakavya_ claims that Karna was killed in a battle against Durlabha. However, this claim is historically inaccurate: Durlabha died around 1070 CE, while Karna lived until 1092 CE. Moreover, the earlier Chahamana records (such as _Prithviraja Vijaya_) do not mention any such conflict. It is possible that Durlabha achieved a minor military success against Karna, which was magnified into a major victory by the later panegyrists.[1]

There is more on User talk:JingJongPascal#List of wars involving Gujarat.

There is no such thing as the "Fourth Gujarat-Rajput War".

The entire list is like this.

References

1.   **^**R. B. Singh 1964, p.125.

—Alalch E.14:35, 20 October 2024 (UTC)

Other "List of wars involving X" pages created by this user are: 
*   List of wars involving Magadha (contested WP:BLAR; the page is a copy of List of wars involving India)
*   List of wars involving the Indian Subcontinent (WP:BLARed as a POV fork by User:NXcrypto)
*   List of wars involving India (disambiguation)
*   Draft:List of wars involving Hindustan
*   Draft:List of wars involving Kerala
*   Draft:List of battles involving major India
*   Draft:List of wars involving Subash Bose
*   Draft:List of wars involving Southern India
*   Draft:List of wars involving Jerusalem

—Alalch E.14:43, 20 October 2024 (UTC)So what I am supposed to do? Leave it as blank?I am following common naming conventions As seen in Maratha-Rajput Wars Mughal-Rajput Wars , etc.... JingJongPascal (talk) 14:49, 20 October 2024 (UTC)Kingdom of Ajmer (Chamamans) is an rajput clan (for context) JingJongPascal (talk) 14:51, 20 October 2024 (UTC)the book and sources simply lay out the belligerents of the war and how it happened they don't mention its name.So I am supposed to leave it blank? JingJongPascal (talk) 14:53, 20 October 2024 (UTC)Here is what you are supposed to do: You are supposed to fundamentally and comprehensively change your approach to editing. You need to understand that what you have been doing is contrary to Wikipedia policy, and that it can not continue. The pages you have been creating are terrible. —Alalch E.14:56, 20 October 2024 (UTC)Thanks for telling me hours I have spend on creating articles which are terrible. JingJongPascal (talk) 15:06, 20 October 2024 (UTC)okay then why don't you tell me what am I supposed to be naming those conflicts? I have to leave them blank? Is that what you want? JingJongPascal (talk) 15:11, 20 October 2024 (UTC)You've already asked that question. Do you think that asking it again makes everything okay and magically makes your original research into valid content? —Alalch E.22:26, 20 October 2024 (UTC)Readers don't come to Wikipedia for your personal survey of history. Presenting them with that instead of relating what reliable sources say is a disservice to readers and is a timesink for other editors. Like Alalch said, you need to fundamentally change your process, working from what sources say only and not adding your own analysis or commentary, or inventing your own names for things. **Remsense**‥**论**22:30, 20 October 2024 (UTC)Then tell me what the hell I am supposed to name them? JingJongPascal (talk) 09:36, 21 October 2024 (UTC)Have you considered that if a conflict doesn't have a name, it may not be suitable for inclusion in an encyclopedic list of conflicts? **Remsense**‥**论**09:38, 21 October 2024 (UTC)this kingdom isn't very well known, it has only two or three well detailed books , the names of the wars are given in books but in descriptive sense like "Xyz Emperor war against Xyz kingdom"None of these wars have actual name, I am using basic naming convention If you found a war between Gupta Empire and Bengal Empire What would you name it? Obviously Gupta-Bengal War JingJongPascal (talk) 12:08, 21 October 2024 (UTC)I have spent hours on this list.. JingJongPascal (talk) 12:09, 21 October 2024 (UTC)We reflect what reliable sources say; we're not a publishing house for original research. You are not entitled to host your original research here because you spent a lot of time on it, unfortunately. It would have been better if you became aware of this issue sooner. **Remsense**‥**论**12:33, 21 October 2024 (UTC)I will fix them, but I will take some time JingJongPascal (talk) 14:39, 21 October 2024 (UTC)Just to reiterate what other editors have already said what you're doing is original research. You content may be better suited to one of the military wiki's on fandom that don't have Wikipedia's policies on such content. -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 18:04, 21 October 2024 (UTC)Also list of wars involving Magadha is not a copy. I am the one who made it in List of wars involving India aswell as that article. JingJongPascal (talk) 15:14, 20 October 2024 (UTC)
The article Prostitution statistics by country seems like a mess of OR. It's inconsistent in what metrics are used, population percentages aren't consistently calculated from the same year as the data, and it compares these separate measurements for some countries against each other. Could use a look from editors familiar with statistics type content. The big ugly alien (talk) 18:45, 22 October 2024 (UTC)

I agree that the chart as currently constructed is an OR mess. Horse Eye's Back (talk) 19:03, 22 October 2024 (UTC)
Titius–Bode law contains a lot of discussion on the provenance of one of the cited sources (a 1913 article by Mary Adela Blagg), and devotes a portion of the article to suggest, citing only the Blagg source itself, that the article in the ADS and journal archives is a forgery. It seems to use the information contained in the source, but not in a way the source directly supports. Of course, there's always the possibility that it really is a forgery, though if that's the case I'd personally prefer that statement to come from a source that isn't the 'forgery' itself. Regardless, I'm not familiar enough with the subject to know what parts of the discussion of the Blagg paper or the article subject itself should be removed, so I'm wary of messing with the article too much (some parts of the article appear to genuinely discuss the content of the source as intended, but I'm not sure where that starts and ends in the article structure - the forgery suggestions seem mixed in pretty deeply to me). —Preceding unsigned comment added by InkTide (talk • contribs) 20:09, 29 October 2024 (UTC)

I just reverted to the 2024-07-18 page revision, which seems to be clean. Also left a note on the talk page. Arcorann (talk) 23:22, 30 October 2024 (UTC)
The source (Braune 2019) is cited in the following sentence:

_However, since the 1990s, the term "Cultural Marxism" has largely referred to the Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory, a conspiracy theory popular among the far right **without any clear relationship to Marxist cultural analysis.** [emphasis added]_

We are currently divided on whether the bolded part constitutes a synthy use of the source. Could editors please take a look and report either here or, preferably, on the Marxist Cultural Analysis talk page, where we have an ongoing discussion? 87.116.182.140 (talk) 08:16, 1 November 2024 (UTC)

Most everything written here is original research. The citations are not to experts in ancient Egyptian literature making the claims, but to wholly new claims. It seems that the material dates all the way back to 2008 with the article's inception. A rewrite and better sources is sorely needed, as well as the removal of just a "list" of motifs, the likes of which do not appear in other well-written articles on literature. Chris Weimer (talk) 09:40, 2 November 2024 (UTC)

Before there’s any chapter, the first paragraphs in the article show no reference. Hadjnix 07:38, 7 November 2024 (UTC)

The lead of an article are meant to summarise the rest of the content, so it's not necessary to have to references in the lead. Instead those details should have references found in the main body of the article, which the lead is then summarising.Leads sometimes have references, usually if a particular detail is controversial, but that's not the norm. -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 11:42, 7 November 2024 (UTC)
Is this sentence in Baalbek SYNTH?

"Baalbek is a stronghold of the militant organization Hezbollah, and its tourism sector has encountered challenges due to conflicts in Lebanon, particularly the 1975–1990 civil war, the ongoing Syrian civil war since 2011, and the Israel–Hezbollah conflict (2023–present)."
Three people think it's not. Two people (including me) think it is. Arguments are in here: Talk:Baalbek/Archive 1#Requesting_explanation_for_revert. FunLater (talk) 22:28, 3 November 2024 (UTC)

A similar issue previously came up at WP:Reliable sources/Noticeboard/Archive 453#Are these reliable sources for Baalbek -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 00:17, 7 November 2024 (UTC)If I understand this issue correctly, no one disputes these three items: (1) Baalbek is a Hezbollah stronghold; (2) the tourism industry has had struggles and challenges; (3) RS attribute the tourism industry's struggles and challenges to military conflicts that have occurred. The dispute is over whether in the absence of an RS that explicitly ties the fact that Baalbek is a Hezbollah stronghold to the military conflicts that are one source of problems for the tourism industry, it is SYNTH to tie the Hezbollah-strongholdiness of Baalbek to the tourism problems. If I got all that right, I agree that it is SYNTH. Novellasyes (talk) 13:32, 7 November 2024 (UTC)It sounds like the sentence just needs to be split in two. Add a full stop after the part saying it has been a Hezbollah strong hold, that could use some additional details anyway as the sources for that go back decades and aren't just related to current events. -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 13:58, 7 November 2024 (UTC)
The question is, if a source takes the position that having to pay postage when returning a ballot is a constructive poll tax, is this a sufficient basis for claiming that this is a form of voter suppression?

To be clear, there is no claim that every form of voter suppression is illegal, just that there is no "line to draw" as to what constitutes voter suppression and that anything which has a tendency to discourage voting, by definition, constitutes voter suppression to a greater or lesser degree.

Here's the pertinent part of the original discussion from Talk:Voter suppression in the United States#Reconsidering the gist of this article:

> I understand from what you are saying here that you do not believe that it is WP:OR to decide that the meaning of the term "voter suppression" is self-evident and does not require further definition. I do believe that it is WP:OR but of course I could be wrong.

The specific ask is presumably that there must be a source which explicitly states that having to put postage on the return envelope may discourage some people from voting (i.e. that this would in fact constitute voter suppression), while my contention would be that this is implicit, particularly when there is no assertion of any countervailing benefit, e.g. in terms of reducing voter fraud. Fabrickator (talk) 15:42, 8 November 2024 (UTC)

*   The term “Original Research”, as used on Wikipedia, refers to statements, arguments or conclusions not directly stated in any external source (but instead originating on Wikipedia). So, the question here is very simple: is the conclusion that postage constitutes voter suppression found in a source? If so, then it is not OR … if not, then it is OR. Blueboar (talk) 18:17, 8 November 2024 (UTC)
*   Flat-out OR. **E****Eng**19:00, 8 November 2024 (UTC)@Blueboar and EEng: What about a source stating that the postage requirement imposes a "burden on the right to vote"? Does that also fail to support the claim of "voter suppression"? Fabrickator (talk) 20:44, 8 November 2024 (UTC)To be clear, I think ballot envelopes should be postage-prepaid, because who the hell has stamps around the house anymore? But it's not for us to make the jump from "burden" to "suppression". I think you'll find the examples at WP:SYNTH on point. **E****Eng**21:16, 8 November 2024 (UTC)If the source says “burden” we should say “burden”.Indeed, I would say that “burden” is actually a stronger word, since rain on Election Day can “suppress” the vote. Blueboar (talk) 13:16, 9 November 2024 (UTC)

An editor continues removing content from the lead at Centre-right politics because they believe that the sources are fake and written by leftwingers. Can we get some more input here? Talk:Centre-right politics#Wording of the lead The big ugly alien (talk) 02:31, 16 November 2024 (UTC)

Note that if the Sfn sources don't match anything in the references list, it's because the editor is deleting those too. The big ugly alien (talk) 03:01, 16 November 2024 (UTC)

Oil paint contained an assertion that "For several centuries the oil painting has been perhaps the most prestigious form in Western art[...]". To better comply with WP:NPOV, I changed it to "For several centuries, the oil painting was considered the most prestigious form in Western art[...]"; however, I could not find a source for a claim like this anywhere in the article and I am unsure if there are sources to back up the idea that this was the consensus in the past. Any help sorting out this dilemma would be appreciated. Thanks, Tarhalindur (talk) 22:57, 10 November 2024 (UTC)

I can't see how your edit brought any improvement, especially removing the "perhaps". I don't think either statement has NPOV issues - market prices alone would bear this out. Johnbod (talk) 04:12, 11 November 2024 (UTC)Do WP:RS say, when going through the history of art, that oil painting was the most prestigious, etc.? Maybe. But that doesn't seem like a very interesting thing to say so I wonder if art historians actually bothered saying that. They might have been more inclined to observe that oil was the preferred medium for many renowned artists throughout history or that many iconic works in the western tradition were done in oil. For example this long history of oil doesn't mention the prestigiousness of oil but mentions what are to me more interesting summaries of why it mattered. Novellasyes (talk) 14:57, 11 November 2024 (UTC)I've gone ahead and removed that pretty egregious OR; I've also gone through and removed a handful of other OR or peacocky terms in the article. It'll still need a bit of improvement but it's (in my eyes) a bit better for now. CoconutOctopus talk 11:11, 16 November 2024 (UTC)
The following sentence in dispute contains original research not supported by the sources at hand:

Polling throughout the election cycle showed that after his indictments began Trumps poll numbers saw an immediate rise which would remain throughout the rest of the election cycle,[1][2] and after his conviction in New York, polling among republicans showed that the conviction made 34% of them "more likely" to vote for Trump.[3]

The first half of the sentence was reverted by myself, as the two sources for the claim did not state that "Polling _throughout_ the election cycle" showed that after his indictments "Trumps poll numbers saw an immediate rise which _would remain throughout the rest of the election cycle_". The sources _cannot_ make this claim, as they were both published in 2023, over 1 year before the end of the election cycle in 2024. My removal of this was reverted by TheRazgriz, who claimed there was no original research. BootsED (talk) 01:46, 3 December 2024 (UTC)

Being tactful in my reply here to add the following:In the referenced text, there are _three_ references, two contemporary citations to the polling "bump" post-indictment in Nov 2023, and one which notes polling post-conviction in June 2024, more than half a year later, and elsewhere in the page is already reference to exit polling support almost a full year from initial reference (in addition to the obligatory links to the main 24 POTUS election page with more focused data/info).My rebuttal is that it _**is**_ OR to make authoritative statements with no RS to validate the _substance_ or _merit_ of the statement, but it is _**not**_ OR to cite RS sources containing and explaining datasets and make a statement of fact based on the data cited. If _needed_, further citations can easily be found to continue to validate the claim, for example HERE which show any variation from Nov 23-Jun 24 as within margin of error, but my approach on WP is that there is very rarely a valid reason to cite more than 1 or 2 sources to validate a claim that is not a serious point of contention. That is my $0.02(USD). More than happy to participate more if needed or requested. Thank you. TheRazgriz (talk) 02:41, 3 December 2024 (UTC)First, the third source does _not_ make the claim that because of Trump’s indictments, his polling numbers remained up _throughout_ the election cycle _because of_ the indictments. It is also published in June of 2024, still before the end of the election cycle.The new source you provided in your comment above was not in the sentence at hand, and does not even say that Trump's indictments resulted in a polling bump. It instead reports on people's opinions on the indictments, not on Trump’s overall poll numbers. The poll is based on the question, not his overall polling numbers. It is also a primary source rather than a secondary source, so using that source to make broader claims is synthesis. It is also published in June, so it still wouldn't satisfy your claim that his poll numbers went up _throughout_ the election cycle because of his indictments. BootsED (talk) 15:10, 3 December 2024 (UTC)I agree with BootED that some OR is involved in the sentence, "Polling throughout the election cycle showed that after his indictments began Trumps poll numbers saw an immediate rise which would remain throughout the rest of the election cycle." A couple of factors to notice: (1) the indictments didn't all happen at once; if it is really true that his poll number experienced an increase after "his indictments began" you'd have to go back and pick up the first indictment and see what happened to his poll numbers starting then; this, however, would then make a complicated claim to draw all the way through to November 2024 since at that time he was still seeking the Republican nomination and polls were about his standing versus other Republicans; (2) his polling numbers vacillated during the general election season and experienced a dip after the Harris nomination; (3) to the extent that some Republicans looked on him more favorably because of the indictments (this is born out in some polls), I don't see an RS that supports that idea that his relatively robust poll numbers which Harris was only briefly able to interrupt was because of the indictments. It would be good to not confuse correlation with causation and not to imply it unless RSes do; but even the correlation seems like OR. There probably are some valuable or interesting sentences that COULD be included about the impact of his indictments but the way it is said now rolls way too much up into one OR overarching claim. Novellasyes (talk) 15:48, 3 December 2024 (UTC)I feel it is important to not misconstrue what the article as written actually says. The wording is:"Polling _throughout_ the election cycle showed that _after his indictments began_ Trumps poll numbers saw an _immediate rise_ which _would remain_ throughout the _rest of the election_ cycle."What is being communicated to the reader? Trump had X% polling before his first indictment, just after the first indictment those numbers saw an immediate Y% increase to Z%, and that Y% gain remained for the rest of the cycle. It is **not** asserting that his numbers remained at Z% for the rest of the cycle, just that the Y% increase remained, i.e. he never saw X% after that point.Here is an equal but opposite question: Did Trumps polling in the 2024 election cycle post-indictment 1 ever get at/near/below his polling pre-indictment 1? The answer is plainly no, based on all available data, at every stage of the election.But to the point of OR, this really feels like a mistake seen time and again, summed up as "If a RS can not be quoted as saying a specific thing, then it is OR to say that thing at all in WikiVoice." WV is **not** a quotation method, it is used to give a summary **based** on RS. It is not OR to summarize the data and RS. RS verify the assertion (again, the Y%, not the Z%), and further RS citations can and are easily obtained which reinforce this. If the issue is "Needs more/better citations", that is achieved within a half hour, but we must keep in mind WP:OVERKILL and be reasonable about it. How many RS are needed to _reasonably_ validate the claim? Do we **need** a poll from each month of the entire cycle? Every quarter? TheRazgriz (talk) 16:52, 3 December 2024 (UTC)You don't need a poll from every month, you need one reliable secondary source published after the election that directly makes the claims you admit you made based on your own interpretation of data. BootsED (talk) 03:07, 4 December 2024 (UTC)Also, it is bluntly false to claim SYNTH to the other citation. That was such a wild assertion to make. Its an Emerson College poll. What in the world is primary about this? Explain the leap to asserting it is SYNTH here. TheRazgriz (talk) 16:59, 3 December 2024 (UTC)The polling data universally verifies this summary. It shows Trump at X% pre-Indictment 1, it shows a significant Y% increase post-indictment 1 to Z% ratings, and confirms that at no point did the Y% "go away" over time, instead remaining for the rest of the cycle, proven by the fact that he never returned to X% levels afterward. If the summary/assertion had no data to confirm, and was simply ripping bits and pieces of RS to cobble together the assertion with no actual underlying foundation of RS/proof for the assertion itself, that would be SYNTH. That is not the case here. The case here is that RS data verifies the assertion, Trump never saw his numbers go back down to where they had previously been. That is a fact, clearly apparent by the data itself. It is not OR to state numbers went up and cite the data, it is also not OR to state they did not return to previous levels and cite the data.What concerns me more is the combined assertion you've made that using Emerson College polls as a citation is somehow "primary source" to this. How? I sincerely am curious how you arrive at that conclusion. Everything is primary to something, but how this poll is primary to this discussion is inconceivable to me. TheRazgriz (talk) 19:26, 3 December 2024 (UTC)The issue is not with the pollster. Primary versus secondary sources is best described by WP:SECONDARY. The primary source you pointed to does not make the claim you say it does. BootsED (talk) 03:11, 4 December 2024 (UTC)The claim is one of data. "Data shows X". Every source I have provided is in support of that claim, and does indeed strengthen that claim.SYNTH would be:Source 1- "Immigrants are pouring across Southern border in record numbers."Source 2- "Record numbers of illegal drugs flowing across Southern border."WIkiVoice summary- "Immigrants are bringing record numbers of illegal drugs across the Southern border."That is SYNTH.Again, the WV assertion here is not that. It is "X% increased by Y% to Z%, and the Y% remained". Every source cited strengthens that claim. You have yet to provide RS that disputes that claim. I can continue providing RS to strengthen my claim, as every poll after that point never showed Trump return to levels at/near/below his pre-indictment level, and showed most fluctuation up or down within margin of error. Exit polling also showed he won the PV, still maintaining his increased%, and these polls are already citied elsewhere on the "main" page so I know you aren't pretending those aren't also there. As a bonus, HERE, yet another collection of polling data, this time during Trump v Harris timeline, still showing his polling numbers at approx the same as they were from every other poll post-indictment. But I am sure you will once again have some sort of issue with this, and once again your issue will be to insist it is all OR, and again you will provide not a hint of a RS to disprove the assertion.So here is my final answer: This is about as basic as it gets, telling the reader a factual summary of what can be verified from multiple RS, specifically within the context of the section within the article page it is being stated in. The assertion is a fact, it is verified by multiple RS confirming the same data result to be true, it is presented within the context of the section topic, and you have provided no substantive counterargument to actually address any of this and instead choose to argue past the point. That is your decision and right to do so. Mine is to choose to stop engaging past the slightest hope of productive, constructive conversation. I leave the rest to the gods of chaos, i.e. other Wiki users. Thank you. Razgriz, the Red Wizard (talk) 04:36, 4 December 2024 (UTC)Bluntly, in order to verify that requires an education level that rises above our Original Research threshold for sky-is-blue. Which is deliberately set low to cater for, well, less-well educated English speakers from countries with substandard education systems. It may be entirely correct, but unless there is a source that explicitly states that, you cant state it as fact. Only in death does duty end (talk) 11:05, 4 December 2024 (UTC)And there's another reason the OR rule is what it is. If Assertion X hasn't been stated by reliable secondary sources, then -- whether it's true or not -- it's questionable that it's something worth telling our readers. **E****Eng**18:56, 4 December 2024 (UTC)
| Sources |
| --- |

The Southern Operations Room uses as a flag the logo of a game cancelled 11 years ago Command & Conquer Generals 2 There are sources that depict the logo of this game although the only WP:RS is Electronic Arts (the game' editor) Youtube page as they've shutdown eveyrthing else related to the cancelled game from their official website long ago. However because there is no reliable source that has stated the logo origin - there is not many people remembering about this 11 years old cancelled game - i obviously got a WP:NOR as this is an unpublished fact. Any way to still get this bit of trivia to the page? I doubt SOR founders would be open for an online interview or a newspaper to write an article on it Irianelle (talk) 10:01, 10 December 2024 (UTC)

Hello, I looked at the YouTube video you originally posted, and I agree that the logos are extremely similar, and that your interpretation might be correct. However, as you have pointed out, it is going to be difficult to find at least one reliable source to verify it. Inclusion of trivia is not always discouraged in articles, but in general it needs to be highly relevant to the subject. In this case, without a secondary (or even primary) source, we are not yet at a point where we can discuss inclusion. Hope that helps! _**Choucas Bleu**talk contribs_ 15:05, 10 December 2024 (UTC)
The article on List of video games considered the best is set up to determine "games considered the best" by "The games listed here are included on at least six separate "best/greatest of all time" lists from different publications (inclusive of all time periods, platforms, and genres)". After a lengthy discussion on the talk page, I'm still convinced it fails WP:SYNTH, specifically "Do not combine material from multiple sources to state or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by any of the sources" and WP:LISTCRITERIA (""Avoid original or arbitrary criteria that would synthesize a list that is not plainly verifiable in reliable sources.") While I think an article on acclaimed media to be interesting and valid, I feel that the approach taken applies arbitrary criteria ("had to appear on six lists") that is not widespread among any video game academia, criticism, or even fans to make to capture the subject on hand. Thoughts? Andrzejbanas (talk) 00:16, 9 December 2024 (UTC)

There's certainly an argument that it's combining different claims in a way that's WP:SYNTH to create a "definitive" list. There's also an argument that all of those sources support "greatest" as required by WP:V and we're just requiring it to be heavily supported and represent the consensus among sources as required by WP:NPOV. Either way, this has repeatedly been brought up and settled. This isn't the answer you want to hear, but at a certain point we have to accept that most of the community feels the latter argument is stronger. If you're looking to fight OR, there are plenty of easier targets to sink your teeth into. The big ugly alien (talk) 00:58, 9 December 2024 (UTC)I have no argument that this is a way to get some information to define "greatness". The issue is only applying a self-imposed rule that states "The games listed here are included on at least six separate "best/greatest of all time" lists" which does not seem congruent with WP:LISTCRITERIA's "Avoid original or arbitrary criteria that would synthesize a list that is not plainly verifiable in reliable sources.". The bigger issue is I do not understand how including only six items is acceptable with the "avoid original or arbitrary criteria". So I appreciate you chiming in @Thebiguglyalien:, but your response does not address the problem I'm trying to bring up. Andrzejbanas (talk) 20:05, 9 December 2024 (UTC)Are you interpreting the phrase "a list that is not plainly verifiable in reliable sources" to mean "reliable sources have to have described/written about standards for evaluating whether something belongs on a particular list". If so, in this case, that would require RSes to have written about why, how, or that people use being on six separate "all time best" lists to determine whether a video game is considered to belong on a "considered [to be] the best" list. I'm spelling this out because I'm not 100% sure myself how to interpret what "plainly verifiable in reliable sources" means as applied to this situation -- or what you think it means or how you are interpreting it.Novellasyes (talk) 03:08, 10 December 2024 (UTC)I'm totally aware I may be misinterpreting it. The content in the sources is definitely the items listed. But, there is no standard in any source to apply that we be a numeric ranking and I'm not sure that applying a rule that only selects a small amount of items is not applying "arbitrary criteria" as it makes us pick and choose what from the sources is valid and what is not. I apologize if any of this comes off as antagonistic, but I'm trying to clarify this @Novellasyes:. If I'm misinterpreting, I think I might understand by an example of how this does not apply. Andrzejbanas (talk) 06:29, 10 December 2024 (UTC)I don't fully understand exactly what the phrase "a list that is not plainly verifiable in reliable sources" means and that's why I asked, and tried to express one possible interpretation of it. I wasn't trying to suggest that you don't understand it. Novellasyes (talk) 13:17, 10 December 2024 (UTC)Fair. Sorry misunderstood. Hopefully some others can chime in. Andrzejbanas (talk) 13:53, 10 December 2024 (UTC)
My understanding of this list's approach is basically as follows: A game is theoretically eligible for inclusion on Wikipedia's list if a reliable source lists it as among the best or greatest games of all time. However, there are two drawbacks to including every game that has appeared even once on such a list: (1) it may be WP:UNDUE to describe a game as "considered the best" if only one source from a large pool of options does so, and (2) the Wikipedia list would rapidly balloon to an impractical WP:SIZE if so many games were included. Thus, it seems like sensible practice to forestall those drawbacks by establishing a higher threshold than "appears at least once". To the best of my knowledge, reliable sources don't do "meta-analysis" of best-games lists that we could use to source "games must appear on X number of lists"—but we still need to choose _some_ number to be the boundary, and so six seems as good as any. (As to whether it's SYNTH to set a higher threshold in the first place, I would say not. When it comes to the reception of media, there's plenty of precedent that it's acceptable to attribute an opinion to critics in the aggregate if references are supplied to show that several critics have expressed that view, and this list's threshold seems to extend from that same practice.) ModernDayTrilobite (talk • contribs) 16:32, 11 December 2024 (UTC)

Thank you for your response @ModernDayTrilobite:. Would it not be more appropriate to follow WP:SPINOUT (specifically Long stand-alone list articles are split into subsequent pages alphabetically, numerically, or subtopically. to cover the latter issue? While I understand your point of view on six, more lists like this will be published, and I feel like adjusting the number to keep a list to be a balanced scale still becomes "iffy" at least per SYNTH rules, but if we separated the list out. I see you linked to some specific rules, but if you could quote which ones you are referring to, it would help me understand where you are coming from a bit more. Andrzejbanas (talk) 17:53, 11 December 2024 (UTC)How would this not just recreate the issue on a greater number of pages? If we split the list into subpages, WP:DUE would still apply, and would still likely create situations where, to determine what is due weight, editors require a game to be featured by "multiple" sources. Let's say multiple is taken to mean three--you've recreated the exact same arbitrary standard, according to you, just at a different place. I don't quite understand your sentence While I understand your point of view on six, more lists like this will be published, and I feel like adjusting the number to keep a list to be a balanced scale still becomes "iffy" at least per SYNTH rules, but if we separated the list out. Were you missing a final clause after "but if we separated the list out"? But yes, by and large, I think you need to take this six sources requirement as a requirement per DUE, not a violation of SYNTH. Alyo _(**chat**·**edits**)_ 18:12, 11 December 2024 (UTC)I mean, its a rule we are supposed to follow regardless of how it effects another rule for one. Second, to address WP:WEIGHT, i'd propose simply listing numerically the amount of lists found. This would give a reader a clearer point of view of how the game stands within publications. Currently, the list also features excessive data such game genre, publishers and "original system" which do not appear to be some sources regardless. Andrzejbanas (talk) 18:17, 11 December 2024 (UTC)Well, I guess the other editors involved don't believe it violates a rule then. Or at minimum, we are trusting our readers to understand that we aren't saying "only when a game is called 'the best' by six separate publications does it then become Objectively True that the game is the best of all time". Your second point does not actually solve the issue of whether or not we include a game _at all_ if, say, it has only been called "the best" by a single publication. I would argue that given the amount of sourcing we have on this issue, it is a clear violation of DUE weight to include, say, _California Games_ equal on a list to _Ocarina of Time_ just because it was put on a single list by Gamespot. Is that inclusion verifiable? Yes. Does that inclusion accurately represent the breadth of sourcing and discussion about either _California Games_ itself or the general list of games considered the greatest ever? Clearly no. (Of course, according to the _CG_ article it made it onto another list in 1996, but that opens up another can of worms about DUE--how should we value inclusion on a single list in 1996? Does that accurately represent the breadth of sourcing and discussion about _California Games's_ legacy or the modern understanding of games considered the greatest ever? Again, I'd argue clearly no.) Based on these points about DUE, it seems that you _have_ to increase the standard for sourcing, and that overwhelmingly outweighs some soft SYNTH concerns. Alyo _(**chat**·**edits**)_ 20:33, 11 December 2024 (UTC)Yes sorry, I'm not saying any of my ideas are necessarily the way to go, I'm just spit balling. Trying to define greatness from appearing on an amount of lists is also problematic for the reasons you stated @Alyo:. While I also have faith that readers can read the instructions, this would read like an article called List of horses then suddenly says within the lead its only a list of war horses because of list of horses would be too long or we couldn't apply weight for some breeds of horses over others.That said, with horses, there are scientific standards you can apply, which is why the horse list is The issue with our list here as you said, it multifold. Perhaps the no original research board is the wrong place to discuss this, The problem with making the lists rules more "strict" for weight can be expanded on similarly as this article does for film. They note that best-of lists, with various rules applied to them "negate the function of serious film reviewing and criticism" and that a best of poll describes nothing more than "the best American commercial narrative films viewed by 20 critics who seem primarily familiar with American commercial narrative films." This can be seen on the lists that applied various limiting rules._The Age_ says their list is based on "restrictions such as "games have been judged on their entertainment value today rather than their impact when released." while GameSpot in 2000 included such games ("There were no restrictions on gaming genre, platform or age. Any game that appeared on a home gaming platform before January 1st 2000 was deemed eligible.") The claim of it coming from the editorial staff is also faulty, as GameSpy says their list is solicited opinions from game developers and "selected expert gamers". IGN said they did not want Mario and Zelda to show up too many times in their list. Applying all of these as a balanced choice is misleading to audience when we just say "critics listed these as great" when we are not open that some games just are not applicable on terms that lists are static, and obviously become outdated, or even a contemporary one can't see the future.With the above suggestion, while I see that it might be a good idea to make a stricter list to follow weight, I can't imagine anything that would make most people say that works because by definition, all the lists are talking about different things. Whether they apply unique rules, or are instantly dated to the static nature of magazines or years of lists. I'm not sure anything would satisfy it. Andrzejbanas (talk) 23:47, 11 December 2024 (UTC)Hmm, I think your horse example is a little flawed, because there's no bait-and-switch happening with the substance of this article. The video games on the list aren't called "the greatest" because they've reached an abstract standard on wikipedia. They're called "the greatest" because _a source_ called them the greatest. This is exactly what the title of the article promises--we aren't presenting _different_ content from what the title suggests, only a pared down version of the universe of possible options. The proper analogy is to List of leading Thoroughbred racehorses, which contains a list of leading Thoroughbred racehorses, but not _all_ leading Thoroughbred racehorses. The undefeated horses section: "The list is not comprehensive for otherwise unnotable horses with five or fewer starts." The most wins arbitrarily stops around 60. The successive wins section says "The horses who were defeated but had ten or more consecutive race wins include..." Most wins in a season only includes those above 10, probably just because humans are biased towards powers of ten. Every section in that article has a cut off point, and that cut off point was made by editors, not sources. No source said "only horses with 60 wins get to be considered a leading Thoroughbred", and so editors have substituted their best judgement while basing the substance of the article on the general idea that "most wins" is a valid metric for determining a "leading" racehorse. I see the same thing happening here: the topic is notable, individual entries exist under the topic, and the entries are suitably sourced. Editors just need to determine a cut off point--that isn't SYNTH. Last point: Applying all of these as a balanced choice is misleading to audience... may be true about the list, but _the list is verifiable_, and our requirement is WP:Verifiability, not truth. If we tried to use our judgment to counter balance, as you point out yourself, that creates far more SYNTH/OR than we started with. The list may not ever be perfect, but the topic is notable and a consensus has been established that this is the way to cover it. Alyo _(**chat**·**edits**)_ 02:12, 12 December 2024 (UTC)You see, the Horse thing is a lot more "measurable". Its a sport, you get wins that are very basic measurable metric. I don't know about this subject, but its possible that its common to acknowledge ones that get a certain amount of wins in a season. Regardless, "wins" make more sense to count than something like best.Describing a creative work like a video game is not so simple. As you'll notice in those lists as well, they don't have a list of horses "voted the best" is not something a serious critic measures. For example, these quotes apply to film and music, but I feel like they are similar creative mediums we can compare. For example, this this article (about film to clarify) states best of lists "negate the function of serious film reviewing and criticism" and that these lists ""ignore major bodies of work which the [x amount of] critics are either unfamiliar with or are not interested in." While this interview with a few critics on _NPR_ states lists are interesting to compare, they echo the statement about them having no real "weight" in artistic merit. They state that "when you're ranking things, that kind of adds another layer of, like, taking away from the art itself and trying to assign a specific meaning to this art that is hard to codify because it's art." or "We're often more kind of approaching these things anecdotally, talking about the stuff that really, really matters to us instead of kind of trying to collect a consensus around ranking the best." and "how do you measure something that may be aesthetically grandiose in some ways versus something that's quieter and, like, try to put those up against each other? It's like - it's really hard, and it doesn't really make sense." Gaming journalists echo the level of seriousness we should be taking to imply "best" for "best of lists". Hardcore Gaming 101 and Gaming Trends echoes this, stating "How could anyone possibly create a definitive list of gaming’s greatest accomplishments when there’s such a wildly large variety of games to choose from?" and "Nowadays “top X” articles on the internet tend to be seen as clickbait, hastily assembled list determined by some quick democratic polling of staff. [...] the lists tend to be rather insular, usually based on whatever publication or forum assembled them" Similarly, HG101 also states their list starts with staffs favourites, and was built from there. The very fact we ignore the criticism on the validity of these lists to be simply taking that "they are the best" its impractical to use them as a form of measurement in terms of quality.So as you said Verifiabilty, not truth, True but we also have WP:LISTCRITERIA which states "Criteria for inclusion should factor in encyclopedic and topical relevance, not just verifiable existence." In this case, yes, these games do appear on "best of" lists, no question. But from the above quotations, is combining them, or even using them explicitly a serious and good way to calculate "best"?While I think its interesting to see lists on a unique topic, like, _Super Mario 64_ "ahh, so the writers of the American company IGN and the Japanese critics in Famitsu or British magazine _Empire_ all voted this game" but from the writing above, it seems to be implying that "if you take the list at face value, you are missing the point" as its a poor way to measure quality in terms of reach of what video games will reach different editors (_IGN_ will write more about popular video games (HG101 writer saying "Rock Paper Shotgun, for example, has top 25/50 lists for many genres, but focuses only on games released on the PC. So reading about “best horror” games seems really strange when you’re omitting huge swathes of them, especially Japanese developed games. Similarly, computer RPGs and Japanese RPGs have such different fanbases that they’re almost entirely different genres, so there’s rarely any crossover on “best RPG” lists. IGN and other mainstream sites tend to focus on newer releases at the expense of gaming’s history." Not to mention, IGN has published 7 best of lists, and they are all currently used in the article. I think from the above, we can't make serious gamut for measuring or gauging some canon or critical consensus.Oh god I wrote an essay, I apologize @Alyo:, but I think we're both making good points here and getting somewhere. Andrzejbanas (talk) 03:46, 12 December 2024 (UTC)Haha no worries at all, it's an interesting topic. I don't have much more to add, because as I flagged above, I think your interpretation here isn't widely held and hypothetical discussions can only go so far without actionable steps. The only place I really disagree with you is in the framing of your sentence, But from the above quotations, is combining them, or even using them explicitly a serious and good way to calculate "best"? I don't think that we are calculating "best" by combining sources. I think we are _summarizing_ the topic of "best games" by listing games that sources have explicitly called "the best". The combination of sources doesn't change the verifiability of sources making that claim. I can completely agree with broad critiques of "best of" lists as they appear in reliable sources, but the end result for our purposes is a valid source that calls something "the best". That's the WP:Verifiability, not truth point--saying "X is a GOAT game" is verifiable, even if you agree with critiques that make that statement not objectively "true". You say The very fact we ignore the criticism on the validity of these lists ... its impractical to use them as a form of measurement in terms of quality, but that issue is already presumed/accepted under WP's groundrules. Again, WP:Verifiability, not truth. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ Don't think of this article topic as "Games that objectively _are_ the best of all time". Imagine that the article is actually titled "Games that a certain subset of sources have subjectively described as the best of all time, using different metrics and criteria and with different backgrounds and expertise". Under WP's rules, that's what the article should be including, it's just a lot less pithy. Alyo _(**chat**·**edits**)_ 05:15, 12 December 2024 (UTC)Would WP:AUDIENCE come into play? I feel like "People who read Wikipedia have different backgrounds, education and opinions. Make your article accessible and understandable for as many readers as possible." Because I think if we can state information from the sources below within the context of the list, it might help clarify issues. As the lists often discuss their own issues of "Best of" lists, I think this would ease any tensions editors or readers might have with the relatively flat opening. Andrzejbanas (talk) 14:09, 12 December 2024 (UTC)
Your question about whether to adjust the lede section of the article is a good question to take to the article's talk page. For what it's worth, the lede in my view does a poor job explaining what a reader is going to find in the list itself.Novellasyes (talk) 15:55, 12 December 2024 (UTC)

Second^. I'm not sure that I would integrate commentary into the list itself, but the lead could certainly be expanded. Alyo _(**chat**·**edits**)_ 17:59, 12 December 2024 (UTC)No, definitely not into the list itself. Just in the lead or some subsection if necessary. Andrzejbanas (talk) 06:33, 13 December 2024 (UTC)
I'm doing a GA review of the article on Kiddush levana, a Jewish ritual that has relatively little coverage in secondary journalistic or academic sources.

The article had relied largely on **rabbinic law sources**, including standard codes of religious law. These are primary sources. Nonetheless, much of the usage might meet the WP:PRIMARY policy conditions, such as: reputably published, used for statements of fact, not interpreting the facts, not the basis for the entire article. Many of these sources are in Hebrew and not available in translation afaik.

As a significant improvement, the article now makes extensive use of an article in the **Encyclopedia Talmudit (ET)** -- about 25 citations. While the ET assumes an Orthodox Jewish standpoint, it is a highly regarded secondary source and aims to present a variety of (Orthodox) views. The ET is also in Hebrew (afaik there's an English translation but I don't have access).

Questions:

1.   Are there any WP:RS objections to using **Encyclopedia Talmudit** extensively in this article? (There are sufficient other sources for notability, etc.)
2.   Is it acceptable to use **rabbinic law sources**, as long as the WP:PRIMARY conditions (above) are fulfilled?
3.   Is it acceptable to use **multiple citations** for specific sentences, so the reader can see both the ET article as well as the specific rabbinic sources that the ET mentions? (I think this will be helpful to many readers.)

Here's a question that's not about WP:RS, but related: For the rabbinic law sources, may Wikipedia citations rely on the standard format? Even in many academic texts, the citations do not mention the specific publisher or (re-)publication date of rabbinic sources. Thanks for your consideration and responsiveness. ProfGray (talk) 20:57, 12 December 2024 (UTC)

There is somewhere an essay or policy called WP:RELIGIOUSTEXT. I don't remember actually what it's called. (That's a redlink). But I'd say ET looks reliable and good to use, as long as you keep it in mind that it's an Orthodox source so it shouldn't be used to write about secular topics or, may be biased when it comes to Orthodox views of secularism or other opinions that might be stated as fact from an Orthodox POV. But bottom line should be reliable for facts that aren't controversial or political, and for analysis that goes beyond that of a primary source as long as caution is used for potential biases. **Andre**🚐21:04, 12 December 2024 (UTC)Thanks. So far I've found: Template:Religious text primary. Not finding an essay or policy (though I vaguely remember one from long ago). Sounds like you answered my Q1 with support for ET use, which means the page can avoid this template. Any thoughts about q #3? ProfGray (talk) 21:19, 12 December 2024 (UTC)I agree that WP:CITEBUNDLEing or adding multiple cites to support the analysis with the primary source is a good idea. **Andre**🚐21:23, 12 December 2024 (UTC)WP:RSPSCRIPTURE, perhaps? Or WP:RNPOV? Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 08:38, 13 December 2024 (UTC)Thanks for those links, @Gråbergs Gråa Sång, but these rabbinic law sources are not scripture, so thankfully they've much less interpretive range and they're much easier to paraphrase factually. At this point, most key points based on such primary sources are backed up by _Encyclopedia Talmudit_. It's true the article depends heavily on Hebrew sources, but that's allowable. I will do a spot check, for GA review, and there are many other Hebrew-reading editors who can correct mistakes, as with any WP article. // Belated @Dovidroth ping. ProfGray (talk) 14:45, 13 December 2024 (UTC)
Discussion regarding Game Science has grown into an intense deadlock where the other editor insists that I have not read their arguments. I would appreciate your comment at Talk:Game Science#Interview-based edits. Aaron Liu (talk) 18:50, 13 December 2024 (UTC)

The article Jackal (The Day of the Jackal) seems to consist almost entirely of OR. As of the most recent edit as I'm writing this, of the 10 references, 8 are to the original text, 1 is to an article about the movie, and only 1 article actually has any coverage of the character separate from the film/book (though even there it's not even the primary topic). I considered nominating it for deletion, but I paused as the article has existed since 2006. It's hard to differentiate coverage of the character from the film so I'm not sure what the relevant guidelines here would be and would appreciate any advice on how to proceed. This is purely speculative, but it's also possible that there may be some COI editing from the TV network given there is a new series out now about this character. An edit I made removing some content that was unsourced and pure OR speculation about the character was reverted by an IP with zero edits before that, which came across as very odd to me and reminiscent of confirmed cases of COI editing from studios I've seen previously on other film/TV articles. 🌸⁠wasianpower⁠🌸 (talk•contribs) 19:05, 17 December 2024 (UTC)

There's a guideline for writing about novel plots: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Novels#Plot. I interpret that section to allow Wikipedians to forthrightly describe/state the plot of a novel without citing that out to external sources (other than the novel itself). In other words, it's not considered to be WP:OR to do that. But you have to do it well (as described in that section). The plot summary in the Jackal (The Day of the Jackal) could use improvement (and a lot of shortening) but that's a separate issue from whether it is WP:OR. My two cents. Novellasyes (talk) 22:19, 17 December 2024 (UTC)It definitely shouldn't be written like this, but there are hundreds of thousands if not millions of articles with sourcing this bad. If OR is removed, then it's the responsibility of the person restoring it to provide a reliable source with it, so you're in the right to challenge their restoration. The big ugly alien (talk) 23:14, 17 December 2024 (UTC)Plot summaries are meant to be concise, at the moment this is anything but concise. -- LCU**A ctively D isinterested**_«@» °∆t°_ 14:01, 26 December 2024 (UTC)
There's an ongoing thread Talk:Team Seas#Re: the ocean pollution additions on a contested edit to the article. The edit in question adds the reported amount of marine debris that enters the ocean from a 2015 study (years before Team Seas), and writes out the connection that This means that during the entire duration of the fundraiser, at least approximately 18,562,500,000 pounds (8,419,808,368 kg) of debris had entered the ocean (or about 61,875% more than what the fundraiser ended up removing). There is clear consensus of a WP:SYNTH violation, as it's inferring a conclusion not explicitly mentioned by the source (that the fundraiser is futile in the grand scheme of things). However, the owning editor has repeatedly argued against the consensus that the others have not adequately shown that it falls under SYNTH, and is assuming bad-faith, stating others are WP:STONEWALLING any true discussion or being dishonest. Would someone mind reviewing the thread and giving their input? --ThomasO1989 (talk) 22:28, 27 December 2024 (UTC)

See also this recent discussion at ANI.MrOllie (talk) 22:36, 27 December 2024 (UTC)Clearly SYNTH; also bludgeoning by this point. I've left this edit, which I hope will help resolve the situation. Mathglot (talk) 07:04, 29 December 2024 (UTC)(Non-administrator comment)When challenged provide a direct quote from the source that supports the (amended) proposed edit, it was dismissed with "I linked it, you can read it yourself." They have completely failed to comply with verifiability policy. The discussion has gone endlessly with multiple editors it's SYNTH and the editor responding "I disagree" with increasing patronization. As shown with the above linked ANI, the editor will not WP:DROPIT on their own accord, so would another party kindly review and potentially close the thread? ThomasO1989 (talk) 03:56, 30 December 2024 (UTC)
Editors are invited to comment at WT:WA §Excessive out-of-scope information and SYN on Esperance articles re traditional ownership on item (2) as to whether the statement that "Merivale are on the traditional land of the Njunga" is synthesis. Mitch Ames (talk) 12:49, 7 January 2025 (UTC)

[27] I'd like a third opinion as to whether content added by this edit falls under original research. Traumnovelle (talk) 00:40, 10 January 2025 (UTC)

Hello, I looked at it but did not see anything obvious, can you explain what makes you think it could be OR? _**Choucas Bleu🐦‍⬛**_ 16:38, 11 January 2025 (UTC)The article has changed a bit but for example this passage: In 1844, that land was transferred to Robert Hunt, who primarily used it tp harvest kauri gum deposits. is sourced to: [28] there is no mention of the specific land that Hunt bought, nor mention of the land in question being Bayswater. It also contains no references to Kauri gum.The claim of the first ferry departure is sourced to this: [29] which makes no claim of it being first and it is an advertisement.There are other examples but typically most of the claims go beyond what the source states and involve interpretation of them. Traumnovelle (talk) 20:29, 11 January 2025 (UTC)
Numerous paragraghs of substantial length in Video game music have no sources; nothing cited, no references given. I have tagged several of these in this section: Early_digital_synthesis_and_sampling and am interested to learn if that content represents "original research". azwaldo (talk) 00:54, 21 January 2025 (UTC)

Strictly speaking, we define original research as claims that aren't verifiable in reliable sources. Merely uncited material can be often be (and is usually encouraged to be) cited rather than removed. However, culture trivia like this is often of marginal utility or otherwise unencyclopedic even if it is verifiable, but these need to be weighed individually. **Remsense**‥**论**01:06, 21 January 2025 (UTC)Got it. Unverified is not unverifiable. So much to say that is lacking support...seemed it might be personal accounting. Thanks for the quick reply. azwaldo (talk) 02:59, 21 January 2025 (UTC)
**Russian invasion of Ukraine** has an RfC for possible consensus. A discussion is taking place. If you would like to participate in the discussion, you are invited to add your comments on the **discussion page**. Thank you. Particularly, the discussion touches on whether or not inclusion of Belarus in the infobox is based on original research. FOARP (talk) 17:01, 28 January 2025 (UTC)
