Title: Pot smokers prefer McDonald's

URL Source: https://katv.com/news/offbeat/pot-smokers-prefer-mcdonalds

Published Time: 2017-09-28T07:44:40.000-05:00

Markdown Content:
Fast-food sales are up in states where marijuana is legal. Cannabis has been shown to increase users’ appetite, sending many customers of legalized dispensaries to fast-food chains, according to a new study by Green Market Report and Consumer Research around cannabis.

Forty-three percent of legal-marijuana users ate at a McDonald’s when experiencing the munchies. Eighteen percent ate at Taco Bell.

Wendy’s came in third place with 17.8%, just barely beating Burger King at 17.6%. Subway ranked in fifth at a tiny 8.7% compared to the previous four spots. Kentucky Fried Chicken hit the list at number six with only 5.5% going to eat there over the past four weeks.

The additional fast food names in the top ten list were Arby’s, Chick-Fil-A, Jack-In-The-Box and Carl’s Jr. (in that order).

“McDonald’s wins by virtue of the sheer number of locations – by default really,” said Jeff Stein, Vice President of Consumer Research Around Cannabis. “Those competitors which better understanding cannabis users and their consumer habits can certainly close the gap by integrating what they learn through their marketing efforts.”

As cannabis is known for its appetite inducing side effect, which is one of its most beneficial qualities for those suffering from diseases that hinder appetite or take medication that make it difficult to eat, understanding the spending habits of consumers is critical.

3.5K

Boy defies terminal illness to show livestock at Arkansas State Fair

Thousands of Texas cybersecurity jobs going unfilled
----------------------------------------------------

There are 21,000 available cybersecurity jobs available in Texas. Cyber Seek says security engineers and analysts are most in demand, and the fact they are going unfilled is dangerous. Nationwide, almost 300,000 cybersecurity jobs are open right now.

Equifax will let consumers lock or unlock access to their credit data
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Equifax will debut a new service that will permanently give consumers the ability to freeze and unfreeze their credit for free. The service will be introduced by January 31, according to the new CEO. The company will also extend the sign-up period for TrustedID Premier, the free credit monitoring service it’s offering all U.S. consumers.

Wealth Gap
----------

Black and Latino households had the biggest gain in wealth during the economic recovery. Federal Reserve data says the recovery is widespread, but significant wealth gaps still continue between whites and minorities.

Apple X not for kids
--------------------

Apple says children and twins shouldn’t use its facial ID recognition feature. The fine print was first discovered by the Guardian in a face ID security document published by Apple on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the iPhone X is reportedly facing production delays involving the 3D sensor manufacturing process.
