Title: Corteva 2022 Sustainability and ESG Report

URL Source: https://www.corteva.com/content/dam/dpagco/corteva/global/corporate/files/sustainability/DOC-Corteva_2022_Sustainability_and_ESG_Report-Global.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 07 Aug 2023 14:34:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 103

Markdown Content:
# Sustainability & ESG Report 

# 2022 Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 2Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Introduction  3

Message from Chuck Magro, Chief Executive Officer  4Message from Sam Eathington, Chief Technology & Digital Officer  5Q&A with Brook Cunningham, Chief Strategy Officer  6

Executive Summary  7

Our Vision  8Our Actions & Impact  9Our Awards & Recognitions  10 Our Advantaged Product Highlights  11 

Our Business  13 

Business Overview  14 Strategy Based on Sustainability  15 

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  16 

Sustainable Innovation  18 Biodiversity  23 Climate  26 Inclusion, Diversity & Equity  28 

ESG Disclosures  32 

Sustainability & ESG Governance  34 Environment  43 Social  69 

ESG Indexes  83 

GRI Content Index  84 SASB Index  93 COP Index  96 TCFD Index  98 UN SDG Index  99 Additional References  100 

# Table of Contents This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and may be identified by their use of words like “targets,” “plans,” “expects,” “will,” “believes,” “intends,” “estimates,” or other words of similar meaning. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including statements about Corteva’s sustainability and ESG goals, targets, business plans, product development, regulatory approvals, and environmental matters, are forward-looking statements, which are based on certain assumptions and expectations of future events which may not be accurate or realized and are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those identified in Corteva’s SEC filings. Introduction 

# 1

3Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 4Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction   

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 4Introduction
> Message from CEO Message from CTO Q&A

Message from Chuck Magro, Chief Executive Officer 

Dear Stakeholders, At Corteva Agriscience, sustainability is at the heart of our business. I am proud to lead an organization that applies the full power of its talented employees, deep innovation expertise, and global reach toward solving complex global challenges, all while preserving the long-term health and viability of farmland and other natural resources. It is an exciting time to be in the agriculture industry. Through continuous development of new technologies and practices, farmers are producing more with fewer resources. Sustainable innovation is helping farms flourish while identifying opportunities to reduce agriculture’s overall environmental footprint. I believe we are just getting started in terms of what science can do to transform global food and fuel production. Last year’s events, however, added even more stress to our systems. The aftereffects of the pandemic and the bottleneck it put on our supply chains and labor market are still prevalent. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has pressured global food security and catalyzed government policies to accelerate the pace of the energy transition, including renewable fuel adoption. Farmers are also seeing new weed, insect, and disease threats in their fields. As a result, the role and expectations of agriculture are changing, and Corteva is responding. In this year’s report, we are sharing our commitments in the four focus areas we introduced in 2022, including sustainable innovation; biodiversity; greenhouse gas emissions; and inclusion, diversity and equity ("ID&E"). Our commitments in these areas underpin our strategy and support Corteva’s aspiration to become the leader of innovative, sustainable solutions for farmers worldwide, today, and tomorrow. At our core, we are an agriculture technology company focused on developing solutions that empower the global agriculture ecosystem and nurture the planet, while concurrently improving our own operational carbon footprint. Corteva can only accomplish this through our people, who are the most important differentiator we have, and by collaborating with like-minded partners across the food and fuel ecosystem. We’re focused on building a culture of belonging and increased representation to drive progress and strengthen our ability to serve customers. Corteva’s mission is to enrich the lives of those who produce and those who consume, ensuring progress for generations to come. That statement continues to inspire me and Corteva colleagues around the world to advance the environmental, social, and economic sustainability of farms and agriculture. I’m honored to be part of bringing forward the future of farming, today. Chuck Magro Chief Executive Officer 

# Corteva’s mission is to enrich the lives of those who produce and those who consume, ensuring progress for generations to come. 5Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction   

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 5Introduction Message from CEO Message from CTO Q&A

In addition, we’ve developed a unique solution to consolidate multiple disease-resistant genes in one location. A sort of suitcase of genes that we’re moving to the best spot for yield protection. It provides disease resistance using the natural genes that already exist in the plant, and it lets our plant breeders increase yield potential at a faster pace. This can reduce the amount of land needed for global food production while minimizing environmental impact. In our crop protection pipeline, we are building collaborations and developing the next generation of sustainably-advantaged products, including biologicals that work alongside existing products for yield protection. For example, in 2022 we introduced Sosdia™ Stress, a biostimulant that enhances crop resilience for stresses such as drought and excessive heat or sunlight, while also letting farmers reduce their water use. The availability of these sustainable solutions to farmers is dependent on timely regulatory approvals, which remains a key bottleneck to accelerating their adoption and impact. Our innovation engine is delivering solutions that give farmers more options to improve yield potential and minimize inputs to build whole-farm systems that are strong and stable. Solutions inspired by nature. Solutions that empower our world’s farmers to be more productive, sustainable, and resilient, season after season. Sam Eathington Chief Technology & Digital Officer 

# Sustainable innovation is the path forward. We can make quantum leaps when we use technology in meaningful ways to meet farmers’ needs today and anticipate the challenges of tomorrow. 

Message from Sam Eathington, Ph.D., Chief Technology & Digital Officer 

It’s a pivotal time in agriculture. The future of food production hinges on delivering new tools and technologies to farmers that help solve farm- and field-level challenges while improving overall sustainability. We must innovate to ensure a safe, nutritious, and affordable food supply is available to meet the world's increasing needs. At Corteva Agriscience, our Research and Development ("R&D") teams are focused on developing sustainable solutions that increase farm productivity and profitability potential while improving resilience to increasing weed, insect, disease, and extreme weather pressures, and protecting our natural resources. 

As part of our innovation process, we’ve committed that every new Corteva solution from our pipeline must meet our sustainability criteria by 2025. These criteria are embedded in each stage of our product development and advancement process. I'm pleased to share an update on our progress in this report. In our seed pipeline, we’re building on our Pioneer ® brand's 100-year breeding history with advanced breeding techniques like gene editing to unlock additional power of native genetics to improve yield potential, enhance disease resistance, and build new value-added seed protein and oil products. These products will not only enhance the availability and quality of crops for consumer applications, but also increase feedstocks for the expanding renewable fuels market. We are committed to delivering technologies that enable farmers to boost productivity and sustainability on their land while contributing to the supply of less carbon-intensive fuels. 6Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction   

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 6Introduction Message from CEO Message from CTO Q&A

Q&A with Brook Cunningham, Chief Strategy Officer Brook Cunningham joined Corteva Agriscience in December of 2022 as Senior Vice President, Chief Strategy Officer. 

Her responsibilities include leading the company’s efforts in enterprise corporate strategy, mergers and acquisitions, sustainability, and strategic intelligence. Prior to joining Corteva, Cunningham was Managing Director and Head of Global Agribusiness and Nutrition at Lazard, a global investment banking firm. At Lazard, Cunningham advised companies on matters involving corporate strategy, mergers and acquisitions, business separations, sales, strategic investments, corporate finance and capital That includes the responsibility to help not only feed and fuel the world, but also enrich the lives of those who produce and those who consume, ensuring progress for generations to come. It includes mitigating the impacts of our own operational footprint on the environment and society at large, and also creating new crop technologies to enable agriculture to deliver solutions to issues like climate change and food security in ways that also protect biodiversity, promote rural development, and support ID&E. As a result, sustainability must be a central pillar of every strategic choice we make at Corteva. We are committed to delivering long-term growth and value creation to our customers, shareholders, and broader stakeholders in ways that uphold our responsibilities in a rapidly-evolving market. 

How is Corteva demonstrating its focus on sustainability through its strategic choices? 

At Corteva, we are making capital allocation decisions that directly align with our sustainability goals and corporate values. We are increasing our investments in R&D 

to advance and accelerate our discovery and commercialization of new sustainably-advantaged and digitally-enabled seed, crop protection, and plant health technologies. 

structure, capital formation, ESG, and shareholder engagement, among others. 

What brought you to Corteva? 

Through my work as a strategic and financial advisor to companies across the agriculture and nutrition sector, I developed a deep appreciation for the critical role companies like Corteva play in feeding and fueling our world. Joining Corteva’s executive leadership team has positioned me to make a direct impact on the organization’s strategic direction and execution, and our collective efforts to address some of the most significant challenges and opportunities facing our global population. There is a contagious commitment across this company to deliver the power of our people, sustainable innovation capabilities, and global reach to our customers and stakeholders via new technologies that will help us to increase crop production while using fewer resources. It isn’t just talk – sustainability truly is at the core of everything we do at Corteva, just as it is for our customers, who are focused on ensuring their farms remain sustainable and profitable for the next generation. There is simply nowhere else I would rather be. 

How does sustainability fit into Corteva’s corporate strategy? 

As a global leader in the agriculture sector, we believe we have unique responsibilities as it pertains to sustainability. We are investing substantial capital to scale our capabilities in the biologicals market, which is projected to be the fastest-growing segment in the crop protection industry over the next decade. Our recent acquisitions of Stoller Group, Inc. and Symborg Corporate S.L. have positioned Corteva as one of the largest biological plant health companies in the world, and provided us with an even stronger foundation upon which to propel continued growth. We are establishing strategic partnerships with companies across the agriculture and energy ecosystems to build new value chains to feed and fuel the world more sustainably. It will take an integrated, collaborative, and global approach to tackle these issues. Corteva is leading by example through strategic actions like our partnership with Bunge and Chevron to deliver a proprietary winter canola hybrid seed technology to the U.S. South. This new double-cropping system will enhance U.S. biofuel feedstock production while creating value and optionality for Corteva customers. These are just a few examples. At Corteva, sustainability isn’t a byproduct of our work. It’s the result of intentional integration into our strategic choices and how we operate. Executive Summary 

# 2

7Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 8Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 8Our Vision Our Actions & Impact Our Awards & Recognitions Our Advantaged Product Highlights

The world is at a challenging juncture. Our global population is growing. The planet continues to experience the impacts of climate change in the form of more extreme weather, shifting rainfall patterns, and rising temperatures. Global conflicts, including Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, have increased pressure on food and energy security. Agriculture has a history of rising to such challenges, and is again being called upon to act. Science and technology must continue to provide farmers with the tools they need to feed and fuel the world while minimizing environmental impacts. At Corteva Agriscience (the “Company”), we believe our capabilities, expertise, and commitment to serving our customers position us to help solve these pressing issues. We are proud of the critical role we play, and as we move along this journey, are optimistic about our ability to drive ongoing progress in the following areas: sustainable innovation, climate, biodiversity, and ID&E. Farmers require more sustainable solutions that help drive yield and production resiliency, and we are continuing to move our portfolio pipeline toward sustainably-advantaged products to meet those needs. We are accelerating our efforts to give farmers more choices to combat their unique challenges. At Corteva, we focus our people, resources, and energy on enriching the lives of those who produce and those who consume. We are determined to help solve some of the biggest challenges facing the environment. We must move quickly and deliberately. Our communities depend on it. 

# Our Vision 

We are committed to boldly embracing the power of inclusion, diversity, and equity to enrich the lives of our employees and supply base to strengthen the performance of our Company while advancing equity in agriculture. 

Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

We are committed to taking steps to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions ("GHG") footprint through a 65% intensity reduction for Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030, consistent with the 1.5 degrees Celsius (“°C”) pathway identified in the Paris Agreement. 

Climate 

We are committed to helping support biodiversity and outcomes aligned to regenerative agriculture on 25 million acres in biomes where we work and sell our products by 2030. We will use a combined approach focused on product and productivity impacts using Corteva’s technologies, partnerships with organizations that share our vision, and improvements to our own Corteva operations. 

Biodiversity 

We are committed to 100% of newly-developed Corteva solutions in our pipeline meeting our sustainability criteria by 2025. We create innovative seed and crop health solutions along with digital insights that enable farmers to increase productivity and profitability potential, provide more environmentally-friendly solutions, and improve resilience to mounting weed, insect, disease, and weather pressures. 

Sustainable Innovation 

Global yields have increased by 30% in the last 20 years, allowing us to produce 40% more food with fewer resources and environmental impacts. The global population is expected to reach 8.6 billion in 2030, 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100. Crop science innovation will be critical to feeding and fueling the world sustainably. 

Agriculture is once again being called upon to ensure food and energy security. Corteva is responding with clear goals to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. 

That has prevented ~240 million hectares from being used in crop production. That's equivalent to the average harvested area in the entire Western Hemisphere, and >140 billion metric tons of annually avoided emissions of CO 2 equivalent. 

# Key Global Challenges Corteva's Commitment to Provide Solutions 

#   Sustainable Innovation 3& Product Stewardship Goals & Commitments Code of Conduct Values Proactive Stakeholder Engagement Board & Executive Leadership Team Ownership and Incentives 

> 1Improved genetic gain and yield potential helps prevent additional land-use change. 2Corteva is committed to a 65% intensity reduction target (42% absolute reduction target) for Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030, consistent with the 1.5°C pathway identified in the Paris Agreement. 3Aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ("UN SDGs").
> 9

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 9

Our Vision Our Actions & Impact Our Awards & Recognitions Our Advantaged Product Highlights 

# Our Actions and Impact 

Climate 

Biodiversity Sustainable Innovation 

# Our Actions 2022 Examples Impact ESG + Sustainability Governance and Disclosure 

Research and Development Energy Reduction Initiatives Creating a Culture of Belonging New Products & Systems Biologicals Mergers and Acquisitions Efficiency Gains Investing in Talent and Diverse Representation Improved Genetic Gain and Yield Potential 1Strategic Partnerships Strategic Renewable Energy Procurement Driving External Value Chain Impacts Improved Practices at Corteva Agriscience Sites Strategic Partnerships 

S Food and Energy Security 

S Disease Resistance 

S Drought and Heat Resiliency 

S Water-use Efficiency 

S Favorable Waste Circularity 

S Biodiversity Practices 

S Farmer Profitability 

S Industry-wide ID&E Beneficial to Soil Balance EPA Endangered Species Act Registration Decreased Scope 1 & 2 Emissions Intensity Ratio 2Waialua, HI Parent Seed Farm Technology-driven Biome Preservation Piloted GHG Protocol Land Sector and Removals Guidance Increased global female and U.S. minority representation Increased global spend with small businesses and diverse suppliers Increased share of women in management positions 

T Carbon Emissions 

T Land-use Change 

T Food Waste 

T Use Rates 

T Natural Resource Impacts 

+

+ +Offiset 100% of electricity-related GHG emissions at Indianapolis headquarters via Renewable Energy Certificates ("RECs") • Breeding  • Gene Editing  • Digital/Data-driven Outcomes • Biotech Traits  • Sosdia™ Stress  • Rinskor™ active Pheasants Forever & Quail Forever Partnerships 

Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Winter Canola/double-cropping System Leading Global Biologicals Platform 

+ +10 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 10 Our Vision Our Actions & Impact Our Awards & Recognitions Our Advantaged Product Highlights

Crop Science Award in the “Best Industry Collaboration” category, together with BASF Agricultural Solutions and M.S. Technologies L.L.C., for the collaboration on a mutually beneficial trait licensing agreement 

Human Rights Campaign: Best Place to Work for LGBTQ+ Equality – received perfect scores on the Corporate Equality Index in the U.S., Mexico, and Brazil 

Manufacturing Leadership Awards from the National Association of Manufacturers , including: • Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Award for agricultural product manufacturing improvement via advanced analytics • Operational Excellence Award for Isoclast ® active capacity expansion and yield improvement project • Sustainability and the Circular Economy Award for use of advanced technology in the product manufacturing for the Company’s Reklemel™ active technology 

Just Capital’s List of Most Just Companies of 2022 – included in the JUST ETF / JULCD Index for scoring in the top 50% of the Russell 1000 

S&P Global Corporate Sustainability Assessment – ranked in the top 93% of the Chemicals sector as of October 2022 

Newsweek’s America’s Most Responsible Companies 2023 – ranked 25 out of 500 companies and fourth out of the 55 Materials and Chemical companies 

WE Connect International: Global Champion for Supplier Diversity & Inclusion – bronze award winner for expanding inclusive spend, policies, and procedures 

# Our Awards & Recognitions 1

Digiday Greater Good Award for World Hunger Product Highlights  for the Global Food Security Index, developed by Economist Impact and supported by Corteva Agriscience  

> 1The above is a representative list of 2022 awards and recognitions received.

11 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

11 Our Vision Our Actions & Impact Our Awards & Recognitions Our Advantaged Product Highlights 

Inatreq™active , a naturally-derived fungicide solution. It offers farmers exceptional curative and protectant disease control on a wide range of pathogens in cereals and bananas, and offers the first new mode of action against Black Sigatoka in bananas in over 15 years. Black Sigatoka attacks banana leaves, causing them to die early, and affects the weight of banana bunches. 1 The disease can result in yield losses of 50% or more and causes premature ripening, which can lead to rot during shipment and seriously limit export opportunities. 2,3 

# Our Advantaged Product Highlights 

Rinskor™active herbicide , a 2018 Green Chemistry Challenge Award Winner, is used to control weeds in rice and other crops. It replaces older synthetic chemistries and is applied to crops at an up to 150 times lower use rate – one that could potentially avoid over 1 million tons of CO2-equivalent over the next five years across the cumulative acres applied. 

Enlist One ® and Enlist Duo ® herbicides were granted seven-year amended registrations by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") following its new process related to the Endangered Species Act ("ESA"). The process confirmed Enlist ® herbicides continue to comply with the ESA and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act. The EPA’s updated assessment, resulted in the addition of targeted risk mitigation measures to Enlist ® herbicide labels, providing additional protections for more endangered species. These updates will help ensure the use of Enlist ® herbicides in accordance with the label and will allow growers to capture the benefits of the Enlist ® weed control system, while also helping protect endangered species. The Enlist ® weed control system  experienced 

a nearly 2 times increase in U.S. acres treated with Enlist ® herbicide from 2021 to 2022. 

## Duo 

1 Helen Tsatsia and Grahame Jackson, “Banana Black Sigatoka (002),” Pacific Pests & Pathogens - Full Size Fact Sheets (Lucid Central), accessed November 11, 2022, https://apps.lucidcentral.org/. 2 Randy Ploetz, “Black Sigatoka of Banana: The Most Important Disease of a Most Important Fruit” (The American Phytopathological Society), accessed November 11, 2022, https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/apsnetfeatures/Pages/BlackSigatoka.aspx. 3 Douglas H. Marín et al., “Black Sigatoka: An Increasing Threat to Banana Cultivation,” PlantDisease 87, no. 3 (March 2003): pp. 208-222, https://doi.org/10.1094/pdis.2003.87.3.208. 12 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 12

Our Vision Our Actions & Impact Our Awards & Recognitions Our Advantaged Product Highlights 

Reduced Stature Corn , one of the most exciting and transformational seed solutions in our pipeline, is being developed using advanced breeding and gene editing. This corn is expected to improve yield potential and make the stalk shorter and stronger, which provides added benefits like increased climate resilience, resistance to extreme weather events, tolerance to higher plant density, better standability, and all-season equipment access to our high-yielding germplasm. 1 All-season access allows farmers to manage inputs such as fertilizer, biologicals, and crop protection, as needed. 

Adavelt™active and Haviza™active , two fungicides that build off the work we’ve advanced with Inatreq active. Both products are currently in our pipeline and have excellent environmental and safety profiles with very low toxicity to birds and insects. Adavelt active controls a wide range of diseases in over 30 crops. Haviza targets Asian soybean rust, a devastating disease with significant impact in South America. 

Utrisha™ N , a natural-origin bio-stimulant. It enables plants to fix nitrogen from the air as a sustainable supplemental nitrogen source with no risk of leaching into water or releasing additional GHG for a variety of crops, including corn, cotton, rice, soybeans, wheat, and alfalfa.  

> 1Pending field trials.

Corteva completed the acquisitions of Stoller Group, Inc. ("Stoller") and Symborg Corporate S.L. ("Symborg") in March 2023. These acquisitions reinforce Corteva’s commitment to providing farmers with environmentally-friendly, sustainable tools that complement evolving farming practices with proven effectiveness, and will be a foundation for accelerated expansion in this area as a core strategic priority. 

# Our Advantaged Product Highlights (continued) Our Business 

# 3

13 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 14 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 14 Business Overview Sustainability in Focus 

# 2022 Environmental and Social Highlights Corteva Agriscience combines industry-leading innovation, high-touch customer engagement, and operational excellence to deliver solutions for the world’s most pressing agriculture challenges. We generate advantaged market preference through our unique distribution strategy, together with our balanced and globally-diverse mix of seed, crop protection and plant health products, and digital expertise. Underlying our business is one of the largest germplasm libraries in the world and some of the most recognized brands in agriculture, including Pioneer ® brand seed, which has been providing product excellence, along with services that have enabled farmers to drive productivity and profitability, for nearly a century. With a technology pipeline well-positioned to drive growth, we are committed to maximizing productivity for farmers, while working with stakeholders across the food and fuel system. Learn more about our seed brands and traits here.  

> 1

Operating EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. See the Appendix (“Regulation G (Non-GAAP Financial Measures)”) of this document for further discussion. Income from continuing operations after income taxes was $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2022. 

# 2022 Financial Highlights U.S. Dollars ("USD") in millions 

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPENSE ("R&D") 

# 33% 21% 23% 21 %IMPROVEMENT IMPROVEMENT REPRESENTING A 6% IMPROVEMENT 

ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL HIGHLIGHTS PROCESS SAFETY INCIDENT SEVERITY RATE (PSISR) DECREASED, REPRESENTING A NEW SUSTAINABLE SOLUTIONS REPRESENT SUSTAINABLY-ADVANTAGED NEW CROP PROTECTION PRODUCTS REPRESENT 

2022 vs 2021 Number per Million Hours Worked of 2022 New Crop Protection Products of 2022 Net Crop Protection Revenue 

SHARE OF WOMEN IN MANAGEMENT POSITIONS INCREASED TO 

2022 vs 2021 as % of Total Workforce 

SCOPE 1 & 2 EMISSIONS INTENSITY RATIO DECREASED, REPRESENTING A 

2022 vs 2020 Kg CO 2 e/$ Net Sales 

# 90 %~

# NET SALES 

# $17,455 

# OPERATING EBITDA 1

# $3,224 

# Business Overview 15 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 15

Business Overview Sustainability in Focus 

At Corteva Agriscience, we understand that the future of global food and fuel production hinges on empowering farmers. This customer-first perspective guides our efforts to deliver differentiated technologies that help farmers be more productive and profitable. 

Our commitment to sustainability is at the heart of our business and strategy, which is designed to meet the global challenges of food security, climate change and the energy transition, while driving greater value for farmers and allowing Corteva to reach its full potential. We continuously invest in science-based solutions such as new breeding techniques, and biological plant health solutions to create transformational change by enabling farmers to grow more on the same acres while reducing fertilizer inputs, water usage, and carbon emissions. 

Our efforts to advance measurable progress in our four focus areas leverage our: 

• Strength of technology • Decades of expertise • Global reach and perspective • Desire to achieve a more resilient agriculture ecosystem 

Upstream, downstream, and through our direct operations, we actively engage with stakeholders to guide our journey and shape our sustainability strategy. Corteva’s commitment to sustainability is company-wide, aligns with our values, and connects us with the communities where we live and work. 

# Strategy Based on Sustainability Our Sustainability & ESG Focus 

# 4

16 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 17 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

# Our Sustainability & ESG Goals 

# Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

We are committed to boldly embracing the power of ID&E to enrich the lives of our employees and supply base to strengthen the performance of our Company while advancing equity in agriculture. 

# Climate 

We are committed to taking steps to reduce our greenhouse gas footprint through a 65% intensity reduction for Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030, consistent with the 1.5°C pathway identified in the Paris Agreement. 

# Biodiversity 

We are committed to helping support biodiversity and outcomes aligned to regenerative agriculture on 25 million acres in biomes where we work and sell our products by 2030. 

# Sustainable Innovation 

We are committed to 100% of newly developed Corteva solutions in our pipeline will meet our sustainability criteria by 2025. 18 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

of Stoller and Symborg Corporate S.L. Our portfolio is led by a strong foundation of work that has earned us six Green Chemistry Challenge Awards from the U.S. EPA; more than any other agricultural input company. 

We are also continually innovating to improve our manufacturing processes for reduced environmental impact. For example, since launch, the relative process greenness 1 score for Rinskor™ active production has increased by over 224% and is in the top 1% of referenced production routes. Digitally-Enabled 

Corteva’s integrated digital tools help farmers optimize their seed and crop protection investments and drive sustainable farming solutions. We provide farmers with enhanced visibility into their fields and production systems so they can maximize productivity while meeting their sustainability objectives. These tools ensure the right products are applied to the right acre at the right time to maximize success while protecting farmland for generations to come. 

# Sustainable Innovation 1 Roschangar, F. et. al. Improved iGAL 2.0 Metric Empowers Pharmaceutical Scientists to Make Meaningful Contributions to United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 12. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 2022 10 (16), 5148-5162 2 Must meet baseline requirements and deliver at least one notable sustainability advantage while maintaining parity compared to other products in the market today. Every Corteva Agriscience innovation in our pipeline must meet our sustainability criteria by 2025. 

Through this commitment, we’re ensuring that each new product from our pipeline meets our stringent baseline requirements and also delivers at least one notable sustainability advantage aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ("UN SDGs"). Corteva is focused on delivering higher-yielding climate and disease-resistant seeds, naturally-derived and sustainably-advantaged crop protection and plant health products, and other technologies and solutions that protect water, soil, and biodiversity while enhancing farm productivity and profitability. 

Sustainability Criteria 2

Improve water quality Increase water use efficiency Reduce food waste Use safer materials in manufacturing and finished products Use sustainably sourced renewable inputs Reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions Improve soil quality and restore degraded land Protect biodiversity and ecosystems Increase access to safe, nutritious, and sufficient food Support genetic diversity of seeds and cultivated plants Improve resilience of agricultural production Reduce waste and improve product application efficiency 

Seed 

For more than 100 years, Corteva has been a global leader in germplasm innovation. Current hybrids, compared to those from the 1940s, produce more overall yield, including three times more under drought stress, three times more per inch of water, and at least two and half times more under nitrogen stress. Crop Protection 

We are accelerating our journey to more sustainable crop protection and plant health concepts through industry-leading innovations in herbicides, insecticides, nematicides, fungicides, seed applied technologies, and nitrogen stabilizers. Additionally, we have reinforced our commitment to provide farmers with environmentally-friendly and sustainable plant health and nutrition tools using biological solutions through our recent acquisitions 19 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 19 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Delivering More Sustainable Solutions to Customers 

Drawing on a legacy of green chemistry and a century of applied agronomy to increase yields, Corteva Agriscience is determined to solve the biggest challenges facing crop production and the environment. We work with farmers to understand how to transform our science into actionable solutions that work for them while protecting the natural resources that agriculture and society rely on. Enabling farmers to adopt new regenerative and climate-positive farming practices is part of our unwavering mission to establish a more food- and fuel-secure world. 

Seed 

We are focused on increasing the potential of current levels of crop productivity by advancing innovations in trait-enabled germplasm. We are complementing those innovations with new phenotypes, trait combinations, and digital recommendations that work in combination to push productivity and environmental robustness to new heights. With a solutions-based focus on genetics, biotechnology, and data-driven insights, Corteva strives to be the leader in delivering seed products that enhance the sustainability of crop production by maintaining or increasing yields while minimizing resource usage. 

Crop Protection 

Corteva uses predictive assays, coupled with analytics and artificial intelligence, to intentionally design active ingredients and products that are effective, environmentally-friendly, and sustainable. We are expanding our portfolio of naturally-derived crop protection and plant health options, including growing our suite of biological products that complement synthetic chemistry-derived solutions. This commitment was underscored by our recent acquisitions of Stoller and Symborg Corporate S.L., which have positioned Corteva as one of the largest biological plant health companies in the world. Additionally, we continue to seek more sustainable delivery systems and technologies that reduce drift and waste, delivering crop protection solutions in a more sustainable way. 

Accounting for the GHG Reduction Benefits 

Our climate initiatives include the development of sustainably-advantaged seed and crop protection products that enable farmers to produce more crops with lower carbon intensity. Our new chemistries power crop protection products with effective low use rates, reducing both the GHG emissions handprint and footprint of these solutions on a per acre basis. These products must meet the needs of farmers facing the effects of climate-exacerbated disease and pest pressures. Further, we continue to develop new seed products with higher genetic gain potential to enable farmers to grow more without expanding the amount of farmland in production. 

# Capabilities for Advancing Innovation 

"Without the improvements in agriculture over the last 100 years, we would need seven times more land converted to farmland than what is in production today." 

Sam Eathington, Chief Technology & Digital Officer Launching/Launched  Sustainability Architecture  UN Sustainable Development Goals Corteva's Criteria Improve Resilience of Agricultural Production Increase Water-use Efficiency Reduce Greenhouse Gas ("GHG") Emissions Protect Biodiversity and Ecosystems 

Seed Sustainable Innovation Criteria Standard 

Improve Yield Measured by Genetic Gain Improve Crop Productivity per Unit of Water, Compared to Current Standard Reduce GHG vs. Baseline Standard Production Seed Products That Improve or Sustain Safety on Non-Target Organisms Conkesta ® E3 Soybeans Cotton Widestrike ® 3 Enlist ® 1Direct Seeded Rice Enlist ® E3 Soybeans Inzen ® trait Sorghum LibertyLink ® Canola PowerCore ® Corn PowerCore ® Ultra Enlist ® Corn Qrome ® Corn Roundup Ready 2 Xtend ®+ LibertyLink ® Soybeans Winter Canola Sclerotinia Protector 

> 20

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 20

Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

The Power of Applied Agriscience 

Corteva Agriscience’s R&D teams harness the power of scientific innovation and applied know-how to develop powerful solutions for farmers around the world. By innovating with advanced breeding techniques and sustainably-advantaged crop protection and plant health solutions, we aim to create transformational change. We believe no farmer should have to make trade-offs with productivity, sustainability, financial security, or environmental integrity. We work in the lab and on the land to deliver technologies that farmers can use to help improve their operations for generations to come.  Our scientists apply advanced agriscience in R&D facilities and global field trials to build strong and enduring farm systems that adhere to our rigorous sustainability criteria. In our 2021 Sustainability Report we noted approximately 90% of our new crop protection products met our sustainable innovation criteria. In 2022, 100% of our new seed product offerings met our sustainable innovation criteria. 

# Industry-Leading R&D Paving the Way for Sustainable Agriculture 

# For new Corteva seed products, we have established thresholds for each sustainable innovation criteria to deliver a notable sustainability advantage. 21 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 21

Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

Rinskor™ active herbicide, a 2018 Green Chemistry Challenge Award Winner, has a favorable environmental and toxicological profile that delivers effective post-emergent control of key weeds in rice crops and other crop systems. This herbicide’s unique chemical characteristics provide an alternative weed management tool — including the control of species that have developed resistance to other commonly used modes of action. It has a short half-life and degrades quickly in soil, contributing to less environmental impact. Rinksor’s effective low use rate results in a lower amount of active ingredient needed for control. Rinskor can replace older synthetic chemistries and can be used at a 150 times lower use rate, potentially avoiding over 1 million tons of CO 2- equivalent over the next 5 years. Reklemel™ active is a nematicide that is applied at use rates up to 50 times lower than other nematicides and protects against nematode damage without disrupting the healthy balance of the soil. It works in harmony with a range of beneficial soil organisms, and was accepted for review under the U.S. EPA Office of Pesticide Program’s Conventional “Reduced Risk” Pesticide Program. Reklemel also received a Sustainability and the Circular Economy Award from the National Association of Manufacturers. The lower use rate translates to lower GHG emissions (cradle to gate) per hectare, potentially avoiding more than 500M Kg of CO2-equivalent  emissions over the next five years 1 .1 Pending regulatory approvals 

# Sustainable Innovation 

CO 2-Equivalency 

> 500M kg 

Environmental Load 

> 200M kg 

Use Rates vs. Other Nematicides Up to 50X less 

# DECREASED DECREASED Metam K 45-350 kg 40-280 kg 0.25-2.4 kg 1,3-Dichloropropene 

*Use rate (kg a. / ha) nematode control 

CO 2-Equivalency 

~ 1.5B kg 

Environmental Load 

> 100M kg 

Use Rates vs. Other Herbicides Up to 150X less 

Propanil 2,4-D Triclopyr 3300-7600 g 500-800 g 160-240 g 10-30 g 

*Use rate (g a.i / ha) in rice 

Rinskor™ active Reklemel™ active C0 202Proline K + K +

## Stoma 

C0 202

## K+K+Stoma 

## With Sosdia Stress Without Sosdia Stress      

> 22 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 22 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Adavelt™ active is an innovative new naturally-inspired next-generation picolinamide fungicide that has favorable toxicological, environmental, and regulatory profiles, providing control to protect both yield and profitability. Adavelt controls a wide range of pathogens, delivering effective control on many crops grown globally, including cereals, vines, fruits, nuts, and vegetables. This fungicide offers improved efficiency with applications that span multiple growth stages. 

Vorceed™ Enlist ® corn combines next-generation corn rootworm protection with the power of the Enlist ®weed control system to give farmers the flexibility to manage the toughest insects and weeds with minimal physical drift. Vorceed provides drastically reduced root damage vs. non-traited control in moderate to heavy corn rootworm pressure environments, and an approximate 99% reduction in adult emergence of Western and Northern corn rootworm. Vorceed Enlist ®corn utilizes a proprietary technology stack which includes a new rootworm control mode of action for durability while maintaining high yield potential for grain production. 

Conkesta E3 ® technology is part of the Enlist ®weed control system, which launched in Brazil in 2021. An important innovation for farmers in Latin America, Conkesta E3 ® soybeans incorporate broad lepidopteran insect protection with strong genetics as part of the Enlist ® weed control system, which offers maximum flexibility and superior control of broadleaf weeds and grasses while maximizing the potential of the crop yield. 

Sosdia™ Stress is an abiotic stress mitigator that helps reduce yield loss in corn, soybeans, wheat, and additional crops associated with environmentally stressful conditions such as drought, heat, salinity, and ultraviolet light. Sosdia Stress contains proline – a natural amino acid – and potassium to protect plant cells, reduce water loss, and improve the plant’s ability to remove carbon dioxide from the air. It helps crops thrive even under challenging weather conditions. 

Protects During Critical Periods 

By protecting crops during flowering, pollination and early grain fill, yield is preserved. 

Grain and Silage Corn is offered through our seed brands. Each provides products backed by local testing and research to ensure farmers have the right seeds in their fields. These high performing corn hybrids are tailored to drive high forage yields with improved digestibility for livestock; requiring lower feed inputs. In Europe, M3 corn is driving market change by offering highly digestible corn products with high yield resulting in more milk production per acre, all while decreasing CO 2 equivalent emissions compared to traditional corn hybrids. This is a win for food production, energy production, and the environment. 

Reduced Stature Corn in Corteva’s pipeline with commercialization expected mid-decade, is about 60% of the height of standard commercial corn hybrids while maintaining harvestable ear height. The reduced stature improves durability in challenging weather compared to taller hybrids. Additionally, its reduced height will allow for more flexible over-the-top applications of fungicides, insecticides, biologicals, and nitrogen fertilizers - all of which helps farmers get the most from their crop while providing climate change resiliency. 1

AcreNext™ is an integrated direct seeded rice program. The hybrid seed has increased yield, can be planted using mechanized sowing services directly into the field, and is compatible with highly efficient crop protection solutions that do not require flooding fields. This comprehensive offering will help farmers produce healthier rice crops that mature faster with increased yields, while being less water and labor intensive.  

> 1Pending field trails

# Sustainable Innovation  

> TM TM 23

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 23

Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

# Biodiversity We are committed to helping support biodiversity and outcomes aligned to regenerative agriculture on 25 million acres in biomes where we work and sell our products by 2030. We will use a combined approach focused on product and productivity impacts using Corteva Agriscience’s technologies, partnerships with organizations that share our vision, and improvements to our own operations. We will accomplish this through: • Demonstrated biodiversity advantages of our new products and systems 

• Improved genetic gain and yield protection 

helping prevent additional land-use change 

• Partnerships that support conservation and restoration of non-productive, grazing, or marginal land • Corteva facilities and production fields 

adopting more favorable biodiversity practices A biome is defined as an area classified according to the species that live in that location. 24 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 24 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Preserving Biodiversity 

Our planet’s biodiversity reflects the variety of all living species that exist in partnership. Biodiversity is the variety of organisms and micro-organisms that live in and around production systems, sustaining healthy soils, plant pollination, and climate resiliency while driving regenerative agriculture outcomes and preserving habitats. Changes to biodiversity can have wide-ranging effects on yield, productivity, and land availability while affecting the soil, water, and wildlife that enable our food systems. Corteva Agriscience has made a commitment to address biodiversity, for ourselves, for farmers, and for our planet. 

Products Sustainably-advantaged Products 

Corteva offers differentiated and sustainably-advantaged crop protection products to help increase farmer productivity while limiting their impacts to biodiversity and organisms that preserve soil health. Reklemel™ active is a selective nematicide that targets damaging plant-parasitic nematodes without disrupting many beneficial organisms in the soil. Reklemel™ enables root establishment and contributes to healthy crops and high-quality harvests. 

Enlist ® Weed Control System Sets Path for EPA Endangered Species Act Consultations 

Corteva’s Enlist ® One and Enlist ® Duo herbicides – part of the leading Enlist ® weed control system – were granted seven-year amended registrations by the U.S. EPA following the completion of their new consultation process for complying with the Endangered Species Act. These registrations ensure farmers can access these critical weed control solutions that also reduce risks to listed species and their habitats. 

Productivity Reducing Need for Additional Farmland 

Some industry estimates suggest demand for renewable oil may grow to 7-9 billion gallons in North America, and 17 billion gallons, globally, by 2030. To help meet this need, Corteva R&D teams are establishing a novel double-cropping system to incorporate winter canola into the southern U.S. This canola can be processed into oil for renewable fuel without interfering with production of a primary crop for food or fiber. Field trials are underway to confirm the agronomic placement and production practices needed to realize this vision. If successful, farmers could realize added value from a second crop on existing acreage. Winter canola will also serve as a cover crop to improve carbon sequestration. 25 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 25 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Productivity (continued) 

Innovative Plant Breeding Helps Produce More on the Same Land 

With over 100 years of continuous plant breeding experience, we are developing innovative genetic solutions that measurably increase yield and productivity, which can prevent more land from coming into production, globally. By applying advanced gene editing technology such as CRISPR, Corteva Agriscience is developing solutions to address unique regional pest, disease, and climate-related threats that plague farmers. 

Operations Advancing Biodiversity at our Seed Production Facilities 

Our Waialua, Hawaii Parent Seed Farm leverages the latest biotechnology to produce both conventional and genetically-engineered corn seeds for farmers around the world. The 2,200-acre site implemented a diverse cover cropping system for erosion control and beneficial insect refuge, combined with native tree breaks along its slopes and roadways. Drip irrigation, coupled with biological nitrogen and phosphorous enhancers, further support a healthy, productive soil system. With more than one-third of Hawaii’s native plants listed as threatened or endangered1 ,2, protecting this vital biome is critical. 

Partnerships Improving Pollinator and Wildlife Habitats on Non-crop Rights-of-way 

We have partnered with leading conservation non-profits Pheasants Forever and Quail Forever to improve plant and wildlife biodiversity on approximately 5 million acres located across the estimated 35 million acres of rights-of-way and energy corridors in the U.S. Leveraging Corteva’s integrated vegetative management practices, specialists and industry practitioners are developing new technologies and practices for land management professionals, delivering an estimated 14% improvement in land-use change and biodiversity loss. 

Participation in USDA Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Grants 

Corteva is honored to participate in four Climate-Smart Commodities grants, partnering with universities, governments, and non-profit organizations to advance biodiversity, reduce GHG emissions, and support historically-underserved communities. For example, Corteva is working with USA Rice, Ducks Unlimited, and other partners to help rice farmers in the southern U.S. manage critical wetland habitats for migrating waterfowl while implementing climate-smart practices.        

> 1https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/ecosystems/rare-plants/species/. 2https://hawaii-agriculture.com/with-pineapple-and-sugar-production-gone-hawaii-weighs-its-agricultural-future/. 26 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 26 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

# Climate Corteva Agriscience is committed to a 65% intensity reduction target (42% absolute reduction target) for Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030, consistent with the 1.5°C pathway identified in the Paris Agreement. The reduction in Scope 1 and 2 emissions will be achieved through energy reduction initiatives, efficiency gains, and strategic renewable energy procurement opportunities. Learn more about Corteva’s Greenhouse Gas Emission Governance, Risk Management, and Performance .

We are committed to addressing the world’s climate challenges by reducing our own GHG emissions and continuing to create innovative solutions for farmers that are compatible with 1.5°C pathway identified in the Paris Agreement. Our efforts will help farmers produce more food while reducing environmental impact, and contribute to a sustainable agriculture industry for generations to come. 

Implementing Sustainable Emissions Reductions Renewable Energy Certificate ("RECs") 

Through our utility provider, AES Indiana Green Power Initiative, Corteva purchased Renewable Energy Certificates equal to all the electricity consumed at our headquarters in Indianapolis, Indiana in 2022. The purchase of these RECs resulted in a reduction of total global Scope 1 and 2 emissions of approximately 4%. We will continue to evaluate renewable energy opportunities as a component of our GHG reduction strategy to reach our 2030 commitment. 

GHG Protocol Multi-stakeholder Pilot 

Corteva is participating in the global Greenhouse Gas Protocol Land Sector and Removals Guidance pilot, a multi-stakeholder initiative designed to guide companies in the accounting and reporting of land-related GHG emissions and removals. Sponsored by the World Resource Institute and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development and aligned with the Science Based Targets Initiative, the pilot will advance Scope 1-3 reporting transparency while addressing pressing issues around land-use change, land management, and carbon storage in land and product carbon pools. 27 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 27 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Scope 3 Emissions Reporting 

Corteva Agriscience is leveraging its strengths in sustainable innovation and operational effectiveness to drive GHG emission reductions. This means not only investing to meet our science-based Scope 1 and 2 emissions targets, but also developing the next generation of agriculture solutions designed to reduce emissions. This is where we see the largest opportunity to contribute to positive climate outcomes. 

Ongoing stakeholder conversations are helping to develop the mechanisms and technologies to improve the data quality and reliability of Scope 3 emissions reporting within the agriculture and chemical industry. We are working through the Corteva Carbon Initiative and with industry and sustainability thought-leaders to develop standards and accounting practices for emissions reporting  and data collection to reduce the reliance on estimations and address the challenges to efficiently obtain reliable data from a company’s value chain. 

We continue to engage with our stakeholders, including our stockholders, customers, suppliers, regulatory authorities, and industry associations, to develop our emissions priorities. While we don’t expect to have a Scope 3 emissions target in the near term, we plan to stay transparent in our reporting and flexible around our efforts to reduce GHG emissions in the future, while continuing to advocate for GHG emissions-reduction policies and practices. 

Learn more about how we are working with groups including Together for Sustainability (“TfS”) and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (“WBCSD”) to lower emissions through sustainable practices and partnerships. 

Through our stakeholder engagements, we identified a growing interest in further verifiable quantification of our products’ environmental benefits. 

See Measuring the Environmental Life Cycle of Our Products for more information on our journey to demonstrate the benefits of new lower carbon technologies that show positive changes to emissions. 

See Our Focus: Sustainable Innovation and Corteva's Green Chemistry Principles for examples of our lower environmental profile products. Since launching our ID&E strategy in 2021, we have established the building blocks for accelerating our progress in this important area. See more on how these initiatives are are starting to deliver positive results. Corteva collaborated with USAID and ACDI/VOCA in Tanzania between 2011  – 2022 to increase the productivity of 600,000 smallholder farmers by 300% on average. ID&E is foundational to who we are and what we plan to achieve as a Company. 

> 28

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 28

Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

ID&E is core to who we are at Corteva Agriscience and essential to our success. Diverse talents and perspectives fuel curiosity, creativity, and innovation – all of which enhance our ability to provide the best products and solutions for farmers around the world. We are committed to boldly embracing the power of ID&E both within and outside of our company. We strive to enrich the lives of our employees, strengthen our supply base, and heighten the performance of our company, while advancing equity in agriculture. With ongoing support from our Board of Directors and a strong focus from our CEO and Executive Leadership Team, this commitment is critical to our long-term business performance. 

# Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

## The farmers we serve represent a diverse mix of nations, cultures, communities, and crops. To anticipate and meet their needs, our workforce and supply base must mirror that diversity. 

Audrey Grimm , SVP, Chief Human Resources & Diversity Officer 

# +3% +300% +6% Share of women in management positions in revenue-generating functions Productivity of 600,000 smallholder Tanzania farmers Year-over-year increase in women in top management positions 

Our strategy remains focused around three key pillars to advance our ID&E journey: fostering an internal culture of belonging; enhancing the diversity of our workforce; and making an external impact through our work with farmers, suppliers, and other industry stakeholders. In 2022, we increased our global female and U.S. minority employee representation and achieved greater inclusion of small business and diverse suppliers in our global supply base. While we are encouraged by this progress, we recognize that we have more work ahead to continue building momentum in 2023 and beyond. 

since 2011 29 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 29 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Culture of Belonging 

Our internal efforts center around the importance of enabling a diverse culture of inclusion, where processes are equitable, and employees at every level feel a true sense of belonging. For the second consecutive year, we received favorable marks related to belonging on our global employee check-in survey. A comprehensive assessment of our recruitment and hiring practices revealed both strengths and areas of opportunity. We leveraged these insights to develop several new initiatives to further strengthen our ability to attract, develop, and retain diverse talent. Examples include recruiter training to strengthen our sourcing and recruiting capabilities, refinements to our university relations processes, and plans to increase leader awareness and accountability relating to the impact of individual hiring decisions and Corteva Agriscience's enterprise ID&E goals. Membership within our Business Resource Groups ("BRGs") grew by 10% in 2022 with 22% of our employees (including 38.5% of people leaders) belonging to at least one of these groups. 

Diverse Representation 

Enhancing the diversity of our workforce is critical to delivering innovative breakthroughs for farmers. We expanded the scope of our diverse representation goals to include all regular employees (previously salaried only) and are now tracking metrics which more accurately represent our employee base. While our original baselines changed, our five-year targeted percentage increases set in 2021 remain the same. In 2022, we increased global female and U.S. minority representation overall, as well as within the pipeline to leadership, putting us on track to achieve our 2026 representation goals. Additionally, we began to track similar metrics outside of the U.S. where data is available, namely Brazil and South Africa, both of which recorded positive progress within their respective minority employee populations in 2022. 

External Impact 

Throughout the year, we worked to advance ID&E progress beyond our walls by promoting inclusion within our supply base and engaging industry stakeholders in addressing equity challenges in agriculture. We maintained our focus on supplier diversity and increased global spend with small business and diverse suppliers in 2022. We collaborate with 14 non-governmental organization supplier diversity advocacy groups to help foster these efforts. We continued to promote dialogue on these issues within the agriculture industry through the release of four new short films in our documentary series, The Heart of the Farm, which highlights the diversity of the American farmer. The series surpassed 11 million views online as of December 2022. Corteva continues to be acknowledged for making a difference. Examples can be found in the Awards & Recognitions section of this report. 

# 2022: Solidifying Our Actions in Alignment with Our Three Pillars 

Embedding ID&E even more deeply into our business will be crucial to furthering progress and ensuring colleagues at every level feel connected to our aspiration. We are encouraged by the opportunities that lie ahead and look forward to continuing to advance our ID&E commitments. 

Anne Holiday , VP, Global Talent, Culture and Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

## We’ve made solid progress this year. What’s really exciting is that functional, regional, and local teams are starting to take the initiative in areas that directly impact our ID&E goals. Continuing to embed ID&E in all facets of our business will be key as we advance our journey toward becoming a more inclusive, diverse, and equitable company. 30 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

30 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity 

Corteva Agriscience supports nine Business Resource Groups ("BRGs") – each made up of devoted colleagues who give their time and talents to bring others together, celebrate different cultures and heritages, serve our communities, and support activities to accelerate our ID&E progress. BRGs play a significant role in advancing our ID&E strategy and business objectives. As an example, the Corteva Veterans Network ("CVN") recently partnered with our Seed Operations organization on a hiring initiative targeting U.S. veterans. Launched on National Hire a Veteran Day, the 90-day program offered sign-on bonuses for veterans hired and bonuses to the referring employees. We recognize the valuable and unique capabilities veterans bring to our organization and plan to expand this initiative to other areas in 2023. Earlier this year, we launched our ninth BRG in celebration of International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples. Our Global Indigenous Peoples Alliance ("GIPA") was founded by colleagues at our Laurinburg Seed Production Site in Maxton, N.C., where more than 15% of our workforce identifies as Native American. Following a global webcast highlighting the customs and traditions of the Lumbee tribe, colleagues in Maxton hosted tribal leaders to celebrate the launch of the new GIPA BRG. GIPA members continue their important work throughout the Maxton area with rich ties to the community, supporting volunteer activities at the local food bank, and hosting coat and school supply drives for area youth. 

# Business Resource Groups: Supporting Our Company and Colleagues 31 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction    

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 31 Sustainable Innovation Biodiversity Climate Inclusion, Diversity & Equity

Developing Emerging Leaders and Talent in Agriculture ("DELTA") 

Providing equitable growth and development opportunities is a key component of our ID&E aspiration. Corteva Agriscience’s DELTA program offers career development opportunities to underrepresented minorities in the STEM field, helping to nurture a strong, diverse talent pipeline within the agriculture industry. Initiated and led by members of our R&D team, DELTA targets students and postdocs who are interested in a career in agriculture and want to learn more about sustainable and reliable food production. Selected applicants participate in an R&D symposium, share their own research, network with industry professionals, and develop critical skills that are advantageous to any career. Our 2022 symposium provided exceptional talent with exposure to Corteva and resulted in a significant number of scholarships and research grants, as well as full-time and postdoc job offers. 

# ID&E Highlights 

Inspiring the Next Generation of Women in Ag 

Women farmers face a unique set of challenges within agriculture, including access to technology, property, and financing. These issues were highlighted during an event organized by the Corteva and European farmers’ and agri-cooperatives’ union, COPA COGECA, at the European Parliament in Brussels in November 2022. Sponsored by three members of European Parliament, the event was the culmination of Corteva’s “Inspirers” campaign and provided Corteva colleagues and COPA COGECA members with the opportunity to share personal experiences highlighting the challenges and opportunities facing women in agriculture. These insights led to a robust discussion with European policymakers about reducing gender inequality in the sector. Women shared their passion for food and farming, successes in overcoming barriers, and feelings of gratification that come with contributing to a more sustainable and food-secure future. Hear from some of our Corteva Inspirers as they share insights and experiences as women in ag, revealing the breadth of opportunity available within the sector and inspiring the next generation of women to consider future careers in agriculture. Environment, Social, and Governance ("ESG") Disclosures 

# 4

32 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 33 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 33

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

# ESG Disclosures 

Sustainability & ESG Governance  34 

Stakeholder Engagement and Non-Financial ESG Materiality  35 Board of Directors and Board Committee ESG Governance  37 Executive Leadership ESG Governance  38 Additional Governance Topics  41 

Environment  43 

Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance  44 GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance  49 Biodiversity Governance, Risk, and Opportunity Management  61 Water Stewardship  63 Circular Economy  66 

Social  69 

Environment, Health, Safety, & Security ("EHS&S") Governance, Risk Management, and Performance  70 ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance  73 Empowering and Enriching the Lives of Smallholder Farmers  78 Engaging with Communities  80 Political Giving and Public Policy  82 34 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 34 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

## of Employees Completed Code of Conduct and Business Ethics Training 

# Sustainability and ESG Governance 2022 Highlights 

## Established our Commitments to Sustainable Innovation, Biodiversity, Greenhouse Gas Emissions, and Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Interactive Engagement with Shareholders and Stakeholders Across the Value Chain 

# 100% 35 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 35

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

develop, execute on, and continuously refine our sustainability strategy to ensure it aligns to our business strategy, and contributes positively to agriculture and the communities in which we operate. This engagement remains equally crucial as we track and report on progress against our commitments. Collaboration is necessary to reach the ambitious targets we have set. We can achieve more when we work together and when we start with those who already have a stake in stewarding our collective future. Stakeholder engagement can take many forms, including but not limited to education and information sharing, innovation and collaboration, consultation, incentivization, compliance and onboarding, and information collection. We are committed to engaging stakeholders consistent with our purpose and values. Our engagement with stakeholders is guided by our Privacy Statement, which describes our practices in connection with information that we collect. Our Code of Conduct sets out the standards expected from all our employees when engaging with stakeholders. We expect our employees to conduct our business activities ethically and with high levels of transparency. Our customers, business partners, shareholders, and other stakeholders expect nothing less of us. 

Looking Ahead 

We regularly post stakeholders news, events, and presentation information in the Sustainability and Investor Relations sections of our website. 

# Stakeholder Engagement and Non-Financial ESG Materiality 

Stakeholder engagement is an essential element of our sustainability and ESG strategy. Corteva Agriscience believes that companies contribute to sustainable growth efforts by engaging in regular, open dialogue with stakeholders about community and company issues and working together to solve problems. We value the perspectives and insights of a wide range of stakeholders who have a stake in stewarding the future, including employees, suppliers, customers, stockholders, peer companies in the value chain, non-profits, communities, government bodies, scientists, and trade associations. Corteva regularly engages with these stakeholders to educate them on our business strategy and incorporate their feedback into our sustainability strategy. In addition to our overall business strategy and our journey toward simplifying our business, understanding the needs and interests of our stakeholders has been crucial to the development of our sustainability strategy and identification of the priorities and target activity where we can have the most positive impact. To obtain these insights, we engage stakeholders in our Non-Financial ESG Materiality Assessment1. In 2022, Corteva expanded its Non-Financial ESG Materiality Assessment to include a robust review of our sustainability focus areas. We conduct this analysis by identifying and prioritizing topics using a dynamic data-driven process for issue identification. This allows us to monitor the priorities of our external stakeholders as we  

> 1The non-financial ESG materiality assessment identifies sustainability topics of relative importance or that are considered significant to internal and external stakeholders but is not aligned to any definition of materiality as outlined in securities law, the Occupational Health and Safety Act, or any other federal, state, local or foreign law, rule, or regulation.

# Corteva Areas of Focus 

Sustainable Innovation 

Innovative solutions to increase productivity and profitability potential, provide climate solutions and improve crop resilience. 

Biodiversity 

Efforts to reduce environmental impacts through agronomic best practices and investment in preventing future land-use change in sensitive areas. 

Climate 

Science-driven action to address climate change and reduce GHG footprint. 

Inclusion, Diversity and Equity 

Attract and retain the best talent from a variety of backgrounds, worldviews and life circumstances and enable a culture of belonging. Corteva’s 2022 ESG Topics Biodiversity Soil Health Water Stewardship Human Rights & Food Security Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Legal & Regulatory Environment Transparency Corporate Governance Product Stewardship Data Privacy Local Communities Supply Chain Responsibility Climate Risks & Mitigation Business Ethics Business Model Resilience Long-Term Value Creation Employee Engagement Operational Footprint Workplace Health and Safety Consumer Demand Sociopolitical Risks Global Trade 

Smallholder Farmers    

> Internal and External Stakeholder Priorities Medium  High 36 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 36 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# 2022 Stakeholder Highlights 

Upstream Supply Base Operations and Local Communities Downstream Supply Chain, Farmers, and Producers Customers and Partners Consumers and Society Investors 2022 Relationships 

To decrease Scope 3 GHG emission reporting challenges across chemical supply chains, Corteva Agriscience worked with Together for Sustainability to launch the Product Carbon Footprint ("PCF") Guideline .Our focus in Ukraine and Russia continues to be the safety of our colleagues, their families, our customers, and preventing a global food crisis. In support of the Ukrainian people, we decided to stop production and business activities in Russia. We launched a new resource for ranchers: 

It All Starts with Grass: How High-Quality Grazing Supports a Healthy, Productive Herd .Products with low use rates, favorable environmental profiles, and lower carbon footprint help lower our customers' environmental impact. The Global Food Security Index 

now includes critical metrics linking agricultural efforts, such as access to agricultural inputs and investment in R&D, to food security. We presented our lineup of sustainable seed and crop protection solutions at our Investor Day and R&D Field Showcase 

that will accelerate our journey to achieve our sustainability goals. 

Stakeholder Expectations 

Several factors hinder Scope 3 reporting progress, including complex agricultural supply chains, which make emission tracking expensive at a time when food security concerns are high due to rising costs. We have taken action to support and protect our Ukrainian colleagues and their families, our customers, and the communities in which we operate through direct and indirect aid. This resource from Corteva provides pasture management tips to help improve herd productivity. Unathi Mhlatyana, Managing Director of McCain Foods South Africa said “ innovative crop protection technologies are vital to the sector’s ongoing sustainability - especially against the backdrop of climate change, extreme weather conditions and rising input costs.” In 2022, Corteva and Economist Impact won a Great Food Award for their collaborative impact to work towards solving world hunger. Solid financial performance and consistent shareholder value. Focus on sustainability, long-term value creation, innovation, governance, ethics, and transparency. 

Our Response 

Industry-wide collaboration and continuous improvement of chemical supply chain sustainability requires an international perspective combined with regional know-how. Given the war’s impact on global food security, Corteva is donating seeds to Ukraine and across Africa and the Middle East region for the 2023 growing season. “Sound pasture management is as important as a good vaccine protocol or feed and mineral program,” said Jeff Clark, Market Development Specialist, Corteva Agriscience. Zorvec ® Encantia ® features a favorable environmental profile and is effective on target organisms at very low use rates with no harmful effects to beneficial species. Corteva is committed to enriching farming and agriculture while providing farmers with the tools needed to keep growing. Reviewing these critical metrics can empower farmers and promote the importance of investment in agricultural R&D. “We have refined our company’s strategy, operating model, and culture, all designed to meet the global challenges of food security, climate change, and the energy transition, but also drive greater value for farmers and allow Corteva to reach its full potential,” said Chuck Magro, Corteva Agriscience CEO. 

Our Challenges 

Through partnerships, education, and other initiatives, Corteva is working to provide its suppliers with the resources they need to adopt sustainable practices and reduce their environmental impact. Corteva joins with many others around the world in advocating for peace. The quantity and quality of grass affect cows' bodily condition, specifically breed-back, milk production, daily gains, and the immune system. Continued sustainable product innovation isn’t a byproduct of our work, it’s the result of intentional design. See how we accomplish this through Sustainable Innovation Governance .“Long-term food security depends on addressing some of the major challenges in the agriculture industry that affect farmers,” said Tim Glenn, EVP, Corteva Agriscience Seed Business Unit. “Farmers need improved products that solve farm- and field-level challenges, all while helping improve the overall sustainability of agriculture,” said Sam Eathington, Chief Technology Officer and Digital Officer, Corteva Agriscience. 37 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 37

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Sustainability and Innovation (“S&I”) Committee 

Our S&I Committee has primary responsibility for Corteva's sustainability-related goals. S&I oversees Corteva’s performance toward our sustainability commitments and other sustainability-related matters and provides oversight of the risks related to the Company’s innovation pipeline and safety. 

Audit Committee 

Our Audit Committee discusses ESG topics from time to time and oversees financial filings that include certain ESG topics, including preparation for the U.S. SEC Climate Proposal. 

People and Compensation Committee 

Our People and Compensation Committee oversees the Company’s human capital management and inclusion, diversity, and equity strategy. This committee is also responsible for our ESG Modifier for the Company’s 2022 short-term incentive program for executives, including a focus on increasing year-over-year sales of sustainable crop protection products. Additionally, all employees have sustainability-centric priorities embedded into annual performance assessments. Across the business, key individuals who are responsible for sustainability initiatives may have specific annual performance goals tied to the delivery of projects related to these initiatives. 

Governance and Compliance Committee 

Our Governance and Compliance Committee retains oversight of our ethics, compliance, and safety programs, which reinforce our values. The committee provides oversight for the Company’s enterprise risk management program by discussing our major risk exposures (other than the risk exposures that are overseen by the Company’s Audit Committee) and the steps management has taken to monitor and control such exposures, including the Company’s risk assessment and risk management policies. Click here more information on Corteva's Board Committees and Risk Oversight, including Committee Charters. 

# Board of Directors and Board Committee ESG Governance 38 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 38 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Executive Leadership ESG Governance 

Corteva's Board of Directors oversees risks related to the Company’s business strategy execution and reputation, including risks related to ESG matters and to achieving the Company’s ESG and financial targets. Our Board assigns the oversight of certain ESG risks to specific Board committees, who provide regular report-outs and make recommendations to the Board on ESG matters. Day-to-day management of the Company and strategic execution is delegated, including on ESG matters. On a regular basis, and usually monthly, the Executive Leadership team meets to discuss various ESG matters, including environmental, social, regulatory, and economic factors that could potentially impact the Company’s strategic progress or performance. As part of this, the team is responsible for driving efforts to advance our ESG programs and deliver upon our goals. For some ESG topics, working groups are assembled to achieve discussed objectives. Our Chief Executive Officer is responsible for establishment and execution of Corteva’s business strategy, which is foundational to the Company’s ESG priorities. Each member of the Executive Leadership Team reports to the Chief Executive Officer and contributes to our ESG progress, directly or through their teams, and, as appropriate, provides ESG-related updates to the Board or its Committees. The Executive Leadership Team includes: 

Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, Dave Anderson 

Oversees financial reporting and controls, including the Company’s response to ESG reporting mandates. He also oversees information technology, including the officers responsible for cybersecurity. 

Executive Vice President, Chief Technology and Digital Officer, Sam Eathington 

Oversees sustainable innovation and biodiversity initiatives. 

Executive Vice President, Crop Protection Business Unit, Robert King 

Oversees chemical-related manufacturing and supply chains. In this role, his team is responsible for identifying and implementing direct, upstream, and downstream-related greenhouse gas emission reductions. 

Executive Vice President, Seed Business Unit, Tim Glenn 

Oversees seed-related manufacturing and supply chains. In this role, his team is responsible for identifying and implementing seed-related operational sustainability. 

Senior Vice President, Chief Human Resources & Diversity Officer, Audrey Grimm 

Oversees sustainability matters related to people, compensation, and ID&E initiatives. 

Senior Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer, Brook Cunningham 

Oversees strategy matters related to Corteva’s sustainability objectives. In this role, her team is also responsible for development of the Company’s annual sustainability report and interim sustainability stakeholder engagement, inquiries, and disclosures. 

Senior Vice President, General Counsel, Cornel Fuerer 

Oversees legal, compliance, government affairs, and communications organizations. In this role, he is responsible for governance matters. 39 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

39 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Board of Directors 

CEO and Executive Leadership Team 

All Employees Culture of Belonging: Business Resource Groups (BRGs) 

Senior Leadership Responsible for Areas of Focus and other ESG Topics 

Audit Board Committees Our Areas of Focus Our Code of Conduct Values 

Governance and Compliance 

People and Compensation 

Sustainability and Innovation 

Enrich Lives 

We commit to enhancing lives and the land. As leaders, we pursue a purpose which goes beyond our immediate interests to benefit society. 

Stand Tall 

We are leaders who act boldly. We accept the challenges that confront our industry as our own and will step up to ensure that agriculture progresses and thrives. 

Be Curious 

We innovate relentlessly. We accelerate our pace of innovation to create solutions that will deliver abundant high-quality food, now and for the future. 

Build Together 

We grow by working together. We must embrace diversity and collaboration in order to build one company and reach out across the food system, creating shared value. 

Be Upstanding 

We always do what’s right, maintaining high ethical standards and conducting business safely and transparently. 

Live Safely 

We embrace safety and the environment in all we do. 

Performance Incentives For executives, an ESG modifier was incorporated into the Company’s 2022 short-term incentive program, including a focus on increasing year-over-year sales of sustainable crop protection products and increasing inclusion, diversity, and equity goals. 

Performance Incentives For employees Company-wide , accountability for business and sustainability results extend Company wide. All employees have sustainability-driven priorities embedded into annual performance assessments, and across the business, key individuals who are responsible for sustainability initiatives have annual performance goals tied to the delivery of projects related to these initiatives. These priorities position us well on our journey to achieve our Winning Aspiration: to become the leader of innovative, sustainable solutions for farmers worldwide, today and tomorrow. 

Sustainable Innovation Climate Biodiversity Inclusion Diversity and Equity 

# Sustainability and ESG Governance 40 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 40 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Cross-functional Sustainability Community of Practice 

In 2022, Corteva Agriscience created a Sustainability Community of Practice to ensure leaders within the organization discuss and align cross-functionally on ESG topics raised by external stakeholders. Topics of priority are brought to executive management and Board committees when necessary. The community consists of members from R&D, Legal, Sustainable Innovation, GHG Emissions, Biodiversity, Communications, Investor Relations, Strategy, and Government Affairs with responsibility for driving and communicating measurable progress on Corteva’s goals. The community also reviews stakeholder feedback and external engagements to ensure all stakeholder voices are being heard and responded to, as appropriate. 

Sustainability Working Groups 

When new material, non-financial ESG topics are identified as strategic priorities by external stakeholders, a working group is created to proactively engage and ensure sustainability-related matters are appropriately identified and addressed. Working groups of focus discuss Scope 3 measurement within GHG emissions, human rights within ID&E, measuring nature within biodiversity, and refining UN SDG criteria in our sustainable innovation area of focus. Our commitment to sustainability and corporate responsibility is integrated into our business through our purpose, governance structures, and business model. Our sustainability management processes are designed to keep the organization informed about significant economic, environmental, and social sustainability issues affecting the company. This reflects the focus of our Executive Leadership Team and Board of Directors on ensuring that Corteva consistently advances the future of agriculture. 41 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 41 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Additional Governance Topics 

Information Security & Privacy 

Corteva Agriscience has a robust information security training and compliance annual program, which includes components such as phishing, logical access, and general cybersecurity awareness. Corteva’s Chief Information Security Officer reports to the Audit Committee on information security matters twice annually. In addition, the Company is externally audited against top information security and compliance standards using a financial reporting risk-based approach, with complete corporate scope. Corteva’s security policies are derived from globally-recognized National Institute of Standards and Technology standards. Corteva also has a robust privacy program that is part of the Legal and Compliance function. The program is overseen by the Global Chief Privacy Officer and includes a staff of privacy professionals and designated leaders across operational and business functions, each with specific responsibility and accountability for data privacy management. A comprehensive privacy report is provided to the corporate Ethics and Compliance committee annually with interim reports on a quarterly basis. Like most major corporations, Corteva is the target of industrial espionage, including cyber-attacks, from time to time. Corteva has determined that these incidents have resulted, and could result in the future, in unauthorized parties gaining access to certain confidential business information. However, to date, Corteva has not experienced any material financial impact, changes in its competitive environment, or impact on business operations from these events. Although management does not believe that Corteva has experienced any material losses to-date related to industrial espionage and security breaches, including cybersecurity incidents, there can be no assurance that Corteva will not suffer such losses in the future. Corteva had no substantiated complaints from a regulator or outside party related to a Corteva breach in 2022, as that term is defined by applicable law. Corteva does not categorize events as “leaks, thefts or losses of customer data” and so we are unable to provide reporting for those requested categories. 42 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 42 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

External Initiatives, Memberships, and Partnerships 

Corteva Agriscience is involved in memberships, sponsorships, and partnerships advancing sustainability efforts, globally. Memberships, sponsorships, and partnerships are critical to driving collective action on the global challenges facing agriculture and are an important channel for stakeholder feedback. Corteva endeavors to take an active participatory role through its involvements. Examples include: 

UN SDGs 

Corteva supports advancing progress towards the UN SDGs. In addition to developing our non-financial materiality assessment in alignment with the UN SDGs, our 2030 sustainability goals are designed to contribute to global progress for certain UN SDGs where our scope, scale, and competencies enable us to aid progress. 

United Nations Global Compact ("UNGC") 

Corteva supports the ten principles of the UN Global Compact. The UNGC is the largest international sustainability initiative, supporting companies to: (1) do business responsibly by aligning their strategies and operations with Ten Principles on human rights, labor, environment, and anti-corruption, and (2) take strategic actions to advance broader societal goals, such as the UN SDGs, with an emphasis on collaboration and innovation. 

Precautionary Approach/UN Global Compact Principle 7 

Corteva applies the Precautionary Approach advocated by UN Global Compact Principle 7. Consistent with the interpretation of many countries and organizations, Corteva interprets the UN’s Precautionary Approach as a regulatory best practice, and not anti-technology. Corteva follows the precautionary principle by applying its classic definition: taking measures to “do no harm.” We take appropriate actions to prevent harm through a rigorous scientific approach and following regulatory best practices and requirements when we bring new products to market. We diligently assess and employ safety measures to manage environmental, health, and safety risks. In addition, we conduct risk assessments as we bring new technologies to market and employ industry-leading tools, such as our Predictive Safety Center, to design with relevant factors in mind. There is some uncertainty in that risk assessment, so safety measures are put in place. 

Taskforce for Climate-Related Financial Disclosures ("TCFD") 

As part of our continuing science-based journey, we share progress in line with TCFD guidelines on governance, strategy, risk management, and target-setting for climate-related risks and opportunities. 

Together for Sustainability ("TfS") 

A global, procurement-driven initiative, delivers a framework with tools such as TfS Assessments and TfS Audits to assess and improve the sustainable performance of chemical companies and their suppliers. TfS has extended its program to include Scope 3 GHG emissions and a TfS Academy to develop knowledge for members and their suppliers. TfS delivers the de facto global standard for ESG performance of the chemical supply chains. 

World Council for Sustainable Business Development ("WBCSD") 

Corteva is a member of the WBCSD, a global, CEO-led organization of over 200 leading businesses working together to accelerate the transition to a sustainable world. The organization focuses on delivering the maximum positive impact for shareholders, the environment, and societies. As a member, Corteva technical experts come together with industry peers to ensure thought leadership on the world’s greatest sustainability challenges. 

Ag Container Recycling Council ("ACRC") 

The ACRC is an industry-funded non-profit organization that safely collects and recycles agricultural crop protection, animal health, and specialty pest control product containers (Jugs and Drums) in the United States. ACRC stewardship of containers does not end with collection. To ensure that the collected plastic is handled safely during processing and used only in end uses that have minimal contact with humans, the ACRC audits all processing and end use manufacturing facilities for compliance with all applicable health, safety, and environmental regulations. 43 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 43 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

# Environment 2022 Highlights 

# 4% Reduction in Global Scope 1 & 2 Emissions through a Purchase of Renewable Energy Credits Provided Guidance on Creating and Integrating Industry-aligned Climate Scenarios for the Agriculture Sector Announced our Biodiversity Areas of Focus: Products, Productivity, Partnership, and Operations 44 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 44 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Key Sustainability Drivers for Crop Protection Discovery 

New mode of action New mode of action Low cost of manufacture Low cost of manufacture Low molecular weight Low logD Low aromatase Low regulatory score Bee friendly Desired solubility Sourced from chiral pool Privileged scaffolds 

Sustainable Innovation Criteria 

Natural Products derived or inspired Bioactive hypothesis 

Powered by Computational Tools Efficacy Focused Efficacy & Sustainability Focused Sustainable Attributes 1

Sustainability Criteria 2

Improve water quality Increase water use efficiency Reduce food waste Use safer materials in manufacturing and finished products Use sustainably sourced renewable inputs Reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions Improve soil quality and restore degraded land Protect biodiversity and ecosystems Increase access to safe, nutritious, and sufficient food Support genetic diversity of seeds and cultivated plants Improve resilience of agricultural production Reduce waste and improve product application efficiency 

Sustainable Innovation isn’t a byproduct of our work, it’s the result of intentional design. 

See more of our work related to Product Stewardship, Green Chemistry Principles, and Corteva’s Industry Leading Predictive Safety Center. 

# Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 

Applying sustainable innovation criteria aligned to the UN SDGs throughout the product development process allows Corteva Agriscience to ensure the products in our pipeline are continuously raising the bar as we strive to bring the leading sustainable solutions to farmers. This enables us to go above and beyond the global regulatory requirements. Corteva also has internal decision criteria and processes, informed by lab and field testing, predictive essays, and models, that need to be achieved before designating a product as a sustainable innovation. These practices allow us to stop development on a product that we learn won’t meet stated criteria for safe and sustainable design.  

> 1

Incorporated at ACTIVE & LEAD Stage 2 Must meet baseline requirements and deliver at least one notable sustainability advantage while maintaining parity compared to other products in the market today. 

# Key Sustainability Drivers for Crop Protection Discovery Sustainable Innovation Criteria 45 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 45 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Environmental Certification, Audit, and Verification 

In 2019, Corteva Agriscience designed and implemented its own Company-wide global management system to track environmental metrics. This system (“GEST”) includes the necessary inputs for environmental parameters relevant to the effective management and monitoring of operations as well as climate-related risks and opportunities. This system is consistent with Responsible Care ® standards as well as other globally accepted standards for specific environmental tracking such as the GHG Protocol. Data integrity is governed through a global data management standard. In 2022, Corteva received Responsible Care Management System (“RCMS”) certification. This certification covers U.S. crop protection manufacturing (“CPM”) facilities and the corporate Environment, Health, Safety, and Security ("EHS&S") governance and supporting tools. Although only U.S. CPM facilities received certification, the corporate EHS&S governance and supporting tools apply enterprise-wide and were also assessed through this process. Corteva engages accredited third-party verifier SGS United Kingdom Ltd. to complete limited external assurance on specific information within this report related to certain environmental metrics. SGS is a leading inspection, verification, testing, and certification company. The assurance statement is based on internationally recognized standards. 1Unless otherwise stated, environmental data covers all sites, globally that report into the GEST system for the full year 2022. Corteva continues to assess calculation adjustments as we look to further understand, adjust, and improve our environmental disclosure process, strategy, and efforts. 

Product Stewardship 

We employ strong governance and process rigor to accelerate productivity, differentiation, and sustainable outcomes through product stewardship, including training for product use. Process rigor extends to each stage of life, from pre-development, to development and advancement, to launch engine, to post-launch monitoring, resulting in differentiated efficacy, durability, and ability to help sustainably enhance customer productivity. Corteva’s stringent safety standards, and those of regulatory bodies around the world, help ensure our products contribute to the delivery of safe and reliable food and also support efforts to protect the environment. Internally, a unique and proactive approach Corteva employees is our industry-leading Predictive Safety Center, which helps design crop protection products with environmental factors in mind as part of the product development process. We contribute to sustainable practices by complying with all applicable environmental laws and Company policies. Externally, we are aligned to the FAO International Code of Conduct on Pesticide Management and Excellence Through Stewardship best practices, and follow registrations, labeling, and stewardship requirements in accordance with local law. Corteva’s crop protection products and seed products containing biotechnology traits are closely regulated worldwide with safety reviews and authorizations completed by individual countries. Each new product typically requires the company seeking approval to carry out an extensive set of studies as part of the submission and approval process. Periodic reviews and safety monitoring by regulatory authorities may also be completed. Products must meet or exceed stringent human health and environmental risk assessments for their intended use. Corteva uses externally recognized methods to test our products, including meta-analysis, laboratory and field studies, and local on-farm testing. 

Customer Information and Labeling 

Corteva works to ensure customer access to accurate and adequate information on the positive and negative economic, environmental, and social impacts of products and services. Corteva complies with, and in some cases exceeds, the labeling requirements required to register and sell products locally. Corteva uses internal and external review processes to help ensure labeling procedures are followed. Corteva labels, safety data sheets, and product use guides are available online. 

Click for U.S. examples of the following: 

• Crop Protection Safety Data • Trait Stewardship • Plant Seed Transparency See more about regulatory considerations driving the requirements for our product safety and labeling in our Annual Report and our Regulatory Data Transparency website.     

> Meet our scientists: Reza Rasoulpour, Designing for Safety
> 1A separate certificate outlining the scope and results from this engagement is provided on our website. 46 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 46 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Genome Editing 

Plant breeding is one of the cornerstones of improved agricultural productivity and sustainable food production. As a breeding tool, genome editing holds tremendous promise to allow seed makers to develop or improve plants with the ability to: • Withstand harsh environmental conditions such as droughts • Require fewer applications of pesticide to protect crops from disease • Produce higher yields, reducing the need for more agricultural land 

Framework for Responsible Use of Gene Editing in Agriculture 

In 2022, Corteva Agriscience achieved verification that the organization is operating in conformance with the Framework for Responsible Use of Gene Editing in Agriculture ("the Framework). The Framework outlines principles and guidelines that organizations can voluntarily follow to demonstrate their commitment to the safe and transparent use of gene editing technology. To achieve verification, Corteva provided objective evidence that the Company has developed and implemented policies and procedures to meet the principles and commitments outlined in the Framework for Responsible Use. This information was reviewed and validated by a professional, third-party auditor to assure the credibility of the verification program. The Framework was developed by a multi-stakeholder Coalition that included representatives from food companies, academia, civil society, technology developers, farmers, and related associations. The Framework has been publicly endorsed by agriculture and food leaders including BIO, Cargill Inc., Costco Wholesale, FMI – The Food Industry Association, Genus PLC, PepsiCo, and Tropic Biosciences. The Coalition was formed by The Center for Food Integrity to support global acceptance of the responsible use of gene editing technology in the food system. To learn more about the Coalition, visit geneediting.foodintegrity.org 

Access to Technology Corteva Open Innovation 

Through the Corteva Open Innovation program, jointly with the Broad Institute, we actively offer licenses on a wide range of intellectual property from various technology developers to support the use of CRISPR. Currently, there are about 40 licensees all over the world that have received access to this intellectual property package. About 25% are non-profit organizations. Around half of the licenses provided to commercial enterprises went to start-ups, 17% to small companies, 20% to medium-size companies, and 13% to medium/large companies. www.openinnovation.corteva.com In the EU, Corteva is a founding member of the Agricultural Crop Licensing Platform, where we offer licenses to other Platform members on commercial trait patents that we have in the EU. This technology trait patent license access allows EU-based breeders to incorporate traits developed by Corteva into their base germplasm breeding programs, which enables enhanced development of commercial products adapted to a broad range of EU growing conditions and consumer needs. 

Advancing Agriculture Equity 

As part of our broader agriculture equity work that is empowering and enriching the lives of smallholder farmers , Corteva is investing in gene editing for improvements in staple crops in developing countries for biotic and abiotic stress resistance and improved nutritional quality. Many products are under development for African farmers, such as maize resistant to lethal necrosis, and sorghum resistant to the parasitic plant Striga. These are research projects directed to specific philanthropic goals and where the outcomes will be widely shared for the benefit of local communities. For more information on our collaborations to realize the full potential of CRISPR, a gene editing technology for agriculture, and our CRISPR Genome Editing Guiding Principles, please visit: www.corteva.com/our-impact/innovation/crispr 

## How CRISPR 

## Works in Agriculture 

How does it work?   

> BETTER NUTRITION
> DROUGHT TOLERANCE
> SLOWER TO ROT OR BROWN
> HIGHER YIELDS
> DISEASE RESISTANCE
> FASTER GROWTH
> DNA is the instruction manual for the growth and development of all living things. With CRISPR, scientists can make specific and exact changes in a plant by deleting, editing or moving a gene in the plant’s own DNA. Based on these changes, the plant has new beneficial traits
> such as:

Corteva Agriscience and others are using CRISPR as a tool to grow healthy, nutritious crops that are better for people and the environment. These improvements could occur in nature or be developed through conventional breeding, but CRISPR makes it possible to deliver them faster and more efficiently. 47 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 47 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Investing in advanced breeding, field trials and integrating enhanced data into the process to drive more predictive outcomes Improved standability and resilience in extreme weather events 1Projected mid-decade launch* 

Example: 

Reduced stature corn 

## Breeding for Yield Gains 

We need faster solutions to solve accelerating world challenges 

Multiple advancements in 2022 Innovative, proprietary design Innovations such as multi-disease corn traits Projected for commercialization later this decade 

Example: 

Gene Editing 

## Developing Enhanced Seed Traits Native, Transgenic, and Gene-edited 

We have a trait pipeline that is second to none 

Better performance for farmers Stronger performance for Corteva Agriscience 

Using digital tools to generate and analyze larger data sets Collaborating with farmers to understand and translate their data into actionable insights, helping them choose products that will work better on their farms 

## Doubling Down on Field Data 

The data will inform our breeding process and optimize the entire process of conducting research trials 

# FOCUSING ON FARMERS IN SEED R&D  

> 1

Based on early trial data. Pending applicable regulatory reviews and completion of field testing. 48 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 48 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Green Chemistry Principles for Crop Protection 

Responsibly managing our products throughout their lifecycle is essential to us, our customers, and the public. We employ strong governance and process rigor to accelerate productivity, differentiation, and sustainable outcomes through product stewardship – from concept to end-of-life of products and including training for product use. 

Enlist ® Weed Control System Training and Enlist ® Ahead for Retailers 

All growers, applicators, retailers, and seed sellers are encouraged to take advantage of our Enlist ® training. This training helps users become well-versed on recent changes to the Enlist One ® and Enlist Duo ® herbicide labels, nozzle, and tank-mix selection, additional endangered species protection measures and other helpful information to make successful applications of Enlist ® herbicides. Corteva Agriscience actively adheres to green chemistry principles aimed at reducing human and environmental impact. These principles are applied across our existing U.S. EPA Green Chemistry Award winners which accounted for 17% of our 2022 crop protection revenues. 

Using Green Chemistry Principles Drives Sustainable and Economical Production of Active Ingredients Financial Impact 

• Fewer raw materials purchased • Smaller waste treatment costs • Improved throughput 

Environmental Impact 

• Less waste • Less energy • Smaller manufacturing footprint 

Green Chemistry Award Spotlight 

What makes Qualcova™ Active (spinosad) and Jemvelva™ Active (spinetoram) unique? 

Made from Naturally Occuring Soil Bacteria 

While many manufacturing processes use solvents sourced from oil refining – a non-renewable resource – Qalcova and Jemvelva are fermented using water. The bacteria used in these reactions are fed by plant-based ingredients and get their energy from corn sugar. In an example of a circular economy, the water used in the fermentation process is purified and reused, and the resulting products – Qalcova and Jemvelva – are then used to more efficiently produce the very crops used in the fermentation process. 

Favorable Environmental Profile 

The active ingredients in both Qalcova and Jemvelva have received multiple recognitions, including EPA Green Chemistry Awards for products that reduce negative impacts on the environment. Because of its natural origin, certain products containing Qalcova can be certified for organic production, pending local regulation. With excellent performance in the field and favorable environmental profiles, global demand for Qalcova and Jemvelva is growing and both products continue to receive prestigious awards for their contributions to agriculture. 

Corteva has won six Green Chemistry Challenge Awards from the U.S. EPA; 

more than any other agricultural input company. The award is given to companies or institutions that have developed a new process or product that helps protect public health and the environment. 49 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 49

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

# GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 

The S&I Committee’s charter explicitly designates committee responsibility for oversight of climate-related risks and opportunities, with the responsibility to review and monitor Corteva Agriscience's climate change risks, plans, goals and targets, and progress against such goals and targets annually on behalf of the Board. Climate-related strategy, governance, risk and opportunity oversight, and performance monitoring is overseen by the following business units and committees: 

S&I Committee of the Board 

Board-level oversight of Corteva Agriscience’s climate governance, strategy, risk management, and performance 

Cross-functional Community of Practice 

Committee comprised of senior management meets regularly to gain alignment and discuss climate-related matters 

Executive Vice President of Crop Protection 

Oversees Scope 1-2 governance, strategy, risk management, and performance 

Chief Technology and Digital Officer 

Oversees UN SDG 13: Climate Action product criteria to reduce GHG emissions in the field 

Chief Strategy Officer 

Supports development of climate-related strategies, assessment of sustainability risks and opportunities associated with potential growth projects, and alignment of capital allocation decisions with the Company’s enterprise corporate strategy and sustainability risk appetite 

Across the business, key individuals who are responsible for climate-related initiatives have annual performance goals tied to the delivery of projects related to these initiatives. 

For executives , an ESG modifier was incorporated into the Company’s 2022 short-term incentive program, including a focus on increasing year-over-year sales of sustainable crop protection products. Our sustainable innovation criteria includes products that can reduce GHG emissions 

For employees , accountability for business and sustainability results extend Company-wide All employees have sustainability-driven priorities embedded into annual performance assessments, and across the business, key individuals who are responsible for climate-related initiatives have annual performance goals tied to the delivery of projects related to these initiatives 50 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 50 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Management regularly assesses and manages climate-related issues as a risk and as a strategic opportunity for innovation and operational efficiency ,with delegation of monitoring at multiple levels of the Company. This spans multiple areas across Corteva – including R&D, strategy, operations, and others. As we consider strategic capital investment, we consider impact on emissions, along with other factors including return on investment. As part of our commitment to sustainable innovation, R&D considers climate change impacts and opportunities in the development of next generation products. Operations monitor, manage, and respond to usually short-term and medium-term climate-related impacts and opportunities. Further, the S&I Committee provides oversight of the Company’s innovation pipeline and sustainability efforts. 

Climate Risk and Opportunity Management 

At Corteva Agriscience, climate-related risks and opportunities are assessed and managed across all business functions on a regular basis. Management regularly evaluates climate-related issues in the context of potential risks and strategic opportunities for sustainable innovation and operational efficiency. This includes identification of opportunities for Corteva to deliver new and existing products that enable climate-smart agriculture to mitigate the impacts of extreme and volatile weather more effectively. 

Corteva’s Climate Risk Assessment Journey 

To better understand the Company’s climate-related risks and opportunities, Corteva conducted a qualitative climate assessment in 2021. This assessment considered a range of factors and included scenario analysis to understand physical risks through Representative Concentration Pathways (“RCP”) 4.5 and RCP 8.5, and transitional risk assessment through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. Through this initial assessment, we noted that existing scenarios available to the agriculture sector lacked specificity. To provide guidance on ensuring industry aligned scenario analysis, we worked alongside the WBCSD and 13 other leading Food, Agriculture and Forest Products companies to develop a set of new climate transition scenarios for our sector in 2022. Additionally in 2022, Corteva initiated internal work to sharpen our qualitative and quantitative climate risk assessment based on the time horizons of 2030, 2040, and 2050. In this analysis, we focused on regions of most significance to our business, while integrating the new scenarios created in coordination with the WBCSD (commodity pricing, acreage, yield projections). Physical Risk Modeling For Corteva’s climate physical risk modeling, we use best-in-class tools and globally accepted decarbonization scenarios that included RCP 8.5 and 2.6. We also use best-in-class tools that rank the highest for hazards covered and geographical reach. 

The Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use emissions could change substantially under distinct transformation pathways with significant mitigation potential from agriculture, forestry and bioenergy mitigation measures. 

World Business Council of Sustainable Development Scenario Scenario description 

RCP 8.5°C high-emissions scenario Under RCP 8.5°C, emissions continue to rise throughout the 21st century and is generally considered to be the worst-case climate change scenario where temperature increases about 5°C by 2100. RCP 2.6°C stringent pathway scenario Under RCP 2.6°C carbon dioxide emissions start to decline by 2020 and go to zero by 2100, also requiring methane emissions to go to approximately half of 2020 levels, while sulfur dioxide emissions decline to approximately 10% of those of 1980. 51 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 51 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Transition Risk Modeling 

Assessment of transition risk is based on potential scenarios for legislation, technological development, or market conditions. Assessment is based on short-, medium-, and long-term horizons with consideration given to the expected lifetime of the assets or activities. Our assessment includes upstream and downstream activities. Each risk or opportunity is measured as the range between the decarbonization scenario (1.5 °C and <2 °C) and the baseline scenario (>3 °C) values in 2050. All risks use the following scenarios: 

Climate-related risks and opportunities fall into two major categories: 

Physical impacts are driven by changes in temperature and precipitation that result in event-driven extreme weather (e.g. hurricanes) or from longer-term shifts in climate patterns (e.g. sea level rise). 

Transition impacts arise from the transition to the low carbon economy, such as climate-related policies and regulations, costs of new technology, shifts in supply and demand, and reputational impacts from stakeholders. 

Scenario Scenario description 

>3°C Historic Trends Scenario >3°C Historic Trends represents a scenario in which climate action remains stable at current levels creating limited transition risks, but the world fails to limit global warming to manageable levels, resulting in substantial future physical risks. This scenario has low levels of transition risk. <2°C Coordinated Policy Scenario <2°C Coordinated Policy Scenario is a scenario where timely policy and regulation work to curb emissions in an orderly fashion, decreasing the physical risk of climate change but increasing the transition risk. This scenario has moderate levels of transition risk. 1.5°C Innovation Scenario Under 1.5°C Innovation Scenario, large demands from the energy system for BECCS 2, coupled with greater- than-historic yield growth in agriculture and government support for R&D, enables early decarbonization and limited physical impacts of climate change. This scenario has high levels of transition risk, but may be muted by technological progress.   

> 1Protected areas refer to areas which are under "strict protection" (WDPA Cat I, II), ie human activity is limited and controlled. 2BECCs include agricultural residues & waste and energy crops specifically grown for use as fuel.

Input assumptions Metrics Boundaries 2020 Boundaries 2050 

Population Million people 7,516-7,795 million people 8,416-10,588 million people GDP Billion USD 97-103B US$05 198-360B US$05 Protected Areas 1 Mha protected area 352-2,250 Mha 352- Mha-6,156 Mha (50% of land, 50x50 target) GHG Prices $ per ton of CO 2 $4-6/ton $4-1,959/ton Bioenergy pathway EJ per year 2.2-10.3 EJ 1-300 EJ Diet Shifts Market share for different proteins 2% market share 16-60% market share Food waste reductions % of food produced that is wasted 33% of all food is wasted +31%, -50% Yield-enhancing tech Increase in productivity Related to 2020 0.7% - 1.2% p.a. 52 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 52 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Physical Risks 

Hazard: Extreme Heat Acute & Chronic 

Description Occurs due to a prolonged period of excessively hot weather. Potential Impact on Corteva Agriscience Heat is a failure-only hazard, that could halt production. 

Hazard: Extreme Wind Acute 

Description Occurs due to extreme wind events that produce sustained gusts of wind. Potential Impact on Corteva Extreme wind can cause property damage and interrupt production. 

Hazard: Surface Water Flooding Acute 

Description Occurs when the ground is over-saturated and/or drainage systems overflow and the excess water cannot be absorbed or drained away. Potential Impact on Corteva Surface water flooding can cause property damage and interrupt production. 

Hazard: Riverine Flooding Acute 

Description Occurs when streams and rivers exceed the capacity of their natural or constructed channels to accommodate water flow and water overflows from the banks, spilling out into adjacent low-lying, dry land. Potential Impact on Corteva Riverine flooding can cause property damage and interrupt production. 

Hazard: Soil Subsidence Chronic 

Description Occurs due to the downward movement of soil, usually due to withdrawal of moisture. Potential Impact on Corteva Soil subsidence can cause property damage if low groundwater causes foundations to shift. 

Hazard: Forest Fire Acute 

Description Occurs due to uncontrolled fire in an area of combustible vegetation. Potential Impact on Corteva Forest fires can cause property damage and interrupt production. 

Hazard: Coastal Inundation Acute & Chronic 

Description Occurs due to sea level rise and storm surges. Potential Impact on Corteva Coastal inundation can cause property damage and interrupt production. 

Property Damage 

The risk of physical damage to the property impacting asset value. 

Business Interruption 

The risk of business interruption due to down days and the property impacting revenue and costs. 53 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 53 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Transition-related Opportunities Managing the Footprint of Our Operations 

Risk Type & Primary Climate-Related Risk Driver Where in the value chain does the risk driver occur? Likelihood of Risk Potential Impact to Corteva Velocity of Risk 

Government policy, technology development Direct operations Medium Medium Medium 5-10 years 

What is the opportunity? 

There are opportunities for Corteva to explore renewables and energy efficiency as levers for achieving the company’s commitment to GHG reduction. This opportunity may focus on Corteva’s operations as well as suppliers becoming more efficient or using renewable energy. 

What is Corteva doing about it? 

Corteva is working to reduce GHG emissions while enabling a more resilient agriculture value chain. Corteva has an established climate strategy, including appropriate Scope 1 & 2 GHG reduction targets. The Company is seeking ways to reduce its impact and providing tools and incentives for customers to do the same. Corteva champions climate-positive agriculture, utilizing carbon storage and other means to remove more carbon from the atmosphere than it emits without sacrificing farmer productivity or ongoing profitability. Learn more in Our Focus: Climate to see how Corteva is reducing Scope 1 & 2 emissions. 

Climate Scenarios 

Physical risk assessment was conducted through RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 Transitional risks assessment was originally conducted through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. In 2022 Corteva helped create more agriculture-specific scenarios with WBCSD, Vivid Economics, and PWC labeled as: • Business as Usual/Historic Trends > 3 C • < 2° C Coordinated Policy Scenario • 1.5° C Innovation Scenario 

Time Horizons 

2030, 2040, and 2050 

Likelihood of Risk and Impact to Corteva 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on severity. 

Velocity of Risk 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on preparedness. 

Technology 

Unrecovered investment in GMO and gene-edited seed products 

Market 

Change in costs of Corteva inputs, including raw materials, energy and labor Change in revenue due to market drivers, such as shifting protein and starch demand 

Policy & Legal 

Change in revenue from regulatory compliance related to land use and protected areas Change in costs from a real or implied future price on carbon across global operations Transitional Risks Methodology 54 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 54 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Transition-related Opportunities Valuing Climate-resilient Products 

Risk Type & Primary Climate-Related Risk Driver Where in the value chain does the risk driver occur? Likelihood of Risk Potential Impact to Corteva Velocity of Risk 

Government policy, market demand Upstream High High High < 5 Years 

What is the opportunity? 

Climate regulations may support accelerated efforts for climate-resilient agriculture, spanning potential mitigation and emissions reductions, and carbon sequestration opportunities. Corteva can partner with customers and offer digital tools and products to help them access market opportunities for climate-resilient or low-carbon agricultural products. 

What is Corteva doing about it? 

Corteva's Carbon Solutions are designed to simplify and enable the path to profitability for farmers who adopt new climate-positive practices for sequestering carbon and reducing on-farm GHG emissions. This initiative leverages the full spectrum of our seed, crop protection, digital technology, and agronomic expertise while providing farmers with access to new markets through a simple, flexible way to sell carbon credits for a fair price on their terms. 

Carbon Markets Made Simple 

How does our carbon program work? 

## 1

Choose your practices and select your fields 

## 2

Let Corteva run soil samples at no cost to you 

## 3

Use Granular Insights to securely log practices 

## 4

Earn carbon credits quantified and verified by ESMC 

## 5

Get paid cash for your credits from Corteva at $15/ton of CO 2e(est. $5-$20/acre/year) 

Climate Scenarios 

Physical risk assessment was conducted through RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 Transitional risks assessment was originally conducted through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. In 2022 Corteva helped create more agriculture-specific scenarios with WBCSD, Vivid Economics, and PWC labeled as: • Business as Usual/Historic Trends > 3 C • < 2° C Coordinated Policy Scenario • 1.5° C Innovation Scenario 

Time Horizons 

2030, 2040, and 2050 

Likelihood of Risk and Impact to Corteva 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on severity. 

Velocity of Risk 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on preparedness. Methodology 

Technology 

Unrecovered investment in GMO and gene-edited seed products 

Market 

Change in costs of Corteva inputs, including raw materials, energy and labor Change in revenue due to market drivers, such as shifting protein and starch demand 

Policy & Legal 

Change in revenue from regulatory compliance related to land use and protected areas Change in costs from a real or implied future price on carbon across global operations Transitional Risks 55 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 55

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Granular Insights Protect your bottom line 

• With your farm data in one spot, see what’s working down to the management zone level, with straightforward financial charts and dynamic agronomic map layers. • Know when and where to plant, spray and harvest, to make more confident agronomic decisions • Catch and correct issues faster with directed scouting. • Share insights with your team and collaborate with ease. 

AgStudio Comprehensive Crop Management Solutions 

• Flexible, robust software and tools for the professional agronomist or retailer to address complex agronomic issues. • Generate customized variable rate seeding prescriptions by field that reflect how to farm. • Gain soil productivity and stay in budget with sampling automation and fertility prescriptions targeted to the crop zone level. 

Carbon Solutions 

Corteva’s Carbon Initiative incentivizes and rewards farmers who advance soil health with climate positive, regenerative practices, by giving them a simple, flexible way to sell carbon credits to Corteva for a fair price on their terms. Farmers can potentially earn an estimated $5-$20/acre/year if they introduce cover crops and/or switch to strip or no-till on acres in their operation. 

LandVisor 

Get a comprehensive view of your land, revealing actionable insights to make the right decisions at the right time. LandVisor combines sophisticated imagery, data, technology and expert guidance to give you confidence in your land management decisions. Transition-related Opportunities Targeted and Integrated Crop Technologies Transitional Risks 

Technology 

Unrecovered investment in GMO and gene-edited seed products 

Market 

Change in costs of Corteva inputs, including raw materials, energy and labor Change in revenue due to market drivers, such as shifting protein and starch demand 

Policy & Legal 

Change in revenue from regulatory compliance related to land use and protected areas Change in costs from a real or implied future price on carbon across global operations 

Climate Scenarios 

Physical risk assessment was conducted through RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 Transitional risks assessment was originally conducted through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. In 2022 Corteva helped create more agriculture-specific scenarios with WBCSD, Vivid Economics, and PWC labeled as: • Business as Usual/Historic Trends > 3 C • < 2° C Coordinated Policy Scenario • 1.5° C Innovation Scenario 

Time Horizons 

2030, 2040, and 2050 

Likelihood of Risk and Impact to Corteva 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on severity. 

Velocity of Risk 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on preparedness. Methodology 

Risk Type & Primary Climate-Related Risk Driver Where in the value chain does the risk driver occur? Likelihood of Risk Potential Impact to Corteva Velocity of Risk 

Market demand Upstream High High High < 5 years 

What is the opportunity? 

Corteva has opportunities related to the integration of crop protection, seed, and digital solutions. These solutions can reduce climate impacts by reducing overall inputs, potentially reducing land use through increased yields, as well as other potential benefits from on-farm data collection and digital services to support climate adaptation and mitigation efforts. 

What is Corteva doing about it? 

Corteva has formed a unified digital organization in its R&D division, enabling digital needs from the earliest parts of the R&D pipeline all the way to the digital sustainable solutions being used by farmers. Learn more about Corteva’s Digital Solutions here. 56 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 56 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Risk Type & Primary Climate-Related Risk Driver Where in the value chain does the risk driver occur? Likelihood of Risk Potential Impact to Corteva Velocity of Risk 

Market demand Upstream Almost certain High High < 5 years 

What is the opportunity? 

Corteva continues to advance crop protection offerings, many of which can help to address climate-related challenges. For example, nitrogen fertilizer is a source of on farm emissions. Corteva continues to focus on nitrogen efficiency by delivering products that promote the retention of nitrogen in the soil and support profitability. There may be further opportunities for increase market demand for products that improve nitrogen efficiency which reduce emissions while supporting farmer business. 

What is Corteva doing about it? 

Corteva’s exclusive Optinyte™ technology reduces denitrification, reducing the escape of GHG into the atmosphere. Conclusions from a meta-analysis were that, on average use of Optinyte™ technology resulted in a 51% reduction of nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions and a 16% decrease in soil nitrogen leaching. The stabilization of nitrogen resulted in a 7% increase in crop yield by extending nitrogen availability in the soil for up to eight weeks during critical growth stages. Optinyte™ can also be mixed into liquid manure applications, providing a 10-12 bushel per acre yield increase. Learn more about our journey towards measuring product related GHG reduction benefits. 

Environmental Benefits  

> •

Stabilized nitrogen reduces leaching or loss from denitrification  

> •

Less nitrate loss in waterways  

> •

Reduces emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere 

Yield Gain  

> •

Nitrogen remains available in the root zone longer  

> •

Increased yield in corn, cereals, and other crops  

> •

Improves crop quality and plant health 

> Protect the Environment
> Reduce nitrate and GHG losses
> Improved Efficiency
> Keep nitrogen in the root zone
> Greater Productivity
> Maximize yield

# Transition-related Opportunities Crop Protection Technologies Transitional Risks 

Technology 

Unrecovered investment in GMO and gene-edited seed products 

Market 

Change in costs of Corteva inputs, including raw materials, energy and labor Change in revenue due to market drivers, such as shifting protein and starch demand 

Policy & Legal 

Change in revenue from regulatory compliance related to land use and protected areas Change in costs from a real or implied future price on carbon across global operations 

Climate Scenarios 

Physical risk assessment was conducted through RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 Transitional risks assessment was originally conducted through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. In 2022 Corteva helped create more agriculture-specific scenarios with WBCSD, Vivid Economics, and PWC labeled as: • Business as Usual/Historic Trends > 3 C • < 2° C Coordinated Policy Scenario • 1.5° C Innovation Scenario 

Time Horizons 

2030, 2040, and 2050 

Likelihood of Risk and Impact to Corteva 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on severity. 

Velocity of Risk 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on preparedness. Methodology 57 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 57 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Risk Type & Primary Climate-Related Risk Driver Where in the value chain does the risk driver occur? Likelihood of Risk Potential Impact to Corteva Velocity of Risk 

Government policy, technology development Upstream High High Medium 5-10 years 

What is the opportunity? 

Corteva Agriscience is exploring new technologies and climate-related products. New gene editing technologies, such as CRISPR, may allow Corteva to speed up trait development activities as well as integrate climate considerations into seed products. 

What is Corteva doing about it? 

In 2022, Corteva achieved verification that the organization is operating in conformance with the Framework for Responsible Use of Gene Editing in Agriculture. The Framework outlines principles and guidelines organizations can voluntarily follow to demonstrate their commitment to the safe and transparent use of gene editing technology. Gene editing techniques can allow seed makers to engineer crops that are more resilient to environmental stresses and pests, while also producing higher yields with less water, reducing the need for agriculture-related land-use change. In addition, gene editing can be used to develop crops with improved nutrient uptake and utilization, which can help reduce fertilizer use and improve soil health, further reducing the environmental footprint of agriculture. Learn more about Corteva’s Responsible Use of Gene Editing here. Transition-related Opportunities Advanced Seed Technology 

Climate Scenarios 

Physical risk assessment was conducted through RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 Transitional risks assessment was originally conducted through IEA NZE 2050, IEA SDS, and IEA STEPS. In 2022 Corteva helped create more agriculture-specific scenarios with WBCSD, Vivid Economics, and PWC labeled as: • Business as Usual/Historic Trends > 3 C • < 2° C Coordinated Policy Scenario • 1.5° C Innovation Scenario 

Time Horizons 

2030, 2040, and 2050 

Likelihood of Risk and Impact to Corteva 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on severity. 

Velocity of Risk 

• The prioritization of risks and opportunities based on preparedness. 

Technology 

Unrecovered investment in GMO and gene-edited seed products 

Market 

Change in costs of Corteva inputs, including raw materials, energy and labor Change in revenue due to market drivers, such as shifting protein and starch demand 

Policy & Legal 

Change in revenue from regulatory compliance related to land use and protected areas Change in costs from a real or implied future price on carbon across global operations Transitional Risks Methodology 58 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 58 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Scope 1 and 2 Emissions Type Description 2020 2021 2022 Scope 1 

Gross Scope 1 GHG emissions (MT CO 2e) 405,000 400,000 424,000 Gases included in the calculation: CO 2, CH 4, N 2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF 6, NF 3 or all All All All Biogenic CO 2 emissions in MT of CO 2e N/A N/A N/A Base year 2020 2020 2020 Consolidation approach Corteva does not include sites that fall outside our definition of Operational Control, defined as sites that Corteva has greater than 50% Operational Control. Corteva also excludes office buildings and warehouses, as these are deemed not to be material for our total GHG footprint. Source of emissions factors and methodologies used The methodologies identified to collect activity data and calculate emissions beginning in 2020 are the Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition) (“GHG Protocol”), U.S. EPA Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database, and U.S. EPA Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule. The GHG Protocol is our overarching framework for Scope 1, 2, and 3 data. Emission factors and CO 2 -equivalent calculation methodologies have generally been derived from U.S. EPA Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule and the U.S. EPA Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (“eGRID”). 

Scope 2 

Gross Scope 2 GHG emissions (MT CO 2e) 620,000 614,000 577,000 Gases included in the calculation: CO 2, CH 4, N 2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF 6, NF 3 or all All All All Base year 2020 2020 2020 Consolidation approach Corteva does not include sites that fall outside our definition of Operational Control, defined as sites that Corteva has greater than 50% Operational Control. Corteva also excludes office buildings and warehouses, as these are deemed not to be material for our total GHG footprint. Source of emissions factors and methodologies used For Scope 2, we use a blended location-based and market-based methodology approach. The methodologies identified to collect activity data and calculate emissions beginning in 2020 are the Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition) (“GHG Protocol”), U.S. EPA Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database, and U.S. EPA Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule. The GHG Protocol is our overarching framework for Scope 1, 2 and 3 data. Emission factors and CO 2 -equivalent calculation methodologies have generally been derived from U.S. EPA Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule and the U.S. EPA Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database ("eGRID"). 

GHG Emissions Current Intensity Ratio Scope 1 & 2 

MT CO 2e/$ Net Sales 

2020 2021 2022 

Organization-specific denominator $ Net Sales Gases included in the calculation CO 2, CH 4, N 2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF 6, NF 3 or all All 59 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 59 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Lowering emissions through sustainable practices and partnerships 

Ensuring the availability of nutritious foods and reducing food insecurity, in line with UN SDG 2: Zero Hunger, is a top priority for our business. To this end, Corteva is innovating the next generation of agricultural solutions to address the impacts of climate change. The company leverages its industry expertise to reduce emissions impacts within its operations, and collaborates with members of the agriculture sector's value chain to identify future opportunities for emissions reductions and reporting improvements. See Measuring the Environmental Life Cycle of our Products for more information on our journey with industry to showcase the benefits of new lower carbon technologies that show positive changes to upstream and downstream emissions and Capabilities for Advancing Innovation for more information on how Corteva’s products and technologies can enable farmers to produce crops with lower carbon intensity. In setting its emissions strategy, Corteva evaluates the costs and benefits of various potential investments in the development of climate resilient product and service innovations, operational improvements that can reduce Scope 1 and 2 emissions, and traditional supplier engagement approaches to reducing Scope 3 emissions. Climate-resilient technology that doesn’t create food, energy, or supply chain security risks is a factor limiting progress towards advancing the agriculture industry’s emission progress and continues to make investment in our innovations and operations generally more impactful than traditional supplier engagement on Scope 3 emissions. Logistics companies and family farms often lack affordable technology needed to collect data on and reduce GHG emissions. This presents a challenge for Corteva as it works to collect accurate emissions data and promote a lower carbon footprint across its supply chain. However, through increasing our stakeholder engagement and the promotion of our climate-resilient products and services, Corteva is identifying opportunities to provide the technologies needed to advance progress on emission reductions and building an agricultural and chemicals sector that prioritizes food security with climate resiliency embedded directly into strategy. One such opportunity is the Corteva Carbon Initiative, which is designed to help farmers produce scalable Scope 3 emission results that adhere to climate accounting guidelines and minimize downstream emissions in the food and agriculture value chain. As part of the initiative, Corteva conducted fundamental research, including soil sampling on acres beyond the requirements of current certification agencies, to establish a comprehensive dataset that can serve as a benchmark for monitoring progress on these acres over time. In 2022, Corteva distributed payments to farmers participating in the Corteva Carbon Initiative , which generated emissions credits for over 

Scope 3 Emissions 

2020 2021 2022 

Gross Scope 3 GHG emissions (MT CO 2e) 6,097,000 6,341,000 8,297,000 Gases included in the calculation CO 2, CH 4 , N 2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF 6, NF 3, or all All Biogenic CO 2 emissions in MT of CO 2e N/A Base year LH2019 to FH2020; first full year of operation as Corteva, to be able to account for full seasonal year. Consolidation approach The methodologies identified to collect activity data and calculate emissions beginning in 2020 include the Greenhouse Gas Protocol: Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard (“GHG Protocol”). The GHG Protocol is our overarching framework for Scope 1, 2, and 3 data. Emission Factors and CO 2 -equivalent calculation methodologies have generally been derived from input-output datasets based on the World Input-Output Database ("WIOD") and the Open IO Database. 60 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 60 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

These actions include: Purchased Goods and Services – sharing product carbon footprint data 

TfS is working towards providing Scope 3 GHG emissions accounting guidance, and tools for improving the identification, tracking and reduction of Scope 3 GHG emissions in the chemical industry. In 2022, TfS launched the Product Carbon Footprint ("PCF") Guideline, the first-of-its-kind guideline to transform the way chemical companies calculate, monitor, and reduce upstream supply chain emissions. The PCF guideline was also expanded to cover corporate accounting and reporting and provided a methodology for suppliers and companies to calculate PCFS and Corporate Scope 3, Category 1 (purchased goods and services) GHG emissions. To ensure alignment with existing standards, TfS partnered with organizations such as GHG Protocol, WEF, Science-Based Targets initiative and WBCSD. The PCF Guideline is ISO and GHG protocol accounting standards compliant. TfS published the Guideline as open-source and is designing an IT solution to enable corporations and suppliers to share upstream product carbon footprints. The updated PCF Guideline and these tools will be a vital instrument for working toward over time real and meaningful emission reductions to help decarbonize the industry together. Corteva's climate strategy leader is a credited author of the TfS PCF Guideline. 

Land Sector and Removals Guidance – multi-stakeholder pilot 

The GHG Protocol establishes comprehensive accounting standardized frameworks to measure and manage GHG emissions from operations, value chains, and mitigation actions. Currently, some important activities related to GHG emissions and removals are not accounted for in companies’ GHG inventories in a way that completely captures all land-related activities, including mitigation initiatives:  

> •

Land use and land management  

> •

Land use change  

> •

Biogenic products across the value chain  

> •

CO 2 removals, including biogenic and technological removals  

> •

Carbon storage in land and product carbon pools Addressing these gaps requires inclusive, multi-stakeholder processes allowing companies like Corteva to test and comment on the new accounting and reporting standard. Participating in this initiative sponsored by the World Resource Institute and the WBCSD and aligned with the Science Based Targets Initiative, will advance our understanding of pending relevant reporting standards while also addressing pressing issues around land use and management that affect Scope 1-3 emissions accounting. 25,000 acres, as part of one of the most extensive initiatives in the agricultural industry to provide payments for Scope 3 emission reductions. Today, over one million acres are enrolled in the Corteva Carbon Initiative. Alongside our downstream engagement of farmers with our Carbon Initiative, Corteva is also actively engaging with organizations developing the industry-aligned standards for Scope 3 carbon accounting in the chemical sector. Through collaborations with non-governmental organizations like TfS and WBCSD, we are actively working to enhance the quality of current accounting standards, resulting in more industry-aligned methods for carbon accounting. 61 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 61 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

# Biodiversity Governance, Risk, and Opportunity Management 

The S&I Committee oversees biodiversity-related risks and opportunities, with the responsibility to review and monitor Corteva Agriscience’s biodiversity risks, plans, goals and targets, and progress against such goals and targets no less than annually on behalf of the Board. For more information on the Company’s Biodiversity Governance, see Sustainability and ESG Governance .For more information on the Company’s Biodiversity Sustainability Innovation Crop Protection and Seed Criteria, see Our Focus: Sustainable Innovation .For more information on the Company’s Biodiversity Strategy, see Our Focus: Biodiversity .62 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

62 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

1850 1950 1980 2022 

Years Acres needed to grow 200 bushels of corn 

Promotion of practices and partnerships Sustainable Innovation Criteria for New Products 

• To sequester carbon for centuries • To absorb rain and retain moisture • To improve soil function and water quality 

# Corteva Agriscience’s Strategy 

Reduce on-farm biodiversity impacts with nature-friendly or nature enhancing products Increase productivity through genetic gains Enable new nature positive land practices 

# Harnessing the value of nature with our products 

> *Source: Forest Trends' Ecosystem Marketplace, "Financing Emissions Reductions for the Future: State of Voluntary Carbon Markets 2019." Washington DC: Forest Trends, 2019.

Plant-parasitic Nematode Control 

Reklemel™ active is a first-of-its-kind, targeted plant-parasitic nematicide, yet is gentle on many beneficial organisms in the soil – including good nematodes. This allows farmers to effectively protect their crops from plant-parasitic nematode damage without disrupting the healthy balance of beneficial organisms in the soil. 

Reklemel ™active 

Nitrogen Stabilizer and Optimizers 

Corteva’s suite of 3 above and below ground nitrogen stabilizers and optimizers ensure nitrogen remains in the soil, while also biologically sequestering nitrogen from the plant’s leaves. 

PinnitMax ®

> TG
> NITROGEN STABILIZER

Optinyte ™

technology 

• To conserve ecosystems • To restore habitats • To enhance pollinator populations 

Weed Control 

Enlist ® was the first product to comply with the EPA's new Endangered Species Act consultation process. With its extended registration, farmers can be assured the tools they need to produce crops while reducing the risks to wildlife and habitats will remain available. 

Duo 

Advance Biodiversity Partnerships Enable Cropping Systems Adopt Biodiversity-Promoting Practices 

# 7Acres 

# 1.1 Acres 

> 1950-1980: Green Revolution
> (introduction of conventional pesticides and fertilizers)
> 1990s:
> Introduction of Genetically Modified Crops (GMOs )
> 2010:
> Introduction of Gene Edited
> CRISPR-Cas9
> crops

• To prioritize conservation in eco-sensitive areas • To employ biodiversity practices on our Research farms and corporate sites • To engage partners for expertise, implementation and engagement 

Carbon Credits 

Corteva’s Carbon Program reached 1 million acres enrolled in 2022 and includes biodiversity smart practices. $30/credit 

Projected 

$60/credit* 

Projected 

> 2022

Crop Year Enrolled 2030 

Over the past several decades, innovations in seed genetics and crop protection have reduced the amount of land needed to grow crops. Higher yielding hybrids and nature enhancing products, alongside promotion of nature positive production practices can help farmers reduce pressure for land conversion and global deforestation while also enhancing food security for a growing population in a world expected to have less arable land and more severe weather due to climate change. 63 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 63 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Annually, Corteva Agriscience conducts a global water-risk assessment against its facilities reporting >100,000 gallons per year. Based on our global tracking and mapping, we know our global physical plant assets have an approximately 20-30% presence in water-stressed areas based on WRI’s Aqueduct Global Water Tool. Water risk is mixed across all seed and crop protection Corteva production plants. Water Stewardship and Our Value Chain 

Through Corteva’s products and services, we have realized opportunities that can have substantive financial and strategic impact on our business. 

About 80% of our new crop protection products meet our design criteria of improving water quality and reduce the risk to groundwater relative to at least one target benchmark. 100% of our new seed product offerings meet our design criteria of improving water-use efficiency per unit of water, compared to current standards. These criteria support potentially at-risk growers in addition to strengthening our upstream supply chain on seed production land and downstream grower customers impacted by water stress. 

To accomplish this, Corteva will lean on our leading innovation capabilities. 

Examples include: 

Corteva’s AQUAmax ® technology is designed to improve the water use efficiency of crops by enhancing their ability to capture and retain water, particularly under drought conditions. This technology involves the use of specialized seed coatings and genetic traits that enable crops to grow deeper roots and better withstand water stress, ultimately resulting in higher yields and less water usage per unit of production. AQUAmax ®technology has been incorporated into several crop varieties, including corn, soybeans, cotton, and sorghum. 

Utrisha™ N , a biostimulant that help reduce the amount of nitrogen that is lost to the environment through leaching and runoff. These products can improve crop productivity and profitability while also reducing the risk of nitrate contamination in groundwater. 

# Water Stewardship Drought and heat resiliency within our value chain 

In 2022, Corteva introduced Sosdia™ Stress abiotic stress mitigator . This new biological solution protects row crops from environmentally stressful conditions like drought, heat, excess salinity, and excess sunlight. Sosdia Stress abiotic stress mitigator allows plants to focus on growth and productivity — instead of on cell repair in challenging conditions — for optimum yield potential. Sosdia™ Stress contains naturally occurring ingredients like proline and potassium, which help crops react to stress similarly to plants with higher levels of osmolytes. (Osmolytes are naturally-occurring compounds that protect cell integrity, water balance, and metabolism during stressful conditions. Think of it this way: Cacti are plants with naturally high levels of osmolytes. Sosdia™ Stress helps row crops react to heat and drought similarly to cacti). Crops treated with Sosdia™ Stress lose less water vapor, maximizing the conversion of water into crop biomass for better yield potential. Corteva’s Brevant ® seeds offers Nexera ® canola with The Heat Advantage™ , ensuring a grower’s canola is automatically protected in the event of excess heat during the critical flowering development stage. 64 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 64 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Water Quality and our Direct Operations 

Increased severity and frequency of precipitation patterns and extreme weather could create a greater need to advance seed production technologies and adapt planning for parent seeds. In crop protection, extreme weather events and shipping supply constraints may cause delays in sourcing, moving, and manufacturing product. Disruptions in shipping may provide challenges in a just-in-time system, potentially resulting in building extra inventory to provide a buffer, which may increase costs to Corteva Agriscience and/or impact margins. Because water is utilized as an ingredient, the ability to source enough water is important to our operations. Our contract manufacturers use freshwater as an input for growing seeds, which are important to the success of our business and to support the resiliency of global food production. Similarly, our customers, including farmers and other stakeholders in the food supply chain, rely on good quality freshwater for growing crops. The ability to source enough recycled, brackish and/or produced water for use is also important to Corteva's manufacturing plants and processes. Therefore, to maintain this critical resource for us and the communities we operate, our policies encourage the reuse and recycling of water in water stressed regions, including, Zero Liquid Discharge facilities, and locate our most water intensive activities, like biological fermentation, at sites where water and wastewater technology is plentiful. 

Water Consumption 2022 Million Gallons 2022 Megaliters 

A: Withdrawal: Total municipal water supplies (or from other water utilities) 3,023 11,443 B: Withdrawal: Fresh surface water (lakes, rivers, etc.) 536 2,029 C: Withdrawal: Fresh groundwater 490 1,855 D: Withdrawal: Irrigation 1 3,556 13,461 Water Shipped offsite for treatment 293 1,109 Total withdrawals (A + B + C + D) 7,605 28,788 E. Total discharges 1,226 4,641 Total net freshwater consumption (A + B + C – E – water shipped offsite for treatment) 2,530 9,577 Withdrawals from areas with high and extreme water stress 611 2,313 Corteva continues to assess calculation adjustments of water consumption as we look to further understand, adjust, and improve our water disclosure process, strategy and efforts. 

In 2022, certain efforts undertaken improved data capture quality. Corteva conducted education sessions at the facility levels of our key locations to enhance water consumption calculations. In addition, supporting networking with facility data owners assists us in logging and better understanding our water impacts globally. 

# 0.00192 2022 Water Intensity (Total withdrawals in M3/$ Net Sales)     

> 1Withdrawals for purpose of irrigation occur from municipal water supplies, surface water, and groundwater. 65 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 65 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

# Sustainability Efforts at our Johnston, IA Global Business Center 

Corteva Agriscience is helping shape the sustainable future of food and agriculture by innovating and collaborating to support farmers, consumers and those in the food value chain. Sustainability is not just a priority for us, it is at the very core of who we are and what we seek to achieve. We’re not starting this process from scratch. We’re building on the sustainability legacy of our heritage companies and brands to form a new vision for the future. 

HID Lighting Recycling 

Approximately 112 tons of metal were diverted from landfills and sent to a recycling partner for reuse. This was otherwise wasted material resulting from replacing outdated lighting with LED technology. 

Copy/Print Paper Usage 

We reduced our paper usage by 10% over the past few years by encouraging employees to print and copy less. If each employee reduces printing by an additional 10% each year, we can save approximately 337,500 sheets of paper. 

Smart Irrigation Controllers 

Installed in 2022, the controls save 30% annually on water use for our campus turf and landscapes. These irrigation controllers monitor real-time weather data and adjust scheduled irrigation run times daily. 

Greenhouse Roofing Material Recycled 

More than 83 tons of plastic was recycled as part of a 2022 roof replacement project at the Johnston greenhouses. 

Composting Plant Waste 

Johnston repurposes waste from campus growing operations by collection and composting. Typically, around 1,000 tons of plant material is composted annually on the Johnson campus. 

Fume Hood Timers 

We have hundreds of fume hoods on campus. In 2014, the Transformation team hoods were running constantly. To be more sustainable, mechanical timers were added to the hoods. As a result, these fume hoods now only run 30% of the time, saving 872,000 kWh per year. 

Reusable Cups in Break Rooms Across Campus 

Throughout campus, break rooms are stocked with reusable mugs. Before reusable mugs were supplied, Johnston used 670,000 paper cups each year. Reusable mugs divert over 19,000 pounds of waste from the landfill each year. Ceres Café and several breakrooms also provide reusable dishes and silverware to help reduce plastic utensil waste. 

Condensate Recovery 

Annually, over 20,000 gallons of clean condensate water is recovered from campus air handling units and reused in campus cooling towers. 1.  Regulated organic materials are gathered in a 22,000-bushel bin 2.  Those materials are incinerated and heat the water pipes in our floors 3.  Nine miles of pipes in the headhouse floors provide radiant heat in the winter, saving $1,100/day in heating expenses Since 2017, Johnston greenhouses have saved over 5.3 million gallons through its water-capture system. 1.  Rainwater is collected from the roofs and stored below the greenhouse 2.  It’s filtered through the process of reverse osmosis in an Olympic-size swimming pool 3.  Water is then precisely distributed to plants based on testing being performed 

WATER-CAPTURE SYSTEM CORN BOILER 66 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 66 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

From product consumption to packaging production, Corteva Agriscience takes a circular economy approach to reducing our impact on the environment. We are also leaders in measuring product impacts on the environment through our internal Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) competency governed by an international recognized set of ISO standards. 

Circular Product Innovations 

For new Corteva seed and crop protection active ingredients, we have established thresholds for each sustainable innovation criteria to deliver a notable sustainability advantage. 

~90% of our new crop protection products in 2022 meet our criteria aligned to UN SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production, specific to the following thresholds:  

> •

Using sustainably sourced renewable inputs  

> •

Using safer materials in manufacturing and finished products  

> •

Reducing food waste  

> •

Reducing waste and improving product application efficiency Examples include: • Corteva can help encourage the circularity of its oilseed crops through double-cropping in the Southern U.S. to produce renewable fuel feedstocks. These products help reduce the need for carbon-intensive fuels while promoting soil health. 

• On March 1, 2023, Corteva completed the acquisitions of Stoller Group Inc., one of the largest independent companies in the biologicals industry, and Symborg Corporate S.L., an expert in microbial technologies. Products include nitrogen optimizers , a biological that 1) enters the plant through the stomata and colonizes in the leaf cells 

and 2) converts nitrogen from the air into ammonium , resulting in a more constant supply of nitrogen to the plant. No plant energy is required for this process. 

# Circular Economy 

Constant flow of nitrogen to the plant Supplies nitrogen throughout the crop cycle in an effective and controlled way 67 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 67 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Circular Packaging 

Corteva Agriscience takes a circular economy approach to the use of packaging materials that are put on the market, to increase the potential for these packaging materials to be recycled and/or reused over time. Corteva is currently focused on the primary, secondary, and tertiary packaging materials for the products that reach our customers. At present, packaging materials that are used for intermediate and internal development are out of scope. Corteva has a global packaging council and regional packaging steering teams that build sustainable progress into packaging decisions relating to eco-design, rationalization, purchasing, and supply across our regions, including ongoing support of agriculture container recycling and collection schemes globally. In our industry, plastic, cardboard, and paper are the dominant materials used to pack final products. Materials that are most commonly recycled after proper decontamination and for specific and monitored end-use include high-density polyethylene ("HDPE") containers and external cardboard boxes. In 2022, we conducted a complete packaging component gap assessment in all regions, leading to a global roadmap and action plan. 

We also identified the following opportunities to increase packaging circularity: 

• Move from multi-material components to mono-material components using coating to enhance barrier performance • Adjust components that can be redesigned without functionality or quality impact, to achieve an optimum weight and performance ratio 

- Corteva’s European crop protection portfolio introduced a new redesigned 1L bottle, which is 27% lighter than previous bottles • Use recycled plastic to replace virgin plastic from the crude oil industry 

Reusable A packaging item will be considered as reusable if: 

It is designed to be reused. And there is a business model in place to reuse it. 

Recyclable A packaging item is recyclable if one of the following criteria is matched: 

A recycling stream exists and is used for the material of consideration of the item within our Crop Protection industry. The item is made of a material for which a recycling stream outside of our Crop Protoction industry exists. 68 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 68 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Non-hazardous Waste FY 2022 Unit 

Total waste recycled/reused 930,334 MT Total waste disposed 1,680,423 MT • Waste landfilled 664,364 MT • Waste incinerated with energy recovery 161,483 MT • Waste incinerated without energy recovery 85,725 MT • Waste with unknown disposal method 2,501 MT 

Hazardous Waste FY 2022 Unit 

Total hazardous waste recycled/reused 27,099 MT Total hazardous waste disposed 75,306 MT • Hazardous waste incinerated with energy recovery 16,055 MT • Hazardous waste incinerated without energy recovery 48,207 MT - Hazardous waste landfilled 4,786 MT 

Air Emissions FY 2022 Unit 

Direct Nitrous Oxides ("NOx") 548 MT Direct Sulfur Oxides ("SOx") 26 MT Direct Volatile Organic Compounds ("VOCs") 327 MT Direct Hazardous Air Pollutants ("HAPs") 62 MT Corteva continues to enhance reporting functionality to calculate air emissions from combustion sources. Air emissions were calculated based on emission factors dependent on individual calculations. HAP emissions are determined from global fuel combustions and process emissions from 5 U.S. Crop Protection Manufacturing locations. 

Measuring the Environmental Life Cycle of Our Products 

In early 2020, Corteva Agriscience established an internal LCA competency. LCA is a science-based, holistic approach to quantifying environmental impacts throughout the value chain of a product or process. LCA is governed by a set of ISO standards, which include 14010, Guidelines for environmental auditing – general principles, and 14044, Environmental Management – Life cycle assessment – requirements and guidelines. Industry, academia, and government agencies have applied LCA for many purposes over the years. Impacts are considered across the full value chain, including raw materials, direct operations, use, and end-of-life scenarios. Our internal LCA team will continue to partner with external consultants and stakeholders to provide the analysis and insights needed to achieve targets and further quantify the environmental impact of our sustainably differentiated products. 

Our Journey Towards Measuring GHG Reduction Benefits 

Corteva is on a journey with its industry peers to better understand how we can showcase the benefits of new lower-carbon technologies that show positive changes to emissions. For example, our peer-reviewed Optinyte™ LCA for corn farming follows ISO standards 14010 and 14044, and reported an 11-32% average reduction in life-cycle GHG emissions based on county and national data, with and without irrigation and drying. In addition, both assessments indicated that a reduction of marine eutrophication potential was a likely result of employing Optinyte™ technology in these systems. As a result of these favorable outcomes, Corteva is increasing R&D into the quantification of the GHG reduction benefits of our products. For more information, see Our Focus: Sustainable Innovation for examples of life cycle assessment’s positive results. 

Corteva is using Life Cycle Assessment to: 

Provide subject matter expertise and guidance for leadership Understand the environmental footprint of select products Communicate with key stakeholders 69 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 69 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

# 2022 Highlights Social 

## Improved Our Process Incident Severity Rate ("PSIR") Increased Our Share of Women in Management Positions Increased the Productivity of Smallholder Farmers 70 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 70 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

The Governance and Compliance Committee of the Board of Directors oversees enterprise EHS&S risks and periodically reviews metrics to track performance and focus improvement efforts. This includes reviewing and providing input to Corteva Agriscience’s management team regarding the management of current and emerging issues and reporting periodically to the Board on EHS&S as well as Distribution Safety & Security ("DS&S"), Quality, product, regulatory, compliance, and stewardship matters affecting the Company. The safety of our employees, facilities, and the communities where we operate and sell is a priority that is rooted in our Live Safely value and is a core part of how our teams around the world live and work every day. To support farmers and the agricultural industry, we need to ensure that we provide the products they need in a safe and sustainable manner. For Corteva, that means protecting the health and wellbeing of our employees and their families, as well as our value-chain partners and supplemental workforce. We introduced our Live Safely value to demonstrate our commitment to the safety of our people, communities in which we operate, and the environment. It represents Corteva employees’ commitment to safety and desire to make a difference by the way we live every day. We are working to fulfill our safety commitments by: • Driving elimination of severe incidents • Implementing a framework to share expertise and information to help drive improved safety performance for our customers and the broader agriculture industry 

Emergency Planning & Response 

Emergencies can strike suddenly, whether an act of nature like a hurricane, flood, or earthquake, or as a result of an operational malfunction. Through the Responsible Care ® initiative, companies belonging to the American Chemistry Council ("ACC") commit to prepare for emergency situations that can affect the safety and stability of facilities and surrounding communities. The Responsible Care ® management system includes emergency planning requirements based on potential risks a facility might face. Individual facility risks may vary, based on the facility’s location (i.e. near a flood plain), time of year (i.e. hurricane season), the types of chemicals used and produced at the facility, and requirements for preparedness plans in compliance with requirements from local, state and national authorities. Responsible Care ® companies: • Identify, assess, and prioritize potential facility operational risk to understand what potential hazards might arise from their operations, how those hazards may translate into potential risks, and how to manage those risks • Establish and maintain procedures to prepare for and respond to accidents and emergency situations that may occur and help prevent or mitigate associated impacts. • Periodically test their emergency response procedures, train employees about the safety obligations for their specific jobs at the facility, and work closely to coordinate their emergency preparedness plans with local, state, and national authorities Emergency Planning & Response 

# EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 71 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 71 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Industry Performance 

As a member of the ACC, we are committed to safety and sustainability in the communities where we operate and in the products we manufacture. Through implementation of Responsible Care ®, ACC members demonstrate their commitment the health and safety of their employees, the communities in which they operate and the environment as a whole. For nearly 35 years, companies practicing Responsible Care ® have worked to significantly enhance their EHS&S performance. Participation in Responsible Care ® is mandatory for all ACC members and Responsible Care ®Partner companies, all of which have made CEO-level commitments to the program, including: • Signing the Responsible Care ® Guiding Principles • Tracking and transparently reporting Company performance on environmental, health, safety and security metrics • Undergoing third-party audit and certification to Responsible Care ®Management System ("RCMS ®" )/RC14001 ®• Implementing the Product Safety, Process Safety and Security Codes Responsible Care ®: Driving Safety & Industry Performance 

Responsible Care Program 

Responsible Care ® is the chemical manufacturing industry’s environmental, health, safety and security performance initiative. In this vein, a key part of the Responsible Care ®Management System process is mandatory certification by an independent, accredited auditor. All of the more than 250 companies practicing Responsible Care ® in the U.S. undergo headquarters- and facility-level audits to ensure they have management system to drive continual performance improvement. Responsible Care ® companies must renew their certification every three years, and companies can choose to certify to one of two management system technical specifications, as well as implement all three Codes of Practice. The technical specifications and the three Codes of Practice are as follows: • RCMS ® certification, which verifies that a company has implemented the Responsible Care Management System; or • RC14001 ®, which combines Responsible Care ® and ISO 14001 certification into a single, cost-effective process • Product Safety Code, Process Safety Code, and Security Code Management System Certification 

Management System Certification & Third-Party Assurance 

Our efforts to assess, monitor, and reduce exposure of employees and contract workers to safety and health risks are guided by our EHS&S program, policies, and standards. This includes efforts contributing to our safety improvement goals and is consistent with guidance in Corteva Agriscience’s Code of Conduct. Corteva maintains an Occupational Health and Safety ("OH&S") management system that has been implemented based on legal requirements and recognized risk management standards and guidelines. A full 100% of employee and contractor OH&S incidents are covered by the OH&S management system while they are working on site or on our behalf. 72 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 72 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Health and Safety Third-Party Assurance 

Corteva Agriscience commissioned SGS United Kingdom Ltd to provide independent assurance of its Health and Safety KPIs noted in the 2022 Sustainability Report. The scope of the engagement includes the safety indicators noted below, and the objective of the engagement is to provide a limited level of assurance to Corteva stakeholders that the reported indicators are: • Determined using procedures and systems that are reliable in producing data that is accurate and free from material misstatement • Reported in accordance with the principles of transparency, accuracy, consistency, relevance and completeness and in accordance with Corteva internal procedures for Health and Safety data collection and reporting (EHS&S Event Reporting and Classification Standard) On the basis of the methodology described and work performed, SGS concludes that no evidence has been brought to attention to suggest that the procedures and systems utilized by Corteva to determine Health and Safety performance metrics are not reliable in producing accurate data or that the reported data determined using those systems and procedures is not a fair and balanced representation of Corteva Health and Safety performance, during 2022. The verification and assurance methodology employed by SGS was based upon internationally recognized standards and guidance, including ISAE 3000. Data is provided in the format that best aligns to the multiple standards that request this information; units are therefore not standardized. 

Safety Performance Unit FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022 

Work-related Fatalities - Employees Number 0 0 0Work-related Fatality Rate for Direct Employees Fatalities per 100 employees 0 0 0Work-related Fatalities - Contractor Number 0 0 0Work-related Fatality Rate for Contract Employees Fatalities per 100 contractors 0 0 0Lost-Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR) Number per million hours worked 0.51 0.37 0.58 Process Safety Events: Tier 1 Number per million hours worked 0.05 0.00 0.05 Total Recordable Incidents Counts (TRIR) Injuries per 100 employees 0.35 0.36 0.39 Process Safety Incidents Count (PSIC) Number of tier 1 PSCE events 4 0 4Process Safety Total Incidents Rate (PSTIR) Tier 1 PSCE events per 200,000 hours worked 0.01 0.00 0.01 Process Safety Incident Severity Rate (PSISR) L1/L2 1 events PSCE per 200,000 hours worked 0.039 0.026 0.020 Number of Work-related Transport Incidents Number per transport definition 7 3 6    

> 1L1/L2 is Corteva’s internal classification for severity. 73 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction
> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 73 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

Embracing ID&E starts with our Board, including the People and Compensation Committee, which is regularly updated on our progress and helps guide and direct our efforts. Our Executive Leadership Team also fully supports this commitment and our CEO, Chuck Magro, reaffirmed its importance by making ID&E a key component of the business priorities he’s established for our organization. 

Non-discrimination & Harassment 

Beyond the Code of Conduct, Corteva Agriscience internally publishes additional, detailed non-discrimination policies outlining expectations that apply to all Corteva employees globally. These policies discuss specific non-discrimination topics, including prohibiting sexual and non-sexual harassment, and reinforcing escalation processes and corrective or disciplinary actions that may result. Employees are required to complete trainings on workplace discrimination and harassment on at least an annual basis. Incidents are reviewed regularly; Corteva discloses incidents to the Board on at least an annual basis and usually quarterly. In 2022, there were 49 substantiated reportable incidents globally of violations to the Discrimination, Harassment and Retaliation Prevention Policy or the Respect & Responsibility Policy. As result of these cases, 15 involuntary termination actions were taken, and 34 cases had disciplinary action and/or remediation plans implemented. Corteva follows all employee laws in the countries where we operate by jurisdiction, most of which prohibit activities that involve child labor, forced or compulsory labor, violations of the rights of indigenous people, and other human rights issues. To enforce these human rights principles in action, Corteva posts signage in physical offices and takes other proactive measures at a local level to convey our zero-tolerance stance on child labor, forced or compulsory behavior, discrimination, and other unethical workforce practices. For example, we take a proactive approach to these concerns in India, with certain measures such as community training guided by the UN Declaration on Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, and the Indian Legal Provisions on Child Labor. 

Employee Training & Development 

Training and development tools are provided through the development of curricula developed both internally and by third parties for compliance, enrichment, and upskilling. See Human Capital Management in our 2023 Proxy Statement. Mandatory training for employees covers human rights parameters including safety, information and personal security, inclusion, ethics and Code of Conduct, anti-corruption, harassment prevention, well-being, and other topics. Each mandatory training has a targeted audience, many of which are Company-wide requirements (examples include vehicle safety, harassment prevention, Code of Conduct), as well as other targeted regional, country, business, or task-specific audiences (examples include antitrust training, procurement procedures). Company-wide requirements are typically focused on the full-time and part-time workforce, whereas some are also required of contractors within the organization (for example, information security and vehicle safety). In addition to training, other benefits such as paid tuition programs are offered. 

Identifying & Assessing Human Rights Concerns 

Corteva assesses our own business as well as others who are acting on our behalf within our supply chain. To identify human rights concerns, Corteva has a grievance mechanism in place to ensure concerns regarding adverse human rights impacts are raised. We choose to work with business partners who share our commitment to the highest ethical standards. We are committed to the protection and advancement of human rights and will not tolerate the use of forced labor, slavery, human trafficking, the exploitation of children, or their engagement in hazardous work. Evaluations are integrated into other assessment and management processes and are based on material issues regardless of where they’re identified within the value chain. As a member of the UNGC, we are committed to aligning our operations and strategies with the UNGC principles on business and human rights. We support its “protect, respect, and remedy” framework and its principles of due diligence. Suppliers are required to agree or attest to our Supplier Code of Conduct within their contract terms, including acknowledging 

# ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 74 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 74 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

our zero-tolerance policy on human rights violations. Corteva Agriscience, together with its worldwide subsidiaries and joint ventures, requires that all of its global vendors, contractors, and suppliers of any product or raw material, wherever it originates, apply its Human Trafficking, Child Labor and Forced Labor Principles. The Supplier Code of Conduct and Human Trafficking, Child Labor and Forced Labor Principles expressly outline zero tolerance on these issues, and if any claim against them was found to be true would ultimately terminate the contract. Additionally, it is the responsibility of local management to implement and ensure compliance with these Principles at Corteva Agriscience facilities in each region around the world. In addition, the Supplier Code of Conduct outlines expectations for environmental partnership including systems, and reporting. TfS Process 

> 75

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 75

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Together for Sustainability 

Our work with suppliers is supported by our membership in TfS. TfS delivers the de facto global standard for environmental, social and governance performance of the chemical supply chains. The program is based on the UNGC and Responsible Care ® principles. TfS is a global organization with regional members’ representation in Asia, North America, and South America. Operating as a unique member-driven organization, the TfS member companies shape the future of the chemical industry together. TfS operates on the principle “An assessment or audit for one-member company is an assessment or audit for all." The sharing of supplier evaluations among 40 global chemical companies lessens the administrative burden and leverages synergies among the member companies. TfS assessments are carried out by its key partner EcoVadis, a global service provider specialized in sustainability performance assessments. For its Audits, TfS cooperates with a TfS-approved Audit company. Performance is assessed in the areas of management, environment, health and safety, labor and human rights, and issues of ethical corporate governance. The measures introduced are then reviewed via re-assessments or audits. Follow-up monitoring and subsequent supplier management are the responsibility of the individual member companies. An online platform is used to make the results available to all members of the initiative. To further its mission to foster sustainable and resilient chemical supply chains, TfS extended its core Assessments and Audits business offerings with leading sustainability solutions for the chemical industry. These will affect change beyond the chemical industry, so that other industries using chemicals can benefit from more sustainable supply chains. Click here for more information on the TfS collaborative approach to sustainable procurement and its Corrective Action Plan ("CAP") process. 

TfS Member TfS Sharing Platform CAP TfS Member 

> It remains each TfS member's individual responsibility to embed expectations in business relationship Sustainability rating used as criterion for individual purchasing decisions TfS offers the infrastructure that supports a high quality of third party sustainability assessments and audits as well as efficient and web-based data sharing of audit and assessment results

Follow-up and manage business relationship Supplier Code of Conduct Spend & Risk Analysis TfS Assessment TfS Assessment TfS Audit TfS Audit 76 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 76

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Workforce Demographics 

At Corteva Agriscience, ID&E is foundational to who we are and what we plan to achieve as a Company. Since launching our ID&E strategy in 2021, we have continued to establish the building blocks for accelerating our progress in this important area. These building blocks are starting to deliver positive results, as illustrated by the following metrics. 

Workforce Demographics 2020 2021 2022 

Total Employees, Global 21,000 21,000 21,000 

% FTE by Location, Global % of Total 2020 % of Total 2021 % of Total 2022 

North America 50% 48% 49% Latin America 16% 18% 18% EMEA 20% 21% 20% Asia-Pacific 14% 13% 13% 

% Female Employees by Level, Global % of Level 

Share of women in total workforce (as % of total workforce) 31% 32% 33% Board of Directors 31% 31% 31% Share of women in all management positions 28% 29% 30% Share of women in junior management positions 28% 29% 30% Share of women in top management positions 31% 27% 33% Share of women in management positions in revenue-generating functions 18% 20% 23% Entry-level 39% 40% 41% 

% FTE by Age Group, Global % of Total 

15-30 Years 12% 11% 13% 30-50 Years 63% 62% 63% 50+ Years 25% 25% 25% 

# NET 

# +6% year-over-year increase in women in top management positions 77 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 77

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Workforce Demographics 2020 2021 2022 % Ethnic Diversity by Level, US Only 1 % of Level 

Board of Directors (exception, global) 15% 15% 15% Executive 29% 28% 24% Senior Management 14% 19% 18% Professional/Management 17% 16% 17% Entry-level 15% 14% 16% Operations & Support 21% 21% 22% 

Share of Race/Ethnicity & Nationality 

Asian 6.23% 6.33% 6.22% Black or African-American 2.85% 2.89% 3.19% Hispanic or Latino 6.72% 6.68% 7.32% White 82.5% 82.4% 81.4% Indigenous or Native 0.37% 0.36% 0.36% Other: Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, Native American, and Two or More Races .99% 1.39% 1.48%  

> 1Ethnic Diversity is defined by the following parameters: Hispanic or Latino, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, Asian, American Indian or Alaska Native, Two or More Races. 78

Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 78

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Corteva Agriscience has a broad portfolio of sustainable innovations for smallholder farmers, from hybrid corn seed varieties that are drought-resistant and heat-tolerant, to green-chemistry award winning crop protection products that are highly effective against fall armyworm, to herbicides that greatly reduce the labor intensity for women in agriculture. Corteva markets these technologies to millions of smallholder farmer customers in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. With some of the most recognized brands in agriculture, Corteva is committed to working with stakeholders throughout the food system to fulfill our promise to enrich the lives of those who produce and those who consume, ensuring progress for generations to come. Corteva also engages in global collaborations that are focused on increasing the incomes, productivity, and sustainable farming practices of smallholder farmers. We collaborate with organizations and entities like the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), One Acre Fund, Consortium of International Ag Research Centers, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Agricultural Cooperative Development International (ACDI)/Volunteers in Overseas Cooperative Assistance ("VOCA"), John Deere, and Land O’Lakes. These collaborations enable Corteva to work with in agricultural development public funding to grow the company’s business in emerging markets and reduce risk, while enriching the lives of smallholder farmers and their communities. Through these collaborations, key stakeholders also leverage our significant innovation advantages and our scale as well as the unique expertise of our world-class employees to advance solutions to pressing agricultural challenges, such as food security, while promoting equity in agriculture. Furthermore, through our Agriculture Equity Initiatives with USAID, CGIAR, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and others, Corteva is leveraging our technologies and scientists to bring sustainable innovations to the smallholder farmers facing some of the greatest pest, disease, and climate challenges globally. 

# Empowering & Enriching the Lives of Smallholders 79 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 79 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

We are co-developing new varieties with public agricultural research institutions and advancing regulatory approvals to increase farmer access to science-based solutions. For example: • Corteva Agriscience collaborated with USAID and ACDI/VOCA in Tanzania between 2011 and 2022 to increase the productivity of 600,000 smallholder farmers by 300% on average by empowering farmers with increased access to sustainable innovations such as climate-adaptive hybrid corn seeds, fall armyworm control, and herbicides that virtually eliminate the practice of hand weeding, which is most often carried out by women • Through a collaboration with the USAID in 

Myanmar , Corteva is aiming to increase smallholder farmer yield from 4 MT to 7 MT per hectare and increase farmer income by $350 USD per hectare by expanding market access to Corteva sustainable innovations, such as climate-adaptive hybrid seeds and crop protection products • Striga is a parasitic weed that targets the roots of sorghum plants, dramatically impacting yield for this major food staple in Eastern Africa . Corteva is collaborating with Kenyatta University, ISAAA AfriCenter, AATF and USAID to apply gene-editing techniques to create a Striga-resistant ‘smart’ sorghum that hinders the host connection by preventing Striga germination and parasitism. By measurably reducing Striga infection, farmers will see productivity increases and be better equipped to meet the food consumption needs of millions of people in this arid region • Corteva collaborates with Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) to improve the productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers in Africa through increasing access to sustainable innovations such as climate-adaptive hybrid seeds. AGRA is an organization that seeks to transform African agriculture from a subsistence model to strong businesses that improve the livelihoods of the continent’s farming households • One Acre Fund is a social enterprise that supplies smallholder farmers in Eastern Africa with financing and training to enhance food security and improve livelihoods. Our collaboration with One Acre fund is increasing yields and incomes through increasing access to Corteva’s sustainable innovations such as climate-adaptive hybrid seeds • Corteva collaborates with Conservation Farming Unit (CFU) in Zambia to increase smallholder farmer access to sustainable innovations such as climate-adaptive hybrid seeds and crop protection products. CFU works to provide medium and smallholder farmers with expertise and tools to transition to conservation farming and agricultural practices in Zambia .• Through the Prospera Program, Corteva collaborates with key public and private stakeholders to provide medium and smallholder farmers with classroom and hands-on training, technical support, and increased access to sustainable innovations in 

Brazil & Argentina 80 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

80 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Corteva Grows is our global, Company-wide strategy and program for corporate citizenship and philanthropy. Corteva Agriscience proudly partners with local and regional communities through outreach programs around the world. We use our expertise to help address nutrition, food security, environment, science and technology education, and quality of life challenges. 

# Community engagement provides opportunities to connect with the people behind agricultural technologies and opens the door for conversations, leading to advocacy and support. 

— Ronda Hamm Global Academic Relations Leader 

# Engaging with Communities 81 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction  

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 81 Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment

UN SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 

Our local communities are the heart of our company. Corteva program initiatives help improve the quality of life in communities where we live and work, striving to meet the unique needs of each. Corteva is driven by a purpose to enrich the lives of those who produce and consume agricultural products around the world. We strive to create an agricultural ecosystem that naturally supports people, progress, and the planet. We proudly partner with our communities through outreach programs. Corteva promotes the sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems within communities across the U.S. with our Corteva Grows Pollinator Habitat program. This unique program supports the monarch butterfly and pollinator habitat at 38 Corteva sites in 19 states across the country that represent about 100 acres. Corteva provides land and financial support for the pollinator habitat, and each habitat is planted and maintained by the site’s employees and 4-H youth. Additionally, Pheasants Forever provides expertise and support, such as habitat seed, site preparation, planting support, and ongoing mowing. Through this joint initiative, over 25,000 4-H youth are helping increase pollinator populations. With the tools and support needed to understand the importance of pollinators, they’re also learning how to build a habitat in their own communities, proactively working toward increasing biodiversity. 

Focusing on UN SDGs 2, 4, and 11 bring Corteva’s purpose to life. They grow the business through understanding our stakeholders and communities, driving programs and partnerships, and expanding market access, technology acceptance, and freedom to operate locally and globally. UN SDG 2: Zero Hunger 

Globally, more than 800 million people in the world do not have enough food to lead a healthy, active life. That equates to one out of nine people who suffer from chronic hunger. Corteva Agriscience is dedicated to sustainable innovation and working in concert with farmers, local businesses, schools, governments, and non-profits to unlock solutions that help feed the world and ensure sustainable food security. Together we can eliminate hunger and achieve food security. Some of our contributions have included: • Sustainable innovations that increase food productivity to feed a growing population. • Planting and harvesting hunger gardens that stock food pantries • Assisting with distribution of food for hungry families • Preparing and delivering meals to home-bound senior citizens • Helping to create new food pantries for communities in need • Assembling meal pack kits • Sharing best practices and access with smallholder farmers 

UN SDG 4: Quality Education 

We support projects and programs that lead to educational achievement and development for youth globally and build a diverse future agricultural workforce. We cultivate the future through science and technology education with all ages and broadly increase the tech pipeline, which benefits our business. We collaborate with community partners, educators, organizations, and schools to support events that make science education fun for all ages. Activity areas include agriculture, biology, chemistry, engineering, information technology, nutrition, marketing, sales, and more. Participants learn about career opportunities in agriculture and become familiar with progressive skill sets and professional competencies like critical thinking, problem solving, leadership, teamwork, and communications. Community engagement provides opportunities for open conversations about agricultural technologies, leading to advocacy and support. Our activities for students include: • Opportunities to meet with scientists, engineers and tech specialists • Engaging science activities at K-12 schools and universities • Hands-on learning and exposure at science fairs. • Providing access to agricultural professionals to answer questions • Offering scholarships to students pursuing careers in agriculture fields 

Community Performance 2022 

Global Cash and In-Kind Giving (Product or services donations, projects/partnerships or similar) $10,000,000 Ukraine Donations $1,700,000 Employee volunteering during paid working hours 19,600 hrs 

Corteva Agriscience prioritizes community impact through the following UN SDGs: 82 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 82

Sustainability And ESG Governance Social Environment 

Corteva Agriscience actively participates in policy-related dialogue pertaining to the environment and social factors that affect the lives of farmers, consumers, our operations, our employees, and the communities in which they live. When engaging in policy-related dialogue, Corteva always complies with U.S., federal, state, and local political campaign finance and election laws. Corteva publicly discloses details on its U.S. Political Giving on its website. 

U.S. Political Contributions FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022 

Lobbying, interest representation or similar $2,549,000 $2,692,000 $2,140,000 Local, regional, or national political campaigns/organizations/candidates $38,000 $144,000 $82,000 Trade associations or tax-exempt groups (e.g. think tanks) $1,015,000 $769,000 $917,000 Other (e.g. spending related to ballot measures or referendums) $0 $0 $0 Total contributions and other spending $3,602,000 $3,606,000 $3,139,000 Data coverage (as %, indicating the organizational scope of the reported data) % of Total Global Net Sales (Revenues) 50% 50% 50% 

# Political Giving & Public Policy ESG Indexes 

# 5

83 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 84 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 84

GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 

# GRI Content Index 

GRI 2: General Disclosures (2021) 2-1 Organization Details Corteva, Inc. ("Corteva Agriscience" or "Corteva") Indianapolis, Indiana, United States Business Overview Sustainability Report Geographic Information (F-64) Annual Report Country Selector Website Item 1: Business Annual Report 2-2 Entities included in the organization's sustainability reporting Item 1: Business Annual Report 2-3 Reporting period, frequency and contact point About This Report Sustainability Report 2-4 Restatements of information 2-5 External assurance 2-6 Activities, value chain and other business relationships Item 1. Business Annual Report Business Overview Sustainability Report Products and Services Website 2-7 Employees Item 1. Business Annual Report Workforce Demographics Sustainability Report 2-9 Governance structure and composition Sustainability and ESG Governance Sustainability Report Voting and Attendance Procedures, Corporate Governance, Board Committees, Board Composition Proxy Statement 2-10 Nomination and selection of the highest governance body Corporate Governance Proxy Statement Corporate Governance Guidelines Webpage 2-11 Chair of the highest governance body Corporate Governance Policies Proxy Statement 85 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 85 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 2: General Disclosures (2021) 2-12 Role of the highest governance body in overseeing the management of impacts Board Composition Proxy Statement Corporate Governance Policies Sustainability and ESG Governance Sustainability Report 2-13 Delegation of responsibility for managing impacts Bylaws of Corteva, Inc. Webpage Sustainability and ESG Governance Sustainability Report 2-14 Role of the highest governance body in sustainability reporting Board of Directors and Board Committee ESG Governance Sustainability Report 2-15 Conflicts of interest Related Person Transactions, Director Nominees, Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation Proxy Statement Page 7 Corporate Governance Guidelines Page 1-8 Director Code of Conduct Page 16-17 Corteva Code of Conduct Page 1 Corteva Code of Financial Ethics 2-16 Communication of critical concerns Sustainability Values and Initiatives Proxy Statement Information unavailable: while we have processes to address and resolve concerns with the Board of Directors, we do not tally and report a number of critical concerns 2-17 Collective knowledge of the highest governance body Board Composition Proxy Statement 2-18 Collective knowledge of the highest governance body Corporate Governance Policies 2-19 Renumeration policies Compensation Discussion & Analysis 2-20 Process to determine renumeration Compensation Discussion & Analysis 2-21 Annual total compensation ratio CEO Pay Ratio 2-22 Statement on sustainable development strategy Strategy Based on Sustainability Sustainability Report 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 86 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 86 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 2: General Disclosures (2021) 2-23 Policy commitments UN Global Compact Commitment of Progress UN Global Compact COP Index Corteva Code of Conduct 6-30, see 15 for our expectations for partners including suppliers 2-26 Mechanisms for seeking advice and raising concerns 31-32 2-28 Membership associations External Initiatives, Memberships and Partnerships Sustainability Report 2-29 Approach to stakeholder engagement Stakeholder Engagement and Non-Financial ESG Materiality 2022 Annual Report Item 1. Business Engagement Proxy Statement Future Agriculture Workforce Position Statements 2-30 Collective bargaining agreements 2022 Annual Report Item 1. Business 3-1 Process to determine non-financial material topics Stakeholder Engagement and Non-Financial ESG Materiality Sustainability Report 3-2 List of non-financial material topics 3-3 Management of non-financial material topics Precautionary Approach/UN Global Compact Principle 7 GRI 201: Economic Performance (2016) 201-1 Direct economic value generated and distributed Item 1. Business Annual Report 201-2 Financial implications and other risks & opportunities due to climate change Item 1A. Risk Factors Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 201-2 Financial implications and other risks & opportunities due to climate change GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 103 Management Approach Empowering and Enriching the Lives of Smallholders GRI 203: Indirect Economic Impacts (2016) 103 Management Approach Empowering and Enriching the Lives of Smallholders Sustainability Report Engaging with Communities 203-2 Significant indirect economic impacts Empowering and Enriching the Lives of Smallholders 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 87 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 87 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 204: Procurement Practices (2016) 103 Management Approach Supplier Sustainability and Diversity Website ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Page 5, 12-13, 15-17, 26, 31-32; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Corteva Code of Conduct GRI 205: Anti-corruption (2016) 103 Management Approach Page 2-3 Supplier Code of Conduct 205-2 Communication and training about anti-corruption policies and procedures Page 32-33 205-2 Communication and training about anti-corruption policies and procedures Page 31-32 Corteva Code of Conduct 205-2 Communication and training about anti-corruption policies and procedures ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 103 Management Approach Page 5-6 Director Code of Conduct GRI 206: Anti-competitive Behavior (2016) 103 Management Approach 12-19, 31-32; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Corteva Code of Conduct 103 Management Approach Page 2-3 Supplier Code of Conduct 206-1 Legal actions for anti-competitive behavior, anti-trust, and monopoly practices Item 3. Legal Proceedings Annual Report GRI 301: Materials (2016) 103 Management Approach Circular Economy Sustainability Report 301-1 Materials use by weight or volume 301-3 Reclaimed products and their packaging materials GRI 302: Energy (2016) 103 Management Approach GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 302-1 Energy consumption within the organization Scope 1 & 2 Emissions 103, 303-1, 303-2 Management Approach Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 303-3 Water Withdrawal Water Stewardship 303-5 Water Consumption 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 88 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 88 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 304: Biodiversity (2016) 103 Management Approach Biodiversity Governance, Risk, and Opportunity Management Sustainability Report 304-3 Habitats protected or restored Corteva Agriscience's Strategy Key Global Challenges Biodiversity Goal GRI 305: Emissions (2016) 103 Management Approach Climate Sustainability Report Biodiversity Circular Economy Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 103, 306-1, 306-2 Management Approach Circular Economy 305-1 Direct (Scope 1) GHG Emissions Scope 1 & 2 Emissions 305-2 Energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions 305-3 Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions Scope 3 Emissions Circular Economy Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 305-4 GHG emissions intensity Circular Economy 305-7 Nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, and other significant air emissions GRI 306: Waste (2020) 103, 306-1, 306-2 Management Approach Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Circular Economy 306-3 Waste generated in metric tons (hazardous, non-hazardous) Circular Economy GRI 307: Environmental Compliance & 419: Socioeconomic Compliance (2016) 103 Management Approach Page 6, 18, 19, 21-27 Corteva Code of Conduct Page 1-2 Supplier Code of Conduct 307-1, 419-1 Non-compliance with laws and regulations in the social and economic area Item 3. Legal Proceedings Annual Report 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 89 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 89 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 308: Supplier Environmental Assessment & 414: Supplier Social Assessment (2016) 103 Management Approach Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Item 1. Business Annual Report 308-1 New suppliers that were screened using environmental criteria ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 414-1 New suppliers that were screened using environmental criteria GRI 401: Employment (2016) 103 Management Approach ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 401-3 Parental Leave Why Join Us: Parental Leave Website 403-1 Occupational health and safety management system EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report GRI 403: Occupational Health and Safety (2018) 103 Management Approach EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 403-1 Occupational health and safety management system 403-5 Worker training on employee health and safety ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 403-6 Promotion of worker health Why Join Us: Prospera Wellness Program Website 403-7 Prevention and mitigation of occupational health and safety impacts directly linked by business relationships Page 3 Supplier Code of Conduct 403-8 Workers covered by an occupational health and safety management system EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 403-9 Work-related incidents and frequency rates GRI 404: Training and Education (2016) 103 Management Approach Human Capital Management Proxy Statement ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 404-1 Average hours of training per year per employee 404-2 Programs for upgrading employee skills and transition assistance programs Human Capital Management Proxy Statement 103 Management Approach Item 1. Business Annual Report 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 90 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 90 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 405: Diversity and Equal Opportunity (2016) 103 Management Approach Culture of Belonging Website ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Page 9 Corteva Code of Conduct 405-1 Diversity of governance bodies and employees Board Composition, Director Nominees Proxy Statement Workforce Demographics Sustainability Report GRI 406: Non-discrimination (2016) 103 Management Approach Page 2 Supplier Code of Conduct Page 8-11; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Corteva Code of Conduct 406-1 Incidents of discrimination and corrective actions taken ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report GRI 408: Child Labor (2016) 103 Management Approach Page 1 Supplier Code of Conduct Child and Forced Labor Corteva Statement Page 8-11; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Corteva Code of Conduct 408-1 Operations and suppliers at significant risk for incidents of child labor Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance GRI 409: Forced or Compulsory Labor (2016) 103 Management Approach Page 1 Supplier Code of Conduct Child and Forced Labor Corteva Statement Page 8-11; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Corteva Code of Conduct 409-1 Operations and suppliers at significant risk for incidents of forced or compulsory labor ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 91 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 91 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 412: Human Rights Assessment (2016) 103 Management Approach ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Engaging With Communities Corteva Board Committees Human Capital Management Proxy Statement Page 8-11; see page 15 page for our expectations for partners including suppliers Code of Conduct Supplier Code of Conduct Website 412-2 Employee training on human rights policies or procedures ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Engaging With Communities Page 29-30 Code of Conduct 413-1 Operations with local community engagement, impact assessments, and development programs Engaging With Communities Sustainability Report GRI 415: Public Policy (2016) 103 Management Approach Political Activities Proxy Statement US Political Disclosures Website Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report 415-1 Political contributions U.S. Political Disclosures Website GRI 416: Customer Health & Safety (2016) 103 Management Approach Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Page 12, 18 Code of Conduct 416-1 Assessment of the health and safety impacts and services categories Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Product Stewardship and Product Information Website 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 92 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 92 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

GRI 417: Marketing and Labeling (2016) 103 Management Approach Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Anti-counterfeiting and Brand Protection Website Corteva Code of Conduct 22-23; Webpage 417-1 Requirements for product and service information and labeling Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Sustainability Report Bringing transparency to regulatory safety data Website GRI 418: Customer Privacy (2016) 103 Management Approach Corteva Global Privacy Policy Website 418-1 Substantiated complaints concerning breaches of customer privacy and losses of customer data Information Security & Privacy Sustainability Report 

GRI Standard Disclosure Number Disclosure Name Source Location 93 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 93 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

SASB Chemicals Sustainability Standard (2018) Code Topic Metric Page of Reference/Response 

# SASB Index 

RT-CH-110a.1 GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Gross global Scope 1 emissions, percentage covered under emissions-limiting regulations GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance RT-CH-110a.2 Climate Discussion of long-term and short-term strategy or plan to manage Scope 1 emissions, emissions reduction targets, and an analysis of performance against those targets Climate, GHG Governance, Risk Management, and Performance RT-CH-120a.1 Circular Economy Air emissions of the following pollutants: (1) NOX (excluding N 2O) Circular Economy Air emissions of the following pollutants: (2) SOX Air emissions of the following pollutants: (3) volatile organic compounds (VOCs) Air emissions of the following pollutants: (4) hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) RT-CH-140a.1 Water Stewardship (1) Total water withdrawn Water Stewardship (2) Total water consumed Quantitative percentage of water withdrawn in regions with High or Extremely High Baseline Water Stress RT-CH-140a.2 Number of incidents of non-compliance associated with water quality permits, standards, and regulations RT-CH-140a.3 Description of water management risks and discussion of strategies and practices to mitigate those risks RT-CH-150a.1 Circular Economy Amount of hazardous waste generated, percentage recycled Circular Economy RT-CH-210a.1 Engaging with Communities Discussion of engagement processes to manage risks and opportunities associated with community interests Engaging with Communities RT-CH-320a.1 Safety Performance (1) Total recordable incident rate (TRIR) EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance (2) fatality rate for (a) direct employees (2) fatality rate for (b) contract employees RT-CH-320a.2 Description of efforts to assess, monitor, and reduce exposure of employees and contract workers to long-term (chronic) health risks 94 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 94 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

SASB Chemicals Sustainability Standard (2018) Code Topic Metric Page of Reference/Response 

RT-CH-410a.1 Sustainably Advantaged New Crop Protection Product Revenue Revenue from products designed for use-phase resource efficiency Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance RT-CH-410b.1 Sustainable Innovation Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance (1) Percentage of products that contain Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS) Category 1 and 2 Health and Environmental Hazardous Substances While we conduct hazard assessments on required products, the requested information is confidential (2) Percentage of such products that have undergone a hazard assessment While we conduct hazard assessments on required products, the requested information is confidential RT-CH-410b.2 Discussion of strategy to (1) manage chemicals of concern Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance RT-CH-410c.1 Genetically Modified Organisms Percentage of products by revenue that contain genetically modified organisms ("GMOs") Corteva does not report the percentage of products by revenue that contain GMOs. Read our commitment to plant breeding transparency and discussion in our 2022 Annual Report (Regulation of GMOs) RT-CH-530a.1 Political Giving and Public Policy Discussion of corporate positions related to government regulations and/or policy proposals that address environmental and social factors affecting the industry Political Giving & Public Policy 95 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 95 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

SASB Chemicals Sustainability Standard (2018) Code Topic Metric Page of Reference/Response 

RT-CH-540a.1 Safety Performance Process Safety Incidents Count (PSIC) EHS&S Governance, Risk Management, and Performance Process Safety Total Incident Rate (PSTIR) Process Safety Incident Severity Rate (PSISR) RT-CH-540a.2 Number of transport incidents RT-CH-000.A Production by Reportable Segment The requested metric is not an accurate representation of our production in aggregate; our net sales can be found in our sustainability report. 96 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 96 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

UNGC Principles Actions Corteva Agriscience supports the principles of the UN Global Compact. The UNGC is the largest international sustainability initiative, supporting companies to: 

1. Do business responsibly by aligning their strategies and operations with Ten Principles on human rights, labor, environment, and anti-corruption, and 2. Take strategic actions to advance broader societal goals, such as the UN SDGs, with an emphasis on collaboration and innovation. 

# COP Index 

Statement of support 

Statement by the chief executive expressing continued support for the Global Compact and renewing the participant’s ongoing commitment to the initiative and its principles Letter of Commitment 

Actions and measurement Principle 1: Business should support and respect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights • Code of Conduct • Supplier Code of Conduct • Supplier Sustainability and Diversity • Culture of Belonging • 2022 Sustainability Report - Non-discrimination and Harassment - Identifying & Assessing Human Rights Concerns - Product Stewardship Governance, Risk Management, and Performance - ID&E Governance, Risk Management, and Performance 

Principle 2: Make sure that they are not complicit in human rights abuses 

Labor principles Principle 3: Business should uphold the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining • Child and Forced Labor Policy • Culture of Belonging • Sustainability and Innovation Committee Charter (Pg. 2) • Corteva Employee Health and Wellness • 2023 Proxy Statement (pg. 14) • 2022 Sustainability Report - EHS&S Governance, RIsk Management, and Performance 

Principle 4: The elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labor 

Principle 5: The effective abolition of child labor 

Principle 6: The elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation 97 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 97

GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References 

# COP Index 

UNGC Principles (continued) Actions Environmental Principles Principle 7: Business should support a precautionary approach to environmental challenges • Code of Conduct • Supplier Code of Conduct • 2022 Sustainability Report -Sustainable Innovation and Product Stewardship Governance -Precautionary Approach 

Principle 8: Undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility 

Principle 9: Encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally friendly technologies 

Anti-corruption principles Principle 10: Business should work against corruption in all its forms, including extortion and bribery • Code of Conduct • Supplier Code of Conduct • 2022 Sustainability Report -Employee Training and Development 98 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 98 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

Topic Recommended disclosures Sustainability and ESG Report Reference 

# TCFD Index 

1. Governance: Disclosure of the organization’s governance and climate-related risks and opportunities 

Describe the Board’s oversight of climate-related risks and opportunities Pg. 37 - Board of Directors and Board Committee ESG Governance Pg. 49 - GHG Governance Describe management’s role in assessing and managing climate-related risks and opportunities 

2. Strategy: Disclosure of the actual and potential impacts of climate-related risks and opportunities on the organization’s business, strategy, and financial planning where such information is material. 

Describe the climate-related risks and opportunities the organization has identified over the short-, medium-, and long-term. Pg. 9 - Our Actions and Impact Pg. 11 - Our Advantaged Product Highlights Pg. 20-22 - Sustainable Innovation Pg. 26 - Implementing Sustainable Emissions Reductions Pg. 48 - Green Chemistry Award Spotlight: Spinosad and Spinetoram Pg. 50 - Corteva's Climate Risk Assessment Journey Pg. 59 - Lowering Emissions Through Sustainable Practices and Partnerships Pg. 60 - Measuring the Environmental Life Cycle of our Products Pg. 62 - Nitrogen Stabilizer and Optimizers Pg. 63 - Drought and Heat Resiliency within our Value-chain Pg. 66 - Circular Economy Website - Corteva Carbon Initiative Describe the impact of climate-related risks and opportunities on the organization’s businesses, strategy, and financial planning. Describe the resilience of the organization’s strategy, taking into consideration different climate-related scenarios, including a 2 degree C or lower scenario. 

3. Risk Management: Disclosure of how the organization identifies, assesses, and manages climate-related risks. 

Describe the organization’s processes for identifying and assessing climate-related risks. Pg. 50 - Climate Risks and Opportunity Management Pg. 52 - Physical Risks Pg. 53 - Transitional Risks Pg. 60 - Enhancing the Quality of Scope 3 Accounting Standards Pg. 68 - Our Journey Towards Measuring GHG Reduction Benefits Describe the organization’s processes for managing climate-related risks. Describe how processes for identifying, assessing, and managing climate-related risks are integrated into the organization’s overall risk management. 

4. Metrics and targets: Disclosure of the metrics and targets used to assess and manage relevant climate-related risks and opportunities where such information is material. 

Disclose the metrics used by the organization to assess climate-related risks and opportunities in line with its strategy and risk management process. Pg. 26 - Climate Pg. 58 - Scope 1 & 2 Emissions and GHG Intensity Ratio Pg. 59 - Scope 3 Emissions Disclose Scope 1, Scope 2, and, if appropriate, Scope 3 GHG emissions, and the related risks. Describe the targets used by the organization to manage climate-related risks and opportunities and performance against targets. 99 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report

99 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References 

Corteva Non-Financial Material ESG Topic UN SDG 

# UN SDG Index 

Sustainable Innovation Ag Innovation Climate Adaptation/Resilience Climate Mitigation Water Use and Stewardship Product Responsibility Soil Health Biodiversity Biodiversity Biodiversity Soil Health Engaging with Communities Human Rights and Food Security Inclusion, Diversity and Equity Local Communities Supply Chain Responsibility Employee Engagement Climate Climate Adaptation/Resilience Climate Mitigation Ag Innovation Inclusion, Diversity and Equity Workplace Health and Safety Employee Engagement Inclusion, Diversity and Equity 100 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 100 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

# About This Report  

> 1The non-financial materiality assessment identifies sustainability topics of relative importance or that are considered significant to internal and external stakeholders but is not aligned to any definition of materiality as outlined in securities law, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, or any other federal, state, local or foreign law, rule or regulation.

This 2022 Sustainability Report is Corteva Agriscience’s third annual sustainability report. It serves as an update on the most important social and environmental sustainability topics as identified through Corteva and its external stakeholders’ non-financial ESG materiality assessment. Corteva sought internal and external stakeholder input to assess the non-financial materiality of relevant environmental and social topics and publicly disclosed those results. That stakeholder engagement informed the direction of the Company’s current sustainability efforts. Corteva’s sustainability topics translate the identified topics into actionable areas where the company can, through its business and practices, drive positive social and environmental progress consistent with the company’s strategic objectives, scope, and scale and through the approach outlined in this report. The following data and information cover the activities of Corteva globally, to the extent possible based on many factors such as enterprise systems or the practicality of capturing data. Where data is not available on a global basis or not provided for a selected entity, it is noted with the data presented. Additional activities related to environmental, social and governance topics that we consider “essential business practices” are discussed within this report where relevant. Corteva engaged accredited third-party verifier SGS to complete limited external assurance on specific information within this Sustainability and ESG Report related to certain environmental and social metrics. SGS is a world’s leading inspection, verification, testing and certification company. A separate statement outlining the scope and results from this engagement is provided on our website. Certain additional reported data was compiled, evaluated or verified by third parties such as nonprofit partners. If a restatement is required, it is explained and noted in text and footnotes in the Sustainability and ESG Report or related data tables. Corteva reports annually in alignment with our fiscal year which ended December 31, 2022. The 2022 ESG and Sustainability Report was published on April 4, 2023. For general questions regarding this report, contact 

sustainability@corteva.com 

Investors with questions regarding Corteva should contact our Investor Relations team at (302) 485-3400 Reporting Frameworks & Additional References 

While voluntary, the contents of this report are informed by the following frameworks: • Global Reporting Initiative ("GRI") Standards for Sustainability Reporting • Sustainability Accounting Standards Board ("SASB") Standard for the Chemical Sector • The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures ("TCFD") • The UN Global Compact Communication on Progress ("CoP") 101 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction      

> Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 101 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References

This communication contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and may be identified by their use of words like “targets”, “plans,” “expects,” “will,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “projects,” “estimates,” or other words of similar meaning. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including statements about Corteva’s sustainability goals, emissions targets, inclusion and diversity representation goals, product development and innovations, regulatory approvals, and environmental matters, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions and expectations of future events which may not be accurate or realized. Forward-looking statements also involve risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond Corteva Agriscience's control. While the list of factors presented below is considered representative, no such list should be considered to be a complete statement of all potential risks and uncertainties. Unlisted factors may present significant additional obstacles to the realization of forward-looking statements. Consequences of material differences in results as compared with those anticipated in the forward-looking statements could include, among other things, business disruption, operational problems, financial loss, legal liability to third parties and similar risks, any of which could have a material adverse effect on Corteva’s business, results of operations and financial condition. Some of the important factors that could cause Corteva’s actual results to differ materially from those projected in any such forward-looking statements include: (i) failure to successfully develop and commercialize Corteva’s pipeline; (ii) failure to obtain or maintain the necessary regulatory approvals for some of Corteva’s products; (iii) effect of the degree of public understanding and acceptance or perceived public acceptance of Corteva’s biotechnology and other agricultural products; (iv) effect of changes in agricultural and related policies of governments and international organizations; (v) costs of complying with evolving regulatory requirements and the effect of actual or alleged violations of environmental laws or permit requirements; (vi) effect of climate change and unpredictable seasonal and weather factors; (vii) failure to comply with competition and antitrust laws; (viii) effect of competition in Corteva’s industry; (ix) competitor’s establishment of an intermediary platform for distribution of Corteva's products; (x) impact of Corteva's dependence on third parties with respect to certain of its raw materials or licenses and commercialization; (xi) effect of volatility in Corteva’s input costs; (xii) risk related to geopolitical and military conflict; (xiii) effect of industrial espionage and other disruptions to Corteva’s supply chain, information technology or network systems; (xiv) risks related to environmental litigation and the indemnification obligations of legacy EIDP liabilities in connection with separation of Corteva; (xv) risks related to Corteva’s global operations; (xvi) failure to effectively manage acquisitions, divestitures, alliances, restructurings, cost savings initiatives, and other portfolio actions; (xvii) failure to raise capital through the capital markets or short-term borrowings on terms acceptable to Corteva; (xviii) failure of Corteva’s customers to pay their debts to Corteva, including customer financing programs; (xix) increases in pension and other post-employment benefit plan funding obligations; (xx) capital markets sentiment towards ESG matters; (xxi) risks related to pandemics or epidemics; (xxii) Corteva’s intellectual property rights or defend against intellectual property claims asserted by others; (xxiii) effect of counterfeit products; (xxiv) Corteva’s dependence on intellectual property cross-license agreements; and (xxv) other risks related to the Separation from DowDuPont. Additionally, there may be other risks and uncertainties that Corteva is unable to currently identify or that Corteva does not currently expect to have a material impact on its business. Where, in any forward-looking statement or other estimate, an expectation or belief as to future results or events is expressed, such expectation or belief is based on the current plans and expectations of Corteva’s management and expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the expectation or belief will result or be achieved or accomplished. Corteva disclaims and does not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, except as required by applicable law. A detailed discussion of some of the significant risks and uncertainties that may cause results and events to differ materially from such forward-looking statements is included in the “Risk Factors” section of Corteva’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, as modified by subsequent Quarterly Reports on Forms 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC. 

# Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements 102 Our Sustainability & ESG Focus  ESG Indexes Our Business Executive Summary ESG Disclosures Introduction 

Corteva Agriscience 2022 Sustainability & ESG Report 102 GRI Content Index SASB Index COP Index TCFD Index SDG Index Additional References  

> 1

Operating EBITDA is defined as earnings (loss) (i.e., income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes) before interest, depreciation, amortization, non-operating benefits (costs), foreign exchange gains (losses), and net unrealized gain or loss from mark-to-market activity for certain foreign currency derivative instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting, excluding the impact of significant items. Non-operating benefits (costs) consists of non-operating pension and OPEB credits (costs), tax indemnification adjustments, and environmental remediation and legal costs associated with legacy businesses and sites. Tax indemnification adjustments relate to changes in indemnification balances, as a result of the application of the terms of the Tax Matters Agreement, between Corteva and Dow and/or DuPont that are recorded by the company as pre-tax income or expense. Net unrealized gain or loss from mark-to-market activity for certain foreign currency derivative instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting represents the non-cash net gain (loss) from changes in fair value of certain undesignated foreign currency derivative contracts. Upon settlement, which is within the same calendar year of execution of the contract, the realized gain (loss) from the changes in fair value of the non-qualified foreign currency derivative contracts will be reported in the relevant non-GAAP financial measures, allowing quarterly results to reflect the economic effects of the foreign currency derivative contracts without the resulting unrealized mark to fair value volatility. REGULATION G (NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE) 

## Non-GAAP Calculation of Corteva Operating EBITDA 

Twelve Months Ended 

December 31, 2022 (In millions) 

Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of tax (GAAP) 

Provision for (benefit from) income taxes on continuing operations $1,216 210 

Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of tax (GAAP) $1,426 + Depreciation and Amortization 

- Interest income 

+ Interest expense 

+ / - Exchange (gains) losses 

+ / - Non-operating (benefits) costs 

+ / - Mark-to-market (gains) losses on certain foreign currency contracts not designated as hedges + / - Significant items (benefit) charge 1,223 (124) 79 229 (111) –502 

Corteva Operating EBITDA (Non-GAAP) 1 $3,224 

This report includes information that does not conform to U.S. GAAP and are considered non-GAAP measures. These measures include operating EBITDA. Management uses these measures internally for planning and forecasting, including allocating resources and evaluating incentive compensation. Management believes that these non-GAAP measures best reflect the ongoing performance of Corteva Agriscience during the periods presented and provide additional more relevant and meaningful information to investors as they provide insight with respect to ongoing operating results of the Company and a more useful comparison of year-over-year results. These non-GAAP measures supplement the Company’s U.S. GAAP disclosures and should not be viewed as an alternative to U.S. GAAP measures of performance. Furthermore, such non-GAAP measures may not be consistent with similar measures provided or used by other companies. Reconciliations for these non-GAAP measures to U.S. GAAP are provided below. Corteva, Inc. 

Indianapolis, IN 46268, U.S.A. 

TM Trademarks of Corteva Agriscience and its affiliated companies. © 2023 Corteva The transgenic soybean event in Enlist E3 soybeans is jointly developed and owned by Corteva Agriscience LLC and M.S. Technologies, L.L.C. The Enlist weed control system is owned and developed by Dow AgroSciences LLC. Enlist Duo and Enlist One herbicides are not registered for sale or use in all states or counties. Contact your state pesticide regulatory agency to determine if a product is registered for sale or use in your area. Enlist Duo and Enlist One are the only 2,4-D products authorized for use with Enlist crops. Consult Enlist herbicide labels for weed species controlled. Always read and follow label directions. Pioneer brand products are provided subject to the terms and conditions of purchase which are part of the labeling and purchase document.
