Title: Microsoft Word - enPeru UNSDCF 06092021-revisiones_incorporadas_inglés.docx

URL Source: https://peru.un.org/sites/default/files/2022-06/Peru%20UNSDCF%2006092021-ENGLISH_FINAL.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 24 Jun 2022 19:41:41 GMT

Markdown Content:
> 1

# United Nations 

# Sustainable Development 

# Cooperation 

# Framework 

# PERU 2022 -2026 

# (September, 2021) 23

# Table of Contents 

Table of Contents ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 3

Joint declaration and signatures ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 4

Glossary ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 10 

Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 14 

1. Cou ntry's progress towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda ................................ .... 17 

1.1. National Context ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 18 

1.2. National vision of sustainable development ................................ ............................... 32 

1.3. Articulation with the 2030 Agenda: appropriation and incorporation of the SDGs in 

national frameworks ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 34 

1.4. Progress and challenges towards achieving the SDGs ................................ ................ 37 

2. United Nations System Support to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .......... 42 

2.1. Strategic priorities ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 45 

2.2. Theory of change ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 48 

2.3. Direct Effects ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 53 

2.4. Synergies ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 54 

2.5. Sustainability ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 57 

2.6. Comparative advantages of the United Nations ................................ ......................... 58 

3. Cooperation Framework implementation plan ................................ ................................ ... 60 

3.1. Governance and joint work plans ................................ ................................ ............... 60 

3.1.1. Management and strategic political dialogue level ................................ ............ 60 

3.1.2. Operational -programmatic implementa tion level ................................ .............. 62 

3.1.3. Advice and specialized support level ................................ ................................ ... 63 

3.2. Harmonized Approach for Cash Transfers (HACT) ................................ ...................... 65 

3.3. Strategic alliances and financing ................................ ................................ ................. 67 

4. Monitoring and evaluation plan ................................ ................................ .......................... 70 

4.1. Collective approach to strengthening national capacities in terms of monitoring and 

generating evidence ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 71 

4.2. Responsibilities and commitments of implementing partners ................................ ... 73 

4.3. Assumptions, risks and opportunities ................................ ................................ ......... 75 

Annex 1: Results Matrix of the Cooperation Framework ................................ ............................ 77 

Annex 2: International Recommendations of the Universal Human Rights System ................... 89 

Annex 3: Summary of queries for the preparation of the UNSDCF ................................ ........... 103 

Annex 4: PAHO / WHO Letter ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 107 4

# Joint declaration and signatures 

In 1945, the Charter of the United Nations established the three foundational pillars of the 

United Nations ( UN) system: peace and security, human rights and development. Decades later, 

in its historic resolution 72/279 of 2018, the General Assembly decided to strengthen the 

development pillar by fundamentally transforming the coordination system for the 

development of the Member States. In order to consistently support them in achieving the 2030 

Agenda for Sustainable Developmen t, the reform of the United Nations System (UNS) created 

an invigorated, empowered and independent resident coordination system. 

In this new system, the Resident Coordinator of the UNS in a country leads the process of 

elaboration of the United Nations Su stainable Development Cooperation Framework ( UNSDCF ), 

the primary document that articulates the government's expectations regarding the work of the 

UN as a whole, as well as the development programs of the UN Agencies, Funds and Programs 

(AFP) in each cou ntry , are derived from the UNSDCF .

The UNSDCF 2022 -2026 represents the collective commitment of the UNS to contribute to the 

efforts of the Government of Peru in the fulfillment of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable 

Development Goals (SDG), as well as the national development priorities with which this 

roadmap is aligned. This UNSDCF 2022 -2026 establishes the general guidelines to develop joint 

work plans between the Government of Peru and twenty -two AFPs (residents and non -

residents), during the next five years. 

In this sense the UNSDCF 2022 -2026 is the reference framework, product of a joint work 

between the Government of Peru and the United Nations System in Peru on their contribution 

to the following four strategic priorities: 1) Well -being of people an d equal access to 

opportunities; 2) Environmental management, climate change management and disaster risk 

management; 3) Competitiveness and inclusive and sustainable productivity; and, 4) Effective 

democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizensh ip. 

The strategic priorities were validated in an inclusive dialogue process with the Government, 

under the leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and with the participation of civil society 

actors, workers ’ and employers’ organi zations, government, academia and private sector. These 

priorities are aligned with the five axes of the Vision of Peru to 2050 approved by the National 

Agreement Forum, to the General Government Policy ,5

the 35 State Policies of the National Agreement , the National Policies, the Strategic Plan for 

National Development and the 2030 Agenda. Likewise, the UNSDCF is aligned with the 

international commitments of the Peruvian Government on human rights, sustaina ble 

development, gender equality, climate change, disaster risk reduction, crime prevention, and 

justice and migration, and may be adjusted during its implementation to help achieve the SDGs. 

Taking into consideration the context of the multidimensional c risis generated by the COVID -19 

pandemic and the urgent need to stop the epidemic outbreak, protect people in a socio -

economic situation of vulnerability and build long -term resilience, the Agencies, Funds and 

Programs in Peru are committed, therefore, to the collective human, technical and financial 

resources of the UNS being organized and deployed in the most effective and efficient manner 

possible. This in order to support the Government of Peru and ensure that the results of the 

UNSDCF are met, so that the g oals established in the 2030 Agenda are achieved, in accordance 

with the national strategic priorities and the national legal system, and in accordance with the 

principle of “leave no one behind”. 

The Parties sign the Cooperation Framework for Sustai nable Development 2022 -2026 between 

Peru and the United Nations in Lima, on September 7, 2021. 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF PERU FOR THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM IN PERU 

Ambassador Óscar Maúrtua de Romaña Igor Garafulic Olivares 

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru Resident Coordinator 6BY AGENCIES FUNDS AND PROGRAMS 

Jan Jarab 

Representative for South America 

OHCHR 

Federico Agusti 

Representative 

UNHCR 

Marianne Fay 

Director 

World Bank 

Mariana Escobar 

Representative 

FAO 

Marco Camagni 

Country Director for Peru a.i. 

IFAD 

Jorge Baca 

Head of Mission 

IOM 

Elena Montobbio 

Director a.i. for the Andean Countries 

ILO 

Carissa F. Etienne 

Director 

Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office for 

the Americas of the World Health Organization (PAHO 

/ WHO) 

* Signature subject to the attached Letter, Ref .: LEG / 

L / 606/21, September 3. 

Roi Chiti 

Representative for the Andean Countries 

UN -Habitat 

78Christiano Pasini 

Representative for Colombia, Peru, Guyana and 

Suriname 

UNIDO 

Andrea Boccardi 

Director for Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia 

UNAIDS 

Bettina Woll 

Representative 

UNDP 

Jacqueline Alvarez 

Director and regional representative for Latin America 

and the Caribbean 

UNEP 

Ernesto Fernández Polcuch 

Representative 

UNESCO 

Ana de Mendoza 

Representative 

UNICEF 

Hugo González 

Representative 

UNFPA 

Antonino De Leo 

Representative 

UNODC 

Monica Siles 

Director of the Multicountry Office in the Andean 

Region 

UNOPS 

Lita Paparoni 

Regional Director 

UNV 

Tania Goossens 

Representative 

WFP 

Melanie Regimbal 

Director 

UNLIREC 

9Glossary 

§ Social cohesion: the degree of trust in government and within society, and the willingness 

to participate collectively towards a joint vision of sustainable peace and common 

development goals. It has two main dimensions, one vertical and one horizontal. The 

horizontal dime nsion addresses relationships between individuals, seen, for example, as 

trust between individuals or the willingness to join associations. The vertical dimension 

represents trust between the government and society. This includes trust in political, 

econom ic, or social leaders, institutions, and processes such as elections, access to justice, 

taxes, budgeting and the provision of public services. It focuses on the State, it considers the 

cohesion between citizens; it is a dimension in which perceptions and behaviors reflect 

loyalty, broad legitimacy, security, and trust in national, sub -national or local actors, 

institutions and processes. 

§ Humanitarian crisis: any situation where there is a general threat to life, physical security, 

health, or basic subsiste nce that is beyond the capacities of the communities where they 

reside to solve it. 

§ Equitable exercise of citizenship: implies the existence and recognition of civil, social, 

political, economic and cultural rights and duties inherent to the individual as part of a 

society and political community of equals. Second, citizen participation in political and 

economic life from the ability to act and promote changes. The exercise of citizenship is not 

only a right in itself that contributes as such to well -being but also the most effective channel 

to guarantee that the social objectives of development are adequately represented in public 

decisions. 

§ Environmental management: a structured set of principles, technical standards, processes, 

and activities, aimed at t he integral management of the environmental system in order to 

achieve an adequate quality of life and the sustainable development of economic activities, 

preventing or mitigating environmental problems, without ending the environment in the 

long run. 

§ Comp rehensive management of climate change: consists of participatory, transparent and 

inclusive planning for the design, execution, monitoring, evaluation, reporting and 

dissemination of policies, strategies, plans, programs and projects aimed at reducing the 

country's vulnerability to the effects of climate change, reduce emissions and increase GHG 

removals; considering interculturality, gender and intergenerational approaches, built 

under a process of multi -sector, multi -stakeholder and multi -level agreement .

§ Disaster Risk Management: social process whose ultimate goal is the prevention, reduction 

and permanent control of disaster risk factors in society, as well as adequate preparation 

and response to disaster situations, considering national policies with s pecial emphasis on 

those related to economic, environmental, security, national and territorial defense in a 

sustainable manner 1.

§ Effective governance : effective governance is a precondition for advancing in the paving of 

the three lanes towards the 2030 Agenda (productivity , inclusion, and resilience), and it 

presupposes processes that allow: the generation of opportunities for socio -economic 

> 1Article 3 of the National Policy for Disaster Risk Management.

10 11 

development and mean ingful participation; the existence of solid, integral, and transparent 

institutions that consider the conditions of each territory; and better opportunities for 

peaceful coexistence and citizen security. 

§ Innovation: the ability to generate and execute new ideas (incremental, evolutionary, or 

transformational) and begins with creativity. Innovation works best from a portfolio 

approach, with a balance between predictable, short -term (incremental) advances and 

riskier, long -term (transformational) bets. For t he United Nations System, the scale and 

ambition of the Sustainable Development Goals call for a major change in the way 

development practice is carried out. This requires both moon shots : bold, visionary 

inventions and technological disruptions; as well as puddle jumps : important and 

incremental advances that support people in vulnerable situations and ensure that no one 

is left behind. 

§ Integrity of the public sector: refers to the constant alignment and compliance with shared 

values, principles and ethica l standards to defend and prioritize the public interest over 

private interests. It is a strategic response to corruption and an essential condition for 

ensuring good governance, as it contributes to inclusive growth, ensures the effective 

delivery of publ ic services, and strengthens the values of democracy and trust in 

governments 2.

§ People in a situation of discrimination: people or groups may face some type of 

discrimination, directly or indirectly, or even multiple forms of discrimination. The principle 

of equality and non -discrimination is recognized at the core of all human rights work, as 

recognized by the Charter of the United Nations and by the Universal Declaration of Human 

Rights. Given its relevance, the principle of equality and non -discriminati on has been 

recognized and constitutes one of the main objectives of all international human rights 

treaties. The principle applies to all people concerning all human rights and freedoms and 

prohibits discrimination on a non -exhaustive list of grounds such as race, color, sex, 

language, religion, political or other opinion s, national or social origin, property, sexual 

orientation, gender identity, birth or any other condition 3.

§ People in situations of vulnerability: these are the different segments of the population 

that are identified as vulnerable based on different attributes of a human right and analyzing 

the prospects of erosion of people's capacities and options related to threats (physical, 

biological, anthropo genic, or their combination). The Peruvian State has recognized some 

groups in situations of vulnerability in the National Human Rights Plan (PNDH) 2018 -2021: i) 

Women, ii) Children and adolescents, iii) People with disabilities, iv) People in situations o f

mobility, which includes refugees and migrants; v) LGTBI people; vi) People living with HIV 

and TB; vii) Domestic workers; viii) Victims of the period of violence 1980 -2000; ix) Afro -

Peruvian People; x) Indigenous Peoples; xi) Older Adults; xii) Human ri ghts defenders; xiii) 

Persons deprived of liberty. In addition to the groups recognized in the PNDH, the UNSDCF 

2022 -2026 also recognizes as people in vulnerable situations the populations in the three 

lowest income quintiles. 

§ Social protection floor: a se t of basic social security guarantees defined at the national level, 

which ensure protection aimed at preventing or alleviating poverty, vulnerability and social 

exclusion. These guarantees must ensure as a minimum that, during the life cycle, all people   

> 2OECD, 2021.
> 3UN (2012). Human Rights Indicators: A Guide to Measurement and Implementation.

12 

in need have access to at least essential health care and basic income security that jointly 

ensure effective access to the goods and services defined as necessary at the national level. 

§ Humanitarian response: emergency assistance that seeks to save lives, alleviate suffering, 

and maintain human dignity during and after crises caused by human intervention and 

disasters due to natural catastrophes in accordance with the humanitarian principles of 

neutrality, impartiality, humanity, and independence. This ass istance seeks to guarantee 

access to basic services for displaced populations such as food, medical care, water, and 

shelter. 

§ Post -crisis recovery: programs that go beyond the provision of immediate relief /emergency 

assistance, aimed at assisting those who have fully suffered the effects of a crisis 

(humanitarian crisis), including disasters, in rebuilding their homes, their lives and services 

and in strengthening their capacity to deal with future disasters and other emergencies. 

§ Resilience: the ability of social, economic, and environmental systems to cope with a 

phenomenon, trend, disturbance, or danger, responding or reorganizing in such a way that 

they maintain their essential function, identity and structure, and retain the capacity for 

adaptation, lea rning and transformation. 

§ Sexual and reproductive health: sexual health is a state of physical, emotional, mental and 

social well -being related to sexuality; which is not the absence of disease, dysfunction, or 

disability. To achieve and maintain sexual he alth , the sexual rights of all people must be fully 

respected, protected and exercised. This requires a positive and respectful approach to 

sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of having pleasant and safe 

sexual experiences, free from all coercion, discrimination, and violence. Reproductive health 

is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well -being and not merely the absence of 

disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and its functions and 

processes. Reproductive health , therefore, implies that people can enjoy a satisfying and 

safe sex life and reproduce and have the freedom to decide if, when and how often to do 

so. Implicit in this last condition is the right of men and women to be infor med and to have 

access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of family planning of their 

choice, as well as other methods of their choice for regulation of fertility which are not 

against the law and the right of access to appropriate healt h-care services that will enable 

women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the best 

chance of having a healthy infant. In line with the above definition of reproductive health, 

reproductive health care is defined as the s et of methods, techniques and services that 

contribute to reproductive health and well -being by preventing and solving reproductive 

health problems. 

§ Food security: exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access 

to sufficie nt, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for 

an active and healthy life. 

§ Basic income security: basic guarantee of a social protection floor, present throughout the 

entire life cycle, which seeks to ensure effective acc ess to goods and services defined as 

necessary at the national level. In the case of children and adolescents, it seeks to ensure 

access to food, education, care and any other goods and services. For people of active ages 

and older adults, on the other han d, it seeks to compensate for the lack or reduction of 

income due to different contingencies such as illness, unemployment, maternity, disability, 

old age and work accident. 13 

§ Public services: the activities assumed by public or private bodies or entities, c reated by the 

Constitution or the laws, to regularly and continuously satisfy a certain category of needs 

that are of general interest (security, education, health, water and sewerage, electricity, and 

natural gas, etc.). 

§ Comprehensive social protection sy stem: system made up of all social protection regimes 

and programs, including social protection floors, rooted or based on the legal system of a 

country that, under a human rights approach, respond in a coordinated manner, planned 

and sustainable to reduce and prevent poverty, vulnerability and social exclusion 

throughout the life cycle. Social protection covers nine main areas: family and child benefits, 

maternity benefits, unemployment benefits, benefits in case of accidents at work and 

occupational disea ses, as well as sickness, old -age, disability, survivor benefits, and health 

protection (medical care). Social protection systems address all of these policy areas through 

a combination of contributory schemes (social insurance) and tax -financed non -contri butory 

benefits (including social assistance). Its effective coordination seeks to materialize the 

objectives of universal coverage, comprehensiveness in terms of new and emerging risks 

such as long -term care, adequacy of benefits, adaptation to a changing world of work and 

financial sustainability. 

§ Care system: set of public policies and services focused on the State guaranteeing the right 

to care, which in turn must be based on gender equality, which implies a new organization 

between the State, families, the community, and the private sector. As there is greate r social 

co -responsibility around care, the possibilities of women to participate in decision -making, 

to work, to study and to have a better disposition of their time increase, all of which affects 

the development of their autonomy, especially economic. Ca re systems are based on the 

recognition of the human rights of both the people who receive care and those who provide 

it. 

§ Sustainable: characteristic that refers to something that has the ability to harness resources 

in a way and at a rate that does not le ad to long -term degradation of the environment, thus 

maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present generations and 

future. 

§ Decent work: opportunities to access a job or other means of work that generates a fair 

income, security in the workplace and social protection for families, better prospects for 

personal development and social integration, freedom for individuals to express their 

opinions, organize and participate in the decisions that affect their lives, and equal 

opportunitie s and treatment for all. Therefore, it encompasses full employment with 

security, social protection, fundamental workers' rights, and social dialogue, all of which are 

essential elements for achieving global social justice. 

§ Volunteering: Volunteering is a universal social behavior that is based on people's desire to 

commit to change, rather than passively experience development processes. It has the 

potential to contribute to community resilience and social cohesion, allowing vulnerable 

groups to organize f lexibly, respond in real -time and adapt to changing risk patterns. 

Volunteering, like other types of citizen participation, is both a means for development and 

an end in itself, becoming a great resource to address many of the development challenges 

of our time and with great potential to significantly promote national ownership, inclusive 

participation and sustainability. 14 

# Abbreviations and Acronyms 

AFP Agencies, Funds and Programs 

AHF Aids Health Care Foundation 

ALOXI Alliance for Public Works Tax Deduction [Alianza para obras por impuestos] 

AN National Agreement 

APCI Peruvian International Cooperation Agency [Agencia Peruana de Cooperación Internacional] 

APDP Peruvian Association of Demography and Population [Asociación Peruana de Demografía y 

Población] 

BIC Benefit and Collective Interest 

CATP Autonomous Central of Workers of Peru [Central Autónoma de Trabajadores del Perú] 

CCA United Nations Common Country Analysis 

CCEFIRO Building Paths of Hope Against Injustice, Rejection and Forgetfulness [Construyendo Caminos de 

Esperanza Frente a la Injusticia, el Rechazo y el Olvido] 

CDC National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control [Centro Nacional de 

Epidemiología, Prevención y Control de Enfermedades ]

CDN National Steering Committee [Comité Directivo Nacional ]

CEDEMUNEP Center for the Development of Peruvian Black Women [Centro de Desarrollo de la Mujer Negra 

Peruana] 

CEDET Center for Stimulation, Development and Rehabilitation Therapies [Centro de Estimula ción, 

Desarrollo y Terapias de Rehabilitación ]

CEDRO Centre for Information and Education for Drug Abuse Prevention [Centro de Información y 

Educación para la Prevención del Abuso de Drogas ]

CEPAL Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 

CE PESJU Center for the Study of Youth Economic and Social Problems [Centro de Estudios de Problemas 

Económicos y sociales de la Juventud ]

CEPLAN National Center for Strategic Planning [Centro Nacional de Planeamiento Estratégico ]

CEPR Special Commission for Refugees [Comisión Especial para los Refugiados ]

CF Cooperation Framework 

CHIRAPAQ Center for Indigenous Cultures of Peru [Centro de Culturas Indígenas del Perú ]

CIREMI Interreligious Committee for the Reception of Refugees and Migrants [Co mité Interreligioso de 

Acogida a los Refugiados y Migrantes ]

CS Civil Society 

CODIP Commission of Blind Ladies of Peru [Comisión de Damas Invidentes del Perú] 

CONDESAN Consortium for the Sustainable Development of the Andean Eco region [Consorcio para el 

Desarrollo Sostenible de la Ecoregión Andina ]

CME Special Resident Immigration Quality [Calidad Migratoria Especial Residente] 

UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 

CGTP General Confederation of Workers of Peru [Confederación General de Trabajadores del Perú] 

CONFIEP National Confederation of Private Business Institutions [Confederación Nacional de Instituciones 

Empresariales Privadas] 

CTS Compensation for Time of Service 

CTP Confederation of Workers of Peru [Confederación de Trabajadores del Perú] 

CUT Unitary Worker Central [Central Unitaria de Trabajadores ]

CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child 

DE Direct Ef fect (s)

HR Human Rights 

ECE Censal Assessment of Students 

ECOSOC United Nations Economic and Social Council 

ENAGERD National Survey of Disaster Risk Management 

ENAHO National Household Survey 

ENDES National Demographic and Family Health Survey. 

ENPOVE Survey Directed to the Venezuelan Population Residing in the Country 

EPCI Em ergency Preparedness Capabilities Index 

UPR Universal Periodic Review 

EsSalud Social Security of Peru 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

GA&F Interagency Group of Partnerships and Financing for Development 

GBV Gender -based violence 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GEMIG Specialized Group for Refugees and Migrants 15 

GEG Gender Specialized Group 

GM&E Group for Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting of Results 

GICI Inte ragency Group for Communication and Advocacy 

GIVAR Group for the Surveillance of Antiretroviral Drug Supply 

GRI Global Reporting Initiative 

GTRM Refugee and Migrants Working Group 

HACT Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers 

HDI Human Development Index 

HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

ICRAF International Council for Research in Agroforestry [World Agroforestry Centre] 

IFRC International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent 

INPPARES Peruvian Institute of Responsible Parenthood [Instituto Peruano de Paternidad Responsible] 

INSAP Popular Health Institute [Instituto de Salud Popular] 

INEI National Institute of Statistics and Information Technology [Instituto Nacional de Estadística e 

Informática ]

ILO International Labor Organizati on 

IOM International Organization for Migration 

IPRODES Institute Promoting Social Development [Instituto Promoviendo Desarrollo Social] 

JNE National Elections Jury 

JWP Joint Work Plan 

LGTBIQ + Lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual, intersex, queers 

MEF Ministry of Economy and Finance 

MIDIS Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion 

MIDAGRI Ministry of Agrarian Development and Irrigation 

MINAM Ministry of the Environment 

MINEM Ministry of E nergy and Mines 

MINJUSDH Ministry of Justice and Human Rights 

MINSA Ministry of Health 

MIUT Child Marriages and Early Unions 

MTC Ministry of Transport and Communications 

MTPF United Nations Multipartner Trust Fund 

MTPE Ministry of Labor and Employme nt Promotion 

MVCS Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation 

NDC Nationally Determined Contributions 

OECD Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development 

OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

ODISEX Observatory of Sexual and Reproductive Rights of People with Disabilities [Observatorio de los 

Derechos Sexuales y Reproductivos de las Personas con Discapacidad] 

SDG Sustainable Development Goals 

OHCHR United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 

ODA Official Development Assistance 

OHCHR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 

OMT Operations Management Team 

ONPE National Office of Electoral Processes [Oficina Nacional de Procesos Electorale s]

ONUHABITAT United Nations Human Settlements Programme 

PAHO / WHO Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office for the Americas of the World Health 

Organization 

PCG Program Coordination Group 

PCS Pacific Corporate Sustainability 

PCM Presidency of the Council of Ministers 

PEDN Strategic National Development Plan 

PGG General Government Policy 

PJ Judicial Branch 

PNDH National Human Rights Plan 

PROFONANPE National Fund for Natural Areas Protected by the State [Fondo Nacional para Á reas Naturales 

Protegidas por el Estado] 

RAE Ecological Agriculture Network [Red de Agricultura Ecológica] 

RAV Arequipa Volunteer Network [Red Arequipa Voluntaria ]

RCO Resident Coordination Office 

RG Results Group (s) 

SEN National Statistical System 

SERFOR National Forest and Wildlife Service 

SERNANP National Service of Natural Areas Protected by the State 

SERP Socioeconomic Response and Recovery Plan 

SGH R Specialized Group on Human Rights 

SGI Specialized Group on Interculturality 16 

SINAPLAN National System of Strategic Planning 

SIS Comprehensive Health Insurance 

SNM National Superintendency of Migration 

UNS United Nations system 

SP Strategic Priorities 

SPAJ Peruvian Society of Adolescenc e and Youth [Sociedad Peruana de Adolescencia y Juventud] 

SPOG Peruvian Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology [Sociedad Peruana de Obstetricia y Ginecología 

Sociedad Peruana de Obstetricia y Ginecología 

SUNAT National Customs and Tax Administration Superintendency 

TBC Tuberculosis 

TC Constitutional Court 

UN United Nations 

UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 

UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 

UNCT United Nations Country Team 

UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework 

UNDP United Nations Development Programme 

UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 

UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 

UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group 

UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 

UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 

UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services 

UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 

UNSDCF United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 

UNV United Nations Volunteers Programme 

UN Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 

VNR Voluntary National Review 

WB World Bank 

WBG World Bank Group 

WFP World Food Program 

WHO World Health Organisation 1. Country's progress towards the achievement of 

# the 2030 Agenda 

Peru is the third country in terms of geographic area and the fourth with the largest population 

in South America. With a territorial extension of almost 1.3 million km 2, it is a megadiverse 

country, home to 70% of the planet's biodiversity. This biodivers ity is observed through its 

variety of ecosystems, flora and fauna 4. In 2020, the Peruvian population was 32.6 million 

people (50.4% women and 49.6% men) 5, who predominantly live in urban centers (79.3%) 6,

and it is estimated that this population will reach almost 36 million in 2030 7. In absolute terms, 

the population continues to increase, and one of the factors that explains this growth in recent 

years is the wave of the Venezuelan population in human mobility, especially since 2018. 

The Peruvian population is still relatively young (the largest age group is 15 -29 years, 27% of 

the total) and shows great cultural and linguistic diversity. In Peru there are 55 indigenous or 

native peoples 8, 51 from the Amazon and 4 from the Andes 9 an d, according to the results of 

the last National Population Census of 2017, 25.8% of the population identifies as part of an 

indigenous or native people, which is equivalent to approximately 6 million people. 

Additionally, INEI reports that more than 3 mil lion Peruvians live abroad, which represents 

about 10% of Peru's population for 2018 10 .

Regarding the advancement of the fulfillment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 

Peru ranks 61 out of 166 in the SDG Index for 2019 11 (see section 1. 4). For th e same year, at 

the level of human development, the country ranks 82nd out of 189 countries, according to 

the Human Development Index (HDI), and is in the group of countries with "High Human 

Development" 12 . As in many other countries in the world, progress towards the SDGs before 

the pandemic was heterogeneous, and in many cases still not progressing at the pace 

necessary to reach the targets set for 2030. The pandemic, declared by the World Health 

Organization (WHO) in March 2020, has meant a series of sig nificant setbacks in most of the 

objectives, which makes it urgent to find factors that accelerate the steps towards sustainable 

development in the framework of recovery. 

Even though income inequality measured by the Gini coefficient fell notably from 2002 to 2019 

(from 53.6 to 41.5), different studies indicate that high inequality still predominates in the 

country, both in the field of property, as in the factorial and personal distr ibution of income 13 ,

and access to basic social services and infrastructure; the HDI falls 19.2% when adjusting for 

inequality 14 . In this context, Peru is a good example that, although economic growth is central 

to reducing poverty, it is insufficient with out redistribution that contributes to better equity. 

On the other hand, although progress in favor of gender equality is recognized, the Gender                  

> 4MINAM (n.d). Ecosystems https://www.minam.gob.pe/diversidadbiologica/nuestras -lineas -de -intervencion/direccion -de -
> conservacion -sostenible -de -ecosistemas -y-especies/ecosistemas/
> 5INEI (2020). “Estado de la población peruana 2020”.
> https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/Me nuRecursivo/publicaciones_digitales/Est/Lib1743/Libro.pdf
> 6INEI (2018); Perú: Perfil sociodemográfico. Informe Nacional, Censo Nacional 2017.
> 7INEI (2020). “Estado de la población peruana 2020”.
> https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/MenuRecursivo/publicaciones_digitales/Est/Lib1743/Libro.pdf
> 8“Indigenous or native peoples are those groups that have their origin in times before the State, that take place in this country or
> region, retain all or part of their distinctive institutions, and that, in addition, present the collective consciousness of possessing an
> indigenous or native identity." Database o f indigenous peoples of the Ministry of Culture (BDPI)
> https://bdpi.cultura.gob.pe/pueblos -indigenas
> 9Ibid.
> 10 https://www.inei.gob.pe/prensa/noticias/mas -de -tres -millones -de -peruanos -salieron -del -pais -y-no -han -retornado -11986/
> 11 Sachs, J. et al. (2020). "The Sustainable Development Goals and COVID -19". Sustainable Development Report 2020. Cambridge:
> Cambridge Univ ersity Press.
> 12 UNDP (2019). Human Development Report 2019.Overview: Human Development Report 2019. Beyond income, beyond
> averages, beyond today: Inequalities in human development in the 21st century.
> 13 OXFAM (2019). Riqueza y desigualdad en el Perú: Visió n panorámica. Lima, January 2019.
> 14 UNDP, Human Development Profiles by Country: http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/PER .

17 18 

Inequality Index shows that Peru (0.395 in 2019) is still behind the average of countries with 

high human devel opment (0.340) 15 , which is reflected in the pending challenges in the exercise 

of bodily and economic autonomies and participation in decision -making processes. 

It is important to note that the COVID -19 pandemic has had serious socio -economic and 

gender consequences, exacerbating inequalities. According to INEI, monetary poverty 

increased by 9.9 percentage points in 2020 and reached 30.1% of the Peruvian population. This 

affected 45.7% of people living in rural areas (3.1 million people) and 26% of people living in 

urban areas (6.8 million people) 16 . This would represent a 10 -year setback in the poverty level 

at the national level. In the same way, maternal deaths increased by 45.7% in 2020 compared 

to 2019, equivalent to an 8 -year setback in the improveme nt of SDG 3 17 .

## 1.1. National Context 

The Common Country Analysis 18 (CCA) , as well as the Socioeconomic Response and Recovery 

Plan on the socioeconomic effects and impacts caused by the COVID -19 pandemic(SERP), 

account for the causes and the essential aspects that determine the national context from 

which the United Nations Sus tainable Development Cooperation Framework 2022 -2026 will 

be implemented by the United Nations System Country Team (UNCT). The Framework will be 

led by the Resident Coordinator and the Country Team, in support of the Government of Peru 

for the implementati on of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development prioritized by the 

country, which has been articulated with the Vision to 2050 and the Policies of the National 

Agreement ; and will seek the active participation of different actors from the State, civil 

so ciety, workers' and employers' organizations, academia, and the private sector. 

To explain the current situation and trends in the national context, the main structural and 

institutional challenges (in the social, economic, environmental, and political -in stitutional 

spheres) identified when preparing the Assistance Framework currently in execution (UNDAF 

2017 -2021) are still relevant. However, four new elements have appeared that change the set 

of factors behind the current situation and make the new Coope ration Framework have 

additional challenges to respond to. 

• Political Instability: The growing instability at the highest political level is related to factors 

such as the confrontation between powers of the State controlled by different political 

forces, probes and acts of corruption, and a growing social mobilization in a context of 

discontent and demands for substantive changes. This instability has an impact on the 

advancement of public policies for development, and could even have economic 

repercussion s, which adds to the need to deepen the decentralization process. Since the last 

general elections of 2016, there have been four presidents in less than five years, an 

unprecedented situation in the recent history of the country. 

• Refugees and migrants from Venezuela : Peru is the second largest recipient of refugees and 

migrants from Venezuela (more than one million people). With more than 500 thousand 

applications for refugee status, Peru is the country with the most applications for refugee 

status by Venez uelans worldwide 19 .

• Increased risk of disasters due to climate change: Only for the period 2015 -2019, the 

incidence of emergencies due to variability and climate change intensified due to increases 

in precipitation on the coast and northern highlands and the reduction in precipitation in 

the northern jungle, as well as the increase in the maximum and minimum temperature by 

0.2 ° C / decade in almost the entire territory. These emergencies mainly affect the most 

vulnerable, including rural populations linke d to subsistence family farming and artisanal           

> 15 UNDP, http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/68606
> 16 INEI (May, 2021). https://n9.cl/sg547
> 17 MINSA -CDC. Epidemiological surveillance of maternal mortality.
> 18 UN (2021). Comm on Country Assessment -CCA -Peru.
> 19 Coordination Platform for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela: https://r4v.info/es/situations/platform Date accessed:
> 05.21.21.

19 

fishermen, generating a growth in inequality gaps 20 . The level of availability of both 

agricultural and livestock food is vulnerable to climatic changes 21 . In this sense, they increase 

vulnerability to food ins ecurity given that the possibilities of providing the population with 

insufficient amounts of food are increased. Thus, given the impact of climate change on the 

hydrological cycle and the availability of water for irrigation, agriculture could decrease 

be tween 12% and 50% 22 .

• COVID -19 pandemic: In May 2021, Peru doubled the numbers of deaths from COVID -19 

after a data review and became the country with the highest per capita mortality rate in the 

world with more than 1.9 million confirmed cases and over 18 0,000 people dead 23 . The 

socioeconomic impacts have been profound. Among them are the massive loss of 

employment, food insecurity, as well as the decline in access to quality education and 

health 24 . It is important to highlight that these impacts have been greater in the groups of 

people in situations of greater vulnerability. 

WELL -BEING OF PEOPLE 

In terms of health , the country has made significant progress in expanding people's access to 

health insurance. Universal health insurance coverage has increased considerably in recent 

years, mainly due to advances in the coverage of the Comprehensive Health Insurance (SIS), but 

by 2019 almost a quarter (24.5%) of the population still had no insurance coverage. In this sense, 

comprehensive health coverage guaranteed for the entire population is still pending, which 

considers preventive and promotional health approaches and gives due importance to its 

various elements, such as sexual and reproductive health and mental health, with a look at the 

right of peo ple to enjoy the highest level of physical and mental health. In contrast to other 

countries in the region, Peruvian women are below the median use of modern contraceptive 

methods for Latin America. A particularly critical indicator has been the 45.7% incr ease in 

maternal deaths in 2020, compared to the previous year, in part due to the interruption of 

service at the first level of care due to the COVID -19 pandemic. In addition, on the issue of sexual 

and reproductive health, the inequalities that affect th e country are very evident. Thus, for 

example, the prevalence of adolescent pregnancy and maternity (see more information on the 

situation of adolescents and young people in Peru in Table 1) is higher among those who live in 

households with a lower income level (13.6% in the lower quintile versus 2.7% in the upper 

quintile, a difference of 5 times), have less education (primary education: 41.2%), reside in rural 

areas (12.4%) and jungle areas (14.3%) 25 . Likewise, there is still a segmented health system in 

the country, where several schemes coexist with different configurations and that have their 

own mechanism of operation, affiliation, provision, and financing. In this context, it is necessary 

to verify that the massive insurance suggested by the expansion of the SIS is effective for the 

most vulnerable groups and the most remote territories. The lack of articulation within the 

system represents one of the main problems to guarantee the social protection of the 

population. Ensuring the “One Health” approach is essential to anticipating, preventing, 

detecting, and controlling diseases that spread between animals and humans. Containing 

Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) contributes to food safety and reduces environmental threats 26 .

In terms of food and nutrition security , in recent years there have been important advances in 

the country that caused, for example, the rate of chronic malnutrition in children under five             

> 20 MINAM (2013). Informe del Balance de la Gestión Regional frente al Cambio Climático en el País: Avances, logros, dificultades ,
> retos y oportunidades. https://www.minam.gob.pe/cambioclimatico/wp -content/uploads/sites/11/2013/10/Informe -de -Balance -
> de -la -Gesti%c3%b3n -Regional -frente -al -Cambio -Climatico.compressed.pdf
> 21 Universidad del Pacífico and WFP (2017). Hambre Cero al año 2030 en el Perú ¿Cómo lograr el Segundo Objetivo de Desarrollo
> Sostenible?
> 22 Ortiz, R. (2012). El cambio climático y la producción agrícola. IADB.
> 23 MINSA (2021). https://covid19.minsa.gob.pe/sala_situacional.asp
> 24 Aldana, U., Rodríguez, R., Santa Cruz, A., Toledo, M. (November, 2020). Informe Final -El impacto socioeconómico del Covid -19
> en los hogares peruanos. IEP/UNDP/RCO/ILO/UNICEF/WFP.
> 25 INEI (2020): Demographic and Family Health Survey (ENDES).
> 26 See: http://www.fao.org/one -health/es/

20 

years of age to decrease from 14.6% to 12.2% between 2014 and 2019 27 . However, there 

continue to b e challenges at the nutritional level in the country, for example, a persistent 

challenge is the presence of anemia in early childhood (in 2019, 40.1% of children aged 6 to 35 

months with anemia prevalence, being 36.7 % urban: and 49.0% rural 28 ). It is imp ortant to note 

that the Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) recognized Peru's significant progress in 

reducing mortality and chronic malnutrition in children, however, it expressed concern about 

the disparities between progress in urban and rural ar eas and in relation to indigenous children 

and children living in poverty 29 (see more information on the international recommendations of 

the Universal Human Rights System for Peru in Annex 2). The pandemic has had a considerable 

impact on people's food an d nutrition, making the current scenario have little to do with what 

existed previously, especially in the case of those in vulnerable situations. It is estimated that 

food insecurity would have increased considerably in urban and rural areas and would be higher 

in rural areas and among the poorest. However, elements of food insecurity are also observed 

even in the group with the highest socioeconomic level in the urban areas 30 . The pandemic has 

also affected the well -being of children and adolescents, starting with their consumption of 

food. According to a study carried out by several AFPs in Peru 31 , in 17% of urban households 

with boys or girls aged 5 years or under, the size of lunch decreased for minors, this percentage 

being 45% in rura l areas. On the other hand, it has been found that food insecurity indicators 

are higher for adults than for children or adolescents, which indicates that households prioritize 

their consumption. To this, on the other hand, a tendency to increase obesity a nd overweight in 

childhood and adolescence is added 32 . According to the National Center for Food and Nutrition 

(CENAN) of the National Institute of Health (INS), 69.9% of adults are overweight and obese, 

which also affect 42.4% of young people, 32.3% of sc hoolchildren, 33.1% of older adults and 

23.9% of adolescents 33 . Likewise, while chronic malnutrition affects mostly the rural areas of the 

country; obesity and overweight affect mostly urban areas.                

> 27 INEI (2020). Peru: Indicators of the Budgetary Programs, 2014 -2019 ENDES.p.13. https://n9.cl/tde9
> 28 INEI (2020). Peru: Indicators of the Budgetary Programs, 2014 -2019 ENDES. p. 52.
> 29 CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5, 2016: paragraph 53
> 30 Aldana, U., Rodríguez, R., Santa Cruz, A., Toledo, M. (November, 2020). Informe Final -El impacto socioeconómico del Covid -19 en
> los hogares peruanos. IEP/UNDP/RCO/ILO/UNICEF/WFP.
> 31 Idem.
> 32 FAO, IFAD, PAHO, WFP & UNICE F (2020). Panorama de la seguridad alimentaria y nutrición en América Latina y el Caribe.
> Santiago de Chile.
> 33 INS (March, 2019). About 70% of Peruvian adults suffer from obesity and overweight https://n9.cl/nkcvp

21 

BOX 1. SITUATION OF ADOLESCENTS AND YOUNG PEOPLE IN PERU 

With about 25% of its population in the age group of adolescence and youth (15 to 29 years) and 65% of its population 

at a working age, Peru is at this moment in the ideal point for taking advantage of the demographic bonus, which will 

close in 2045. Taking advantage of this situation that will end in the 2040 -2050 period for the benefit of long -term 

and sustainable development requires the strengthening of the human capital of adolescents and young peop le, who 

face inequalities in access to quality basic social infrastructure and services, and whose development opportunities 

and exercise of rights have been severely limited during the context of COVID -19. 

Poverty faced by the adolescent and young populat ion has been reduced steadily in the last decade. The adolescent 

age subgroup carries a greater weight of poverty (15 -19 years, 22.3%: 2019) in relation to the youth group (20 -24 

years, 16.4%: 2019) and the general population in the national average (20.7% : 2019). The impact of poverty on the 

adolescent and young population doubles in the rural zones of rural areas. The socioeconomic effects of COVID -19 

have led to a setback of between 10 and 11 years in the progress made in reducing poverty among adolescen ts and 

young people, to the greater detriment of the adolescent population in rural areas (poverty of 49.3%: 2020). On the 

other hand, in a context of structural challenges linked to productive diversification, sectoral productivity gaps and 

informal emplo yment, and their relationships with opportunities for access to education and decent work, the 

proportion of adolescents and young people (15 -29 years) who does not study, work or receive any type of training 

increased from 19% to 30% in 2020 compared to the previous year. This is especially complex given the digital divides 

and limited access to technology and connectivity, which restricted the access of significant proportions of students 

to virtual education in 2020. 

Thousands of adolescents and young people have their life trajectories affected due to situations related to the 

experience of their sexuality and the exercise of their sexual and reproductive rights, particularly the poorest, with a 

lower educational level, who live in the Amazon, are indi genous or Afro -descendants, have a disability or are migrants 

and refugees. Adolescent pregnancy is a persistent problem, the proportion of adolescents who are pregnant or who 

were already mothers has changed little in the last decade (13.9%: 2014 -2015; 12 .6%: 2018), although it presents a 

marked drop to 8.3% in 2020 which needs to be analyzed. The highest percentages of teenagers that have been 

pregnant are found in the Jungle (14.3%); those that are located in the lowest wealth quintile (13.6%); and those 

residing in the rural area (12.4%). Of special concern is the case of forced child pregnancies, classified as torture at 

the international level; that is, when a girl under the age of 15 is raped and pregnant. In our country 4 girls under the 

age of 15 be come mothers every day, most likely as a result of sexual abuse. On the other hand, adolescents are the 

ones with the highest rate of unmet family planning needs (14.2%). The relatively low use of modern contraceptive 

methods is striking among adolescent c ouples (51.1%) and sexually active (63.9%), as well as the fact that 36% of 

adolescent couples do not use any contraceptive method, and that 21.5% use traditional methods, exposing 

themselves to the risk of unintended pregnancies. In the context of COVID -19, due to the interruption of health 

services with an emphasis on sexual and reproductive health counseling for adolescents, only 31% of indigenous A&J 

declared that they could access contraception; 17% of young Afro -descendants indicated that they had not used any 

method, and 12% used traditional methods. In the last five years, HIV has increased in the young population, 

representing 47.1% of all infections, with the 25 -29 year -old group reporting the highest number of HIV cases (20.4%). 

Violence in all i ts forms significantly affects adolescent girls: 59 out of 100 have suffered some type of violence, 

including sexual violence. 43% of the complaints about sexual violence received in the Women's Emergency Center 

correspond to adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age (6,007 of 13,840 complaints received in 2020). On the 

other hand, the prevalence of unions and early marriages in adolescents under 18 years of age is 19.8% (46% in 

Loreto). It is a harmful practice closely associated with gender inequality, p overty, violence and early motherhood. 

The participation of A&J as strategic development actors is key, however, only 7.18% participate in organizations. It 

highlights a low participation in political parties (1.3%), and a minimal presence of young people in citizen 

participation mechanisms. 22 

10.2% of homes nationwide have a housing deficit 34 , with the rural area having the highest 

percentage of inadequate homes with 17.5%, while the urban area has 8.2% 35 (which means 

that, in absolute terms, the number of urban households in a situation of housing deficit is 

double that of rural households). In relation to access to basic services , more than 3 million 

people do not have access to water (without considering safe or potable water considerations 

in this measurement) and 7.4 million do not have access to sanitation services, with a greater 

emphasis in rural areas and peri -urban and marginal urban areas 36 . Furthermore, more than 

400,000 households do not have ac cess to electricity. On the other hand, in the last decade 

internet access has doubled. According to figures from the second quarter of the National 

Household Survey (ENAHO) 2020, 70.3% of the population aged six years and over has access to 

the internet, this being higher in urban areas (3.5 times more than in rural areas). However, 

much of this access occurs outside the home and most access through an exclusive connection 

from their mobile phone. 

In the case of education , in Peru , an educational reform h as been implemented in the last 

decade that aims to ensure a quality educational service with equity, based on efficient 

management and a meritocratic teaching career. This reform has faced significant political 

challenges at various times but has continue d to advance through various ministerial 

administrations. Thus, in the last five years , it has been possible to continue increasing 

enrollment at different levels, in addition to significantly increasing public spending as a 

proportion of the public budget , especially after 2011. For example, during the last decade, the 

completion rate at the primary level 37 has been increasing progressively. In 2019, the country's 

average was 89.5%, with the completion rate being higher in urban areas (92.0%) than in rural 

areas (83.5%) (in the last five years a marked decrease in the urban /rural gap has been observed, 

dropping from around 20 percentage points to less than 10). Concerning gender, unlike at the 

secondary level, there are no significant differences at the pri mary level. In high school, the 

situation is much more complex. By 2019, the completion rate at the age corresponding to the 

level (17 -18 years) was 76.5% in the country 38 . In proportion, the completion rate of women is 

higher than men in both urban and ru ral areas; However, regardless of gender, there is a 

considerable number of women and men who do not complete secondary education at the age 

corresponding to the level, as a result of the incidence of adolescent pregnancy, accumulated 

extra -age and inserti on into the labor market at an early age; and, therefore, they run the risk 

of not going back to school and seeing their future life possibilities reduced. Regarding learning 

achievement, despite the progress , the situation is still critical since few stud ents achieve a 

satisfactory level in reading comprehension or mathematics in the national census assessments, 

with a particularly critical situation at the secondary level. Furthermore, it is important to bear 

in mind that in Peru the gap in the coverage a nd quality indicators is deepening with poor or 

extremely poor students, indigenous or living in rural areas, and students with a disability. Thus, 

for example, illiteracy is accentuated in women with a native mother tongue (Quechua, Aymara, 

or Amazonian l anguage) 39 . In the wake of the pandemic, these challenges are even greater due 

to the suspension of face -to -face education and its replacement by virtual education. Some of 

the difficulties linked to this type of teaching include the gap in internet access and the 

equipment for the development of virtual classes, such as computers, laptops, or tablets (only 

2% of rural households have this equipment, and 41 % in urban areas 40 ).               

> 34 Households are considered to have a housing deficit if they have a quantitative deficit and / or a qualitative housing defici t.
> 35 INEI (2020); National Survey of Budget Programs -ENAPRES; Chapter XIII; P. 191
> 36 INEI (2018). National Survey of Budget Programs -ENAPRES 2018.
> 37 Understood as the proportion of people between 12 and 13 years of age who completed this educational level with respect to th e
> total population within said age range.
> 38 Minis try of Education (MINEDU) (2021): Educational Quality Statistics (ESCALE).
> 39 MINEDU (2018). School Census 2013 -2017.
> 40 MINEDU (2018). School Census 2013 -2017.

23 

Despite increases in public social spending and advances in various social policies, in Peru before 

the pandemic , there were significant challenges in understanding social protection as a universal 

right ( see more information on the importance of having a comprehensive system of social 

protection in Peru in table 2) .

MANAGING THE ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISAS TER RISK 

Peru's sustained economic growth is due in large part to the exploitation of natural resources, 

which is why there are enormous pressures on both its biodiversity and its ecosystems . Likewise, 

threats from illegal hunting, illegal mining, illegal logging, migratory agriculture, deforestation, 

overexploitation of fishery resources and the degradation of protected and unprotected 

ecosystems generate effects such as loss of habitat, ove ruse of resources, pollution and the 

displacement of native species in these ecosystems; which in turn endanger the survival of many 

vulnerable populations in the economic and social sphere since these populations are especially 

vulnerable to the effects o f climate change and depend on the ecosystem goods and services 

that are provided by this biodiversity. Indigenous peoples, peasants and fishermen are part of 

these especially vulnerable populations, in addition to the inhabitants of the cities since they 

require the provision of ecosystem services for their functioning. In the last two decades, Peru's 

BOX 2. THE URGENCY OF HAVING A COMPREHENSIVE SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEM IN PERU 

The economic and social crisis caused by the Covid -19 pandemic has highlighted the absence, in Peru, of a 

comprehensive social protection system that would respond to its effects an d fundamentally in favor of the most 

vulnerable. The country does not have a social protection floor that guarantees access to at least essential health care 

and basic income security for effective access to goods and services defined as necessary at the n ational level, 

throughout people's entire life cycle. This situation has been exacerbated as a result of the current context. 

Currently, less than 3 out of 10 workers contribute to social security and therefore are not covered in the event of death, 

old a ge, disability or illness; indeed, only 25.3% contribute to the pension system. The situation is more unfavorable for 

women, where only 21.4% contribute to the system. In the case of occupational accidents and diseases, the ratio is even 

lower. The latter is due to the fact that the system does not cover all registered workers, but only those who work in 

activities considered high risk. 

The reality of older adults does not escape the lack of protection where, at the end of 2019, 41.3% did not have any 

type of income, be it from pension or work. For that same year, only 18% of adults over 65 years of age reported 

receiving a pension and an additional 4.7% had a pension and earned income, probably due to the low pensions 

recognized by the system. An important fact is that 27.8% of people in this group do not report pension income, but do 

report income from work, which reveals that the low coverage and quality of benefits pressure older adults to remain 

linked to the labor market past 65 years of age. 

Finally, a large part of the Peruvian population remains without comprehensive protection mechanisms to face the loss 

of income derived from the lack of employment, nor does it have access to programs and services to improve their 

employability and, with it, their reintegration into the labor market during an economic recovery that is expected to be 

slow and long -lasting. In this regard, Peruvian regulations establish a system of individual accounts under the title of 

Compensation for Time of Service or CTS that, du ring the pandemic, has shown significant deficiencies in terms of 

coverage. In addition to the limitations presented by individual accounts being conditioned on the ability to accumulate 

savings, its regulation exempts micro -companies from this obligation when it is in this type of company that the vast 

majority of the Peruvian workforce is employed or underemployed. 

Improving the performance of the Peruvian social protection system, in line with international labor standards, in terms 

of its governance, ex pansion of coverage and sustainability of the different subsystems, constitutes an undeniable 

reality and a demand of society as a whole. 24 

cities have expanded by more than 40%, compared to the average of 30% in the LAC region 41 ,

and a large part of this urban expansion has occurred informally, consuming productive land and 

ecosystem services. In this context, it should be considered that the generation of knowledge, 

through scientific research and the recognition of traditional knowledge, are key to contribute 

to the recovery and restoration of Peruvian ecosystems and their biodiversity. 

The levels of air pollution reached by the country are worrying, mainly in the urban centers of 

the country 42 . In 2018, Lima was ranked 27th among the cities with the highest air pollution in 

Latin America (with an annual average of 28 μg / m3 of PM2.5). However, at the end of 2019 , it 

was ranked 15 (with an annual average of 23.7 μg / m3), which would denote a recent 

improvement in the city's air quality 43 . According to the WHO world air quality report, in 2019, 

Peru is in position 50 of the countries with the highest concentration of PM2.5 with an annual 

average of 17.9 ug / m3 and Lima in position 42 of cities with the highest concentration of PM2.5 

with an annual average of 18 ug / m3 44 . The National Meteorolog y and Hydrology Service of Peru 

(SENAMHI), since 2010, manages a network of 10 Atmospheric Surveillance stations located in 

Metropolitan Lima, in the districts of Ate, Santa Anita, San Juan de Lurigancho, Puente Piedra, 

Carabayllo, San Martín de Porres, Vi lla María del Triunfo, San Borja and Jesús María, which 

measure 6 air pollutants (PM10, PM2.5, NO2, O3, CO and SO2) established in the Environmental 

Quality Standards for air (ECA - air) approved by Supreme Decree No. 003 -2017 -MINAM, 

showing that the ECAS for PM10 and PM2.5 are exceeded in a large number of days, mainly at 

the Ate, Villa María del Triunfo, Huachipa and San Juan de Lurigancho stations 45 , and that these 

levels of contamination are mainly influenced by anthropic activities 46 , the transportatio n sector 

emitting over 50% of the particulate matter under 2.5 microns (PM2.5) in the metropolitan area 

of Lima and Callao. 

According to the inventory carried out by the Ministry of the Environment in 2014, total mercury 

emissions and releases were over 69 tons at a minimum and up to 343 tons maximum per year 

in the country. The main sources of release of this element are apparently linked to gold and 

silver extraction processes with mercury amalgamation processes, mining associated with 

copper and zinc, bu t also to other industrial processes not related to mining activity 47 . Also 

noteworthy is the environmental damage produced by the more than 60 oil spill incidents 

reported, for example, those of the North Peruvian pipeline. In the case of the mining secto r, 

the cases of the toxic effects of lead in the Pasco region stand out. In this regard, in 2018, the 

Working Group on Human Rights and Business received reports of various negative externalities 

related to mining, oil and gas 48 .

On the other hand, the generation of solid waste per inhabitant in Peru is very low compared 

to more developed countries; however, the insufficient infrastructure for its integral 

management is notable (taken from the collection , recovery, treatment, and f inal disposal), 

since almost half of the waste is improperly disposed of through illegal dumps, uncontrolled 

burning, water currents or directly in the ocean 49 . Thus, among the most outstanding 

environmental pollution problems are the disposal of tons of p lastic in continental water 

currents and the sea, and the production model of much of the informal and illegal mining of               

> 41 Atlas of Urban Expansion, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, UN -Habitat, and New York University
> 42 For more information on air quality in cities, see the section on SDG 11.
> 43 WORLD AIR QUALITY REPORT Region & City PM2.5 Ranking. It should be noted that the World Air Quality Report is based on data
> from the world's largest centralized platfo rm for air in real time combined with the efforts of thousands of initiatives carried out by
> citizens, communities, companies, organizations nonprofits and governments. See: https://www.iqair.com/world -most -polluted -
> cities?continent=59af929e3e70001c1bd78e50&country=6FC843efEKrPZzBdK&state=&page=1&perPage=50&cities=
> 44 WHO, 2020
> 45 Silva, J., Rojas, J., Norabuena, M. et al. Particulate matter levels in a South American megacity: the metropolitan area of Lima -
> Callao, Peru. Environ Monit Assess 189, 635 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661 -017 -6327 -2
> 46 SENAHMI (2021). REPORT. Surveillance of air quality Metropolitan Area of Lima and Callao. April
> 47 https://expedicionmercurio.com/#evaluacion -incial
> 48 United Nations, General Assembly (2018). . Report of the Working Group on the issue of human rights and transnational
> corporations and other business enterprises on its mission to Peru, A / HRC / 38/48 / Add.2, May 9th, 2018
> 49 OECD (2018). En vironmental performance evaluation.

25 

metallic minerals in almost all regions of the country, not adhering to international standards 

for hazardous waste. 

It should be noted that Peru is part of the main multilateral environmental agreements on 

chemicals and waste, such as the Minamata Convention, the Stockholm Convention, the 

Rotterdam Convention and the Basel Convention. In this sense, the country prioritizes its 

implementa tion through specific regulations and /or national application plans, to date having 

the National Plan of Application of the Minamata Convention on Mercury approved in 2019 by 

Supreme Decree No. 004 -2019 -MINAM and The National Plan for the Updated Applicati on of 

the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, approved in 2021 by Supreme 

Decree No. 010 -2021 -MINAM. 

The impact of climate change on glacier retreat is causing new types of polluting factors such as 

acid rock drainage , the consequences o f which affect not only the areas closest to the glaciers, 

but also all those along the way of the waters generated by this deglaciation process. 

Peru has up to seven of the nine characteristics defined by the United Nations Framework 

Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 50 to qualify as a "particularly vulnerable" country to 

the adverse effects of climate change . Studies have determined that by the year 2100, up to 6% 

of the country's water resources would be lost due to the effects of climate change, affe cting 

availability for consumption, the agricultural and industrial sectors and the generation of 

energy 51 . Part of the loss of th ese water resources appears to be linked to the glacial retreat, 

resulting in imbalances in the supply of water resources in t he basins where many of the most 

vulnerable communities live and where a good part of the country's agricultural production is 

generated 52 .

Faced with climate change, one of the most vulnerable sectors is the agriculture sector because, 

according to MIDAGRI, it depends mostly on rain (66% on waterless land) and uses 80% of fresh 

water (inefficiently) 53 , some of the main consequences on the sector being: 1) Effects on 

vegetative development, yield and health of the crops, translated into the developmen t of pests 

in drought conditions for the Andean region, and diseases in rainy conditions, 2) Lower 

profitability of the crops due to increased production costs, associated with the greater need for 

insecticides, damage to irrigation infrastructure or incid ence of floods, and 3) Greater risks to 

the health of farmers and consumers 54 .

Faced with this high vulnerability to the effects of climate change, Peru has made important 

legislative progress. Thus, in 2018, it promulgated the Framework Law on Climate Cha nge 

(regulated in 2020) 55 , so becoming the first country in Latin America to have it 56 . In line with 

these regulations, the National Strategy against Climate Change to 2050 is in the process of being 

updated 57 , which will serve as an instrument for the com prehensive management of climate 

change in the long term, in addition to including different scenarios to achieve carbon -

neutrality 58 . In turn, within the framework of the Paris Agreement, the country has determined                             

> 50 i) Low -lying coastal areas, ii) arid and semi -arid areas, iii) areas exposed to floods, droughts and desertification, iv) fragile mountain
> ecosystems, v) disaster -prone areas, vi) areas with high urban air pollution an d vii) dependent economies largely from the income
> generated by the production and use of fossil fuels.
> Revised from: National Climate Change Strategy. MINAM, 2015. p.20.
> https://cdn.www.gob.pe/uploads/document/file/374120/ENCC -FINAL -250915 -web.pdf
> 51 Von Hesse and Galarza (2011). Costs and Benefits of Adaptation to Climate Change in Latin America. Lima, GIZ. http://ailac.org/wp -
> content/uploads/2014/06/ EstudioCosto -BeneficiodeACCenAmericaLatina -1.pdf
> 52 For more information see: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000266209
> 53 MIDAGRI (n.d). El Sector Agrario y el Cambio Climático. https://n9.cl/mesm0
> 54 BCRP (2009). El Cambio Climático y sus efectos en el Perú, pp. 31. https://n9.cl/5jst
> 55 Law N ° 30754: Framework Law on Climate Change https://sinia.minam.gob.pe/normas/ley -marco -cambio -climatico
> 56 Diario Gestión (2018). Peru becomes the first country in Latin Amer ica to have a Framework Law on Climate Change. Press
> release. https://n9.cl/fy6bw
> 57 The latest version was published in 2015 under DS N ° 011 -2015 -MINAM https://n9.cl/mbsa
> 58 Unique digital platform of the Peruvian State (n.d). National Strategy for Climate Change by 2050. https://n9.cl/7wo8x

26 

a more ambitious nationally determined c ontribution (NDC) and has committed to reducing its 

greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by up to 40% by 2030 59 .

Regarding disaster risk management, according to the National Civil Defense Institute, between 

2003 and 2017 , there have been 69,419 emergencies and disasters, affecting 16,404,234 people 

and leaving 1,935,448 displaced and affected people. The aggregate direct impact of these 

events was USD 4.2 billion 60 . And despite the measures taken by the government, the 

vulnerability of the population has been i ncreasing in part due to climate change and it is 

estimated that, currently, 63% of the country's population is in a situation of vulnerability to 

disasters 61 .

Through Law No. 29664, the National Disaster Risk Management System was created and under 

this f ramework , management documents have been approved at the country level for the 

implementation of Disaster Risk Management (DRM). The National Policy for Disaster Risk 

Management to 2050 has recently been updated, the contents of which are framed in the Sen dai 

Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 -2030. 

It is important to highlight that vulnerability to disasters increases the population's susceptibility 

to food insecurity 62 . In the 2015 Food Insecurity Vulnerability Map 63 , six regions were identified 

(whose poverty rates are usually the highest and have a high degree of rurality) that showed a 

“Very High” level of vulnerability to food insecurity: Huancavelica, Apurímac, Huánuco, Puno, 

Amazonas and Ayacucho. Additionally, at a disaggregated level, it w as found that 23% of the 

country's population (approximately 7.1 million people) lived in districts (mainly in the 

mountains and jungle of the country) with "High" and "Very High" vulnerability to food insecurity 

due to the recurrence of natural phenomena. The excess presence of chemical residues, such as 

pesticides, in various foods is also a concern.         

> 59 Government of Peru (2020). Nationally Determined Contributions of Peru: Update Report Period 2021 -2030. https://n9.cl/w4pz8
> 60 National Policy for Disaster Risk Management to 2050. Approved by Supreme Decree No. 038 -2021 -PCM.
> 61 INDECI -National Institute of Civil Defense (March, 2018). "Strengthening Disaster Respon se in Peru: Lessons Learned from the El
> Niño Coastal Phenomenon 2017 in Peru", Lima. p.17.
> 62 Universidad del Pacífico and WFP (2017). Hambre Cero al año 2030 en el Perú ¿Cómo lograr el Segundo Objetivo de Desarrollo
> Sostenible?
> 63 PMA & CENEPRED (2015). 201 5 Vulnerability map to Food Insecurity due to the recurrence of natural phenomena

27 

Regarding access to community participation in environmental matters , it should be no ted that 

the country has made efforts to develop an accessible environmental information system and 

prior consultation with indigenous peoples for the development of projects in their territories is 

protected by the law, although major improvements are req uired in its application, within the 

framework of interculturality and the United Nations Declaration on the rights of indigenous 

peoples (see more information on the international recommendations of the Universal Human 

Rights System for consultations with indigenous peoples in Annex 2 and more information on 

the situation of indigenous peoples in Table 4). As of 2021, there are eight prior consultation 

processes in process, 4 of them related mainly to energy issues (hydrocarbons, electricity 

generation), 3 to mining and 1 to road infrastructure 64 . Progress in environmental justice with 

the creation of a prosecutor office specialized in environmental crimes is also notable. On the 

other hand, volunteering both at the central and regional levels has become a tool for the 

promotion of environmental education and culture. In this way, citizens, mainly young people, 

get involved in actions promoted by their authorities at all levels. However, the large number of 

socio -environmental conflicts that occur throughout the territory would appear to reflect the   

> 64 https://consultaprevia.cultura.gob.pe/proceso Access date: 05.06.21.

BOX 3. URBAN -RURAL GAPS 

The COVID -19 pandemic represents a triple health, economic and social challenge, and will have serious impacts 

in Latin America and the Caribbean, with Peru not being the exception. In this context, rural populations face 

important structural limitations that make them even more vulnerable to the socio -economic impacts of the 

pandemic. Furthermore, rural women have greater limitations than men to access productive resources and 

services, which makes them more vulnerable to the socioeconomic effects of COVID -19. 

In Peru, taking the ENAHO 2019 as a reference, the incidence of monetary poverty shows a gap between rural 

and urba n areas: 14.6% of poverty in urban areas and 40.8% in rural areas. Although it is true that it represents 

a decrease of two percentage points compared to the 2018 data, the effects of the pandemic, according to 

UNICEF, could generate an increase in rural p overty to 62.5% by 2021. This projection is aggravated in the 

framework of the methodological update of the INEI for the measurement of multidimensional poverty in Peru. 

According to the IPE, with data prior to the pandemic, the estimates of rural poverty would increase by 327 

thousand people by 2021, including dimensions of health, education and living conditions. This would represent 

a 20% increase in rural multidimensional poverty in the country, while urban areas would reduce their poverty 

rate to 9.3%. This situation of poverty does not occur equitably in the rural population and affects historically 

excluded groups in a more profound way, such as women, indigenous peoples and Afro -descendants. 

Differences in access to basic services in cities and rural areas add to this, particularly in relation to access to 

sanitation services. According to MIDIS , while between 2010 and 2017 the urban -rural gap in telephone and 

electricity services narrowed (from 41.6 to 16.4 pp and from 39.6 to 17.6 pp, respectively) and even in water 

supply (from 48.7 to 23.9 pp); During the same period, on the contrary, the gap in sanitation grew from 43.2 to 

44.8 pp. The access gap to sanitation services and, in general, to basic services, deepens when the language of 

the head of th e family is Quechua, Aymara, Awajun / Aguaruna, Ashaninka, Shawi / Chayahuita and Shipibo -

Konibo. 

On the other hand, the presence of older adults in poor households, in a greater proportion than in urban areas, 

means that, under the current health context, vulnerabilities increase. According to INEI, in 2019 poverty 

affected 32% of rural older adults compared to 7.1% in Metropolitan Lima or 11.6% of the rest of the national 

urban areas. Likewise, deepening the gap, 40.3% of rural older adults are illiterate , of which 61.3% are women, 

which reinforces the narrative of greater affectations due to informational disabilities regarding care and 

mitigating measures for COVID -19. 28 

limited capacity of citizens to influence environmental decision -making. In addition, it is 

important to note that even though Peru signed the Escazú Agreement, Congress filed its 

ratification despite the fact tha t this agreement is essential to ensure access rights in 

environmental matters, and therefore essential to resolve and prevent socio -environmental 

conflicts. 

Regarding environmental crimes , Peru has made significant progress with the creation of the 

Functional Unit for Environmental Crimes of MINAM (General Secretary Resolution No. 028 -

2021 -MINAM) and the High Level Commission for the prevention and reduction of 

Environmental Crimes (Supreme Decree No. 011 -2021 -MINAM), both will develop proposals for 

measures at all levels for the prevention and reduction of this type of crime, and promote 

coordination between t he authorities and the State's response to this problem. 

COMPETITIVENESS AND PRODUCTIVITY 

The pandemic found Peru in a stage of economic slowdown that began in 2014 with the end of 

the commodity bonanza period and the decline in private investment. Even though the strength 

of its macroeconomic fundamentals allowed the country to cushion the fal l in domestic demand 

and ensure the functioning of financial markets and the payment system with unprecedented 

expansive fiscal and monetary policy packages 65 , COVID -19 has made evident the structural 

problems of the Peruvian economy characterized by low and heterogeneous productivity. This   

> 65 Measures implemented by the country inc luded: (i) mobilization of fiscal resources to face the emergency in its various aspects;
> (ii) distribution of financial support to families to cover basic needs during the period of confinement; (iii) support to co mpanies
> through payroll subsidies and cre dit guarantees to prevent liquidity problems from leading to an excessive number of bad debts and
> the collapse of the payment system; and (iv) an expansionary monetary policy with a reduction of 200 basis points in the refe rence
> rate to 0.25%, its all -time low.

BOX 4. SITUATION OF INDIGENOUS OR NATIVE PEOPLES 

In Peru there are 55 indigenous or native p eoples, 51 from the Amazon and 4 from the Andes, and 48 indigenous or 

native languages are spoken, 44 in the Amazon and 4 in the Andes 1. Likewise, according to the results of the last 

National Population Census of 2017, 25.8% of the population identifies t hemselves as part of an indigenous or native 

people, which is equivalent to 5 million 985,551 people. Of this universe of Peruvians, 30.2%, that is, a third, would 

correspond to young people and adolescents between 15 and 29 years old. Breaking down ethnic self -identification, 

it is observed that the majority of indigenous people self -identify as Quechua (22.3%). Smaller proportions of the 

census population self -identify as Aymara (2.4%) and as natives or indigenous people of the Amazon (0.9%). The 

census a lso records that this population resides mainly in the urban areas of the country 1.

Indigenous or native peoples have collective human rights recognized by international and national legal norms. 

Regarding international legal instruments, it is worth high lighting Legislative Resolution No. 26253 where the Peruvian 

State ratified ILO Convention No. 169, which recognizes the right of indigenous or native peoples to maintain and 

strengthen their cultures, ways of life and their own institutions, and their rig ht to participate effectively in the 

decisions that affect them. 

Despite advances in policies, international and national standards, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of Human 

Rights Defenders 1, expressed concern about the lack of application of the provisions of ILO Convention 169 and of 

the United Nations Declaration on processes for land tenure, natural resources and environmental issues, as well as 

the stigma and criminalization they face, the limitation of the right to protest, freedom of expres sion and the 

indiscriminate use of force 1. Likewise, he warned that indigenous or native peoples continue to face discrimination 

and exclusion that has led them to live in contexts of inequality in different dimensions, particularly those who live in 

the A mazon. These dimensions include: access to education, health services, including sexual and reproductive health, 

access to basic services, political participation and access to justice systems. The vulnerable conditions in which they 

live exacerbated the s pread of COVID -19 in this population. 29 

low productivity is mainly due to the concentration of the export basket in few products, lags in 

competitiveness, including industrial competitiveness, and in the business environment 66 ,

insufficient social and infrast ructure spending, low tax pressure, and a labor market structure 

that has not changed in the last decade and is concentrated in those sectors that have lower 

productivity (such as agriculture and fishing). In addition, low -quality informal employment 

conti nues to be predominant 67 (in Annex 2 there are further details on the recommendations 

made to the country on employment issues within the framework of Human Rights). 

According to the 2018 Harvard Universit y Growth Lab Economic Complexity Index, the country 

was ranked 104 out of 133 countries. This represents a drop of 20 positions in the world ranking, 

compared to the position obtained in 1998, due to the lack of diversification of exports 68 . In this 

regard, the export basket is poorly diversified and concentrated in basic raw materials, which is 

a sign of high vulnerability to fluctuations in the price of commodities in the international 

market. In 2018, the largest exports of goods were in l ow complexity products, particularly 

minerals and agriculture. 

It is estimated that, due to the recession induced by the COVID -19 pandemic and the uncertainty 

generated by the internal political crisis that peaked in November 2020, the gross domestic 

prod uct (GDP) contracted 11.12% in that year 69 . The contraction of the economy was 

accompanied by a massive loss of jobs and a worsening of public finances. The loss of jobs was 

greater in the second quarter of 2020 when the employed population fell by 6.7 mil lion, and 

informal employment increased. 70 The nominal exchange rate devalued, affected by uncertainty 

and the fall in the interest rate. However, despite the pandemic, inflation remained under 

control in 2020 and the BCRP estimates that by 2021 inflation will be 2% (target range), which is 

within the expected parameters and that in 2022 it would be below 2% 71 . In this context of 

economic reactivation, it will be especially important to bear in mind that human rights are not 

conditioned or sacrificed throug h, for example, accelerated or virtual prior consultation 

initiatives, and the relaxation of labor and environmental standards that do not comply with 

international standards. 

Likewise, the confinement decreed by the government against COVID -19 72 notably a ffected the 

Peruvian labor market. The most critical period was in the second quarter of 2020, where both 

labor supply and demand plummeted by about 30% compared to the same quarter of 2019 -

something never seen before since labor statistics are produced -, a situation that led to an 

inactivity rate of 54.7% (26.7% over that registered in the same period of 2019), an increase in 

the unemployment rate as well as an increase in the informal employment rate for a similar 

period of analysis 73 . All this was accom panied by the deterioration of the jobs still ongoing due 

to the scarce policies for remote work, as well as the destabilization of the economy of micro, 

small and medium -sized enterprises (MiPyme), a business segment that represents 99.5 % of 

the total of formal companies in the Peruvian economy; 96.2% being micro -enterprises, 3.2% 

small and 0.1% medium 74 . This business segment, which is one of the most important sources                   

> 66 Despite the notable progress of the Peruvian financial system since the 1990s, mainly in terms of regulation and stability of the
> institutions, the degree of deepening of the local market is still low, mainly in terms of domestic credit to the priv ate sector,
> capitalization and amounts traded on the stock market and insurance premiums.
> 67 Based on the ENAHO, between July 2019 and June 2020, the informal employment rate rose to 74.3%, that is, 1.7 percentage
> points over that registered in the year Ju ly 2018 -June 2019, which would indicate that the traditional adjustment mechanism of the
> Peruvian labor market -through adjustments in the quality of employment rather than in the quantity -was not blocked or limited.
> 68 https://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/rankings
> 69 INEI (February, 2021). Technical Report National Production
> 70 Gamero, J. and Pérez, J. (2020). Perú › Impacto de la COVID -19 en el empleo y los ingresos laborales. Panorama Laboral en
> tiempos de la COVID -19. ILO.
> 71 BCRP (March, 2021). Inflation Report. March 2021 Panorama actual y proyecciones macroeconómicas 2021 -2022.
> https://www.bcrp.gob.pe/docs/Publicaciones/Reporte -Inflacion/2021/marzo/reporte -de -inflacion -marzo -2021.pdf
> 72 Chacaltana (2020). Rapid response to COVID -19 under high informality. The case of Peru [online] https://n9 .cl/vzlae
> 73 Chacaltana and Pérez (2020). Rapid response (and slow recovery) to COVID -19 under high informality. The case of Peru [online]
> https://n9.cl/ct12v
> INEI (2020). Technical Report Comportamiento de los indic adores de mercado laboral a nivel nacional, N° 03 -agosto 2020 [en línea]
> https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/MenuRecursivo/boletines/ 03 -informe -tecnico -n03_empleo -nacional -abr -may -jun -2020.pdf
> 74 See: https://ogeiee.produce.gob.pe/index.php/en/shortcode/estadistica -oee/estadisticas -mipyme

30 

for job creation, has been one of the most affected sectors as a result of the pandemi c with an 

impact translated into a greater number of closures and job losses, as well as disruption in the 

productive chains and payment flow circuits 75 .

EFFECTIVE DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE 

At the political and public policy level, Peru continues to face in 2021 several of the great 

structural and institutional challenges that the country sought to address at the beginning of the 

century, after the previous period of democratic transition (2000 -2001). These include 

challenges related to democratic governance, modernization of public management, 

decentralization and regionalization process, unequal presence of the State in the territory, 

weakness of the democratic culture in society, crisis of representation and political parties, lack 

of disaggregated data to better understand inequalities and corruption. At the same time, 

different studies and surveys have registered a constant decrease in citizens' trust in the political 

system, compared to a level that was already low before this period. 

On the other hand, social conflict has remained high in recent years, and even during the 

pandemic: in March 2021 the Ombudsman's Office reported 194 conflicts, including 143 active 

and 51 latent, most of them located in the Loreto region 76 . This has put the State's capacity for 

prevention, dialogue, and conflict resolution to the test. Conflict in many cases has been related 

to the impact of the extractive activities of mining and hydrocarbons. In addition, we must not 

forget that Peru is the second largest producer of coca leaf worldwide, with the l argest amount 

of production destined for the manufacture of illicit drugs. The persistence and even more so 

the increase in the cultivation of coca to produce illicit drugs brings with it an increase in related 

crimes, insecurity and corruption. Likewise, many forms of crimes such as drug trafficking, illegal 

mining, and others against natural resources, are associated with money laundering, which 

further undermines the economy and the legal flow of funds, as this crime seriously affects the 

financial -banki ng system, important axis in development. 

Regarding access to justice, between 2015 and 2018 the number of detainees without conviction 

decreased by 23.5%; however, multiple challenges remain as around 40% of the prison     

> 75 UNDP (2020). Más allá de la recuperación: Una conducta al 2030 desde la conducta empresarial peruana. https://n9.cl/5h58
> 76 Ombudsman's Office. (March, 2021). Social Conflicts Report No. 205. https://n9.cl/1776p

BOX 5. SITUATION OF AFRO -PERUVIAN PEOPLE IN PERU 

The situation of the Afro -Peruvian people continues to be a challenge in the human rights framework, where 

60% of the population perceives that Afro -Peruvians are discriminated against. For its part, the Ombudsman's 

Office has warned: (i) prevalence of racial discrimination, different forms of multiple and intersectional 

discrimination; (ii) the recognition of Afro -Peruvians as a distinct people, with ancestral claims, is fundamental; 

(iii) public policies with insufficient intercultural focus; (iv) challenges in generating data and information on the 

situation of the Afro -Peruvian population; (v) disparities in education, health, employment, and s tandard of 

living; (vi) low level of participation and insufficient representation in political and institutional decision -making 

processes; and, (vi) sexual violence. The 2018 -2021 National Human Rights Plan and the Indigenous Peoples 

policy establish spe cific initiatives for this group. 

Peru has received various recommendations related to the situation of Afro -Peruvians both in the framework 

of the Third cycle of the Universal Periodic Review, by the Treaty Bodies and some Special Procedures, as well 

as by the ILO supervisory bodies, among which are summarized: (i) comprehensive policy against racism and 

racial discrimination; (ii) advance the effective implementation of the national policy for mainstreaming an 

intercultural approach and implement a speci fic policy to close racial gaps and disparities; along with affirmative 

measures; (iii) effective awareness -raising measures for individuals, public servants, and justice operators; (iv) 

recognize the collective rights of Afro -Peruvians and include specifi c protections for Afro -Peruvians; (v) improve 

the accuracy of information systems and data collection related to Afro -Peruvians; (vi) guarantee their 

meaningful participation and inclusion in the development process; in social, economic, cultural, politica l and 

civil life; and in making decisions that affect your life. 31 

population does not know the scope of their sentence 77 . In parallel, within the country's justice 

system, the most recent information shows 298,424 new defense assignments or 

representations, a magnitude that represented an increase of 6.5% with respect to the volume 

of new procedural charges assigned ex officio in 2017 78 . Likewise, CEDAW expressed its concern 

about the barriers that limit women's access to justice, mainly those who live in poverty, in rural 

and marginal areas and those who belong to indigenous, Amazo nian or Afro -Peruvian 

communities 79 . See more information on the situation of Afro -Peruvians in Peru in table 5. 

Gender inequality is a significant barrier to the full and equitable exercise of rights and 

citizenship. Discriminatory gender norms, structure s and stereotypes limit the exercise of bodily 

autonomy by girls, adolescents, and women, with greater emphasis on those who belong to 

groups in a greater situation of vulnerability. This, in turn, affects their health and limits their 

possibilities of dev eloping their economic autonomy and political participation to the detriment 

of their benefit, that of their communities and society in general. Gender -based violence (GBV) 

and harmful practices such as early unions and child marriages (MIUT) are common 

ma nifestations in Peru, which may have been aggravated in the COVID -19 context. Regarding 

GBV, the Public Ministry, between 2016 and 2018, attended 282,054 complaints of serious 

injuries due to violence and attacks against women and members of the family gro up. Between 

2009 and 2018, 1,167 women were killed. For its part, between 2017 and 2020, the National 

Police of Peru attended 883,652 complaints of violence against women and members of the 

family group. Despite these figures, it is important to note that there is a reduction in the 

proportion of women between the ages of 15 and 49 who state that they have suffered physical 

or sexual violence in the last 12 months by their husband or partner (8.8%: 2020, 11.7%: 2015) 

and an increase in the number of femicid es. In the case of MIUT, there is no progress in the high 

prevalence in women aged 20 to 24 years (19% national average; 46% Loreto), with adverse 

effects on their development: girls and adolescents united between the ages of 10 and 15 only 

finish primary school and 75% of women united early are engaged in unpaid domestic work. 

Since 2016, chronic instability at the highest political level has been added to these medium and 

long -term challenges, related to factors such as the confrontation between State po wers 

controlled by different political forces, probes and acts of public and private corruption, and a 

growing social mobilization in a context of discontent and demands for profound changes. This 

instability has an impact on the advancement of public policies for development and could even 

have economic rep ercussions. 

In recent years, political crises, in addition to generating institutional instability, have impacted 

human rights 80 . Human rights institutions in Peru have made significant progress. At the public 

policy level, the National Human Rights Plan (PNDH 2018 -2021) stands out, a strategic tool of 

the Executive Branch, which links its goals with the SDGs and the recommendations of UN 

mechanisms, and includes for the first -time lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transgender, intersex, 

queers (LGTBIQ+), human r ights defenders and domestic workers as a special protection group. 

In addition, in June 2021 the Government made the National Action Plan on Business and Human 

Rights 2021 -2025 official. However, according to the II National Human Rights Survey, “7 out of 

10 Peruvians feel that human rights are little or not protected in the country”, and only “1 out 

of 4 (27%) believes that this situation will improve" 81 . Likewise, the majority considers that 

"corruption is the main problem that affects their rights" and perceives Congress as the 

institution "that generates the most mistrust in the defense of human rights 82 ." Table 6 shows 

more information on the situation of human rights defenders in Peru.        

> 77 INEI (2021). Monitoring and Follow -up System for Sustainable Development Goals. Access date: 24.02.2021. bit.ly/3arwkHF
> 78 Idem.
> 79 United Nations, General Assembly (2014).. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination agains t Women. Concluding
> observations on the combined seventh and eighth periodic reports of Peru, CEDAW/C/PER/CO/7 -8, July 24th, 2014, paragraphs 11
> and 12.
> 80 Ombudsman's Office (2019). Twenty -third Annual Report, p. 121.
> 81 MINJUSDH (June,2020) .Analytical Report: II Encuesta Nacional de Derechos Humanos.
> 82 Ibid.

32 

A greate r effort to follow up on the recommendations of the UN mechanisms in recent years 

indicates a trend towards the creation of more guarantor frameworks. However, these contrast 

with the factual situation of certain groups, the limits seen for the guarantee o f certain rights 

and the growing limits to civic space, as well as the real weight given to these efforts, especially 

at the level of budget, implementation, and commitment of certain sectors. The risk of not 

addressing these structural causes is the high probability that millions of people remain in 

poverty, exclusion, and the lack of satisfaction of their rights, and not fulfilling the commitment 

of the 2030 Agenda that no one is left behind. 

## 1.2. National vision of sustainable development 

Since 2019, Peru has a Vision of Peru to 2050 elaborated within the framework of the National 

System of Strategic Planning (SINAPLAN). This constitutes a guiding element of the action of the 

State and society to achieve the sustainable development of the c ountry in the long term, and 

incorporates Peru's commitments to the 2030 Agenda, considering the spheres of People, 

Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Alliances. This central instrument for the sustainable development 

of the country was approved at the National Agreement Forum. The National Agreement is 

made up of 35 long -term State Policies, and the National Agreement Forum includes actors from 

the public sector, political parties, the private sector, and civil society in the space for dialogue 

and agreement. 

Since 2020, CEPLAN has readjusted its lines of action to the new emergency context, seeking to 

advance in the set of emergency plans and towards new Concerted Development Plans and the 

formulation of the Strategic National Development Plan (PEDN) in severe adverse conditions. 

Although it does not explicitly consider the SDGs, the Vision to 2050, in effect, integrates the 

economic, social, and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, and incorporates 

considerations of democratic governance and pol itical factors, human rights, humanitarian 

assistance and peace. Its five axes are: 

1. People reach their potential with equal opportunities and without discrimination to enjoy 

a full life. 

2. Sustainable management of nature and measures against climate change. 

3. Sustainable development with decent employment and in harmony with nature. 

4. Democratic, peaceful society, respectful of human rights and free from fear and violence. 

5. Modern, efficient, transparent, and decentralized state that guarantees a fair and inclusi ve 

society, without corruption and without leaving anyone behind.    

> BOX 6. SITUATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS IN PERU
> The situati on of human rights defenders in Peru is a matter of concern for the UN human rights mechanisms,
> such as the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, which concluded in 2021 that a large
> numbers of these, particularly defenders of envi ronmental rights, land rights and the rights of indigenous peoples
> cannot operate in a safe and conducive environment in Peru (A / HRC / 46/35 / Add.2, 2021). During 2020, at
> least 5 environmental defenders and natural resource defenders were assassinated in Peru. The Peruvian State
> approved in April 2020 the intersectoral Mechanism for the protection of human rights defenders, which will
> include the intervention of eight ministries. Likewise, the Peruvian State has received various recommendations
> related to the situation of human rights defenders both in the framework of the Third cycle of the Universal
> Periodic Review, by the Treaty Bodies and some Special Procedures, among which are summarized: (i) measures
> against stigmatization, intimidation and violen ce against human rights defenders; (ii) measures against the
> criminalization of defenders; (iii) guarantee the right to public meetings in the context of social protests, and (iv)
> effective protection measures for human rights defenders at risk.

33 

It is expected that this vision will be realized through the updating and implementation of 

policies and plans in the different sectors, levels of government (including the Concerted 

Develop ment Plans of subnational governments) and institutions, starting in 2021. Under the 

guidance of the vision, the State Policies of the National Agreement may be updated, and 

progress will be made in the formulation of a new Strategic National Development P lan (PEDN) 

to replace the Bicentennial Plan that expires in 2021. In general, the main framework 

instruments for the sustainable development of the country establish objectives that are directly 

linked to the goals and indicators of the SDGs. 

On the other hand, the Peruvian Government has defined the General Government Policy (PGG) 

as the set of prioritized policies that are developed through national policies during a period of 

Government. Even in the context of the COVID -19 emergency, the central aspects of the PGG to 

2021, with its five axes, have remained in force, although interrelated with the priorities for 

emergency care: i. Integrity and fight against corruption; ii. Institutional strengthening for 

governance; iii. Equitable, competitive, and susta inable economic growth; iv. Social 

development and well -being of the population and v. Effective decentralization for 

development. Likewise, in response to the context and the current crisis, the Peruvian State, 

through the National Agreement , has renewed its Solidarity Commitment to the Protection of 

Life "Peru Hunger 0 " 83 in conjunction with SDG 2.  

> 83 National Agreement (2020). Compromiso Solidario con la Protección de la Vida “PERÚ HAMBRE 0”.

34 

## 1.3. Articulation with the 2030 Agenda: appropriation and 

# incorporation of the SDGs in national frameworks 

Since 2012, the Government of Peru has been significantly involved in the consultation and 

construction processes of the 2030 Agenda and has prepared two Voluntary National Reports 

(INV) to report on the progress and perspectives of sustainable development in the country. 

Figure 1 . Articulation of the Axes of Vision 2050 with the 5Ps of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

The 2030 Agenda and the SDGs have been being implemented in Peru through the committed 

action of the differ ent actors in society. Along these lines, the 17 SDGs and the 5Ps of the 2030 

Agenda, “People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnerships”, are articulated with the 5 Axes of 

the Vision of Peru to 2050, (see figure 1) and with the 35 State Policies (see ta ble 1) 84 . 

> 84 For more details on the articulation of the 35 State Policies with the SDGs, consult: Na tional Agreement & UNDP (2017).
> Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible y Políticas de Estado del Acuerdo Nacional.

35 

Tabl e 1. Articulation of the 35 State Policies and the SDGs 

35 State Policies of the National Agreement SDG 

1. Strengthening of the democratic regime and the rule of law (Approved on July 22, 

2002) 

SDG 16 

2. Democratization of political life and strengthening of the party system (Approved 

on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 5, SDG 16 

3. Affirmation of national identity (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 11 

4. Institutionalization of dialogue and agreement (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 16 

5. Government based on objectives with strategic planning, national prospective and 

transparent procedures (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 11 

6. Foreign policy for peace, democracy, development and integration 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 16, SDG 17 

7. Eradication of violence and strengthening of civility and citizen security 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 3, SDG 5, SDG 16 

8. Political, economic and administrative decentralization to promote the integral, 

harmonious and sustained development of Peru. (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 11, SDG 16, SDG 17 

9. National Security Policy (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 16 

10. Poverty alleviation (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 1, SDG 5, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 11, SDG 13, SDG 

16 

11. Promotion of equal opportunities without discrimination (Approved on July 22, 

2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 10 

12. Universal access to free and quality public education and promotion and 

defense of culture and sports (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 3, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 8, SDG 16 

13. Universal access to health services and social security (Approved on July 22, 

2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 3, SDG 5, SDG 6, SDG 10, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 

16 

14. Access to full, dignified and productive employment. (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 16 

15. Promotion of food security and nutrition. (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 6, SDG 10, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 15, SDG 

16 

16. Strengthening the family, protection and promotion of childhood, adolescence 

and youth. (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 3, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 8, SDG 11, SDG 16 

17. Affirmation of the social market economy (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 11 

18. Search for competitiveness, productivity and formalization of economic activity 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 16, SDG 17 

19. Sustainable development and environmental management (Approved on July 22, 

2002) 

SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 3, SDG 4, SDG 6, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, 

SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 13, SD G 14, SDG 15, SDG 16, SDG 17 

20. Development of science and technology (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 4, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 17 

21. Development in infrastructure and housing (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 1, SDG 6, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 17 

22. Foreign trade policy for the expansion of markets with reciprocity 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 2, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 16, SDG 17 

23. Agricultural and rural development policy (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 2, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 15, SDG 16, SDG 

17 

24. Affirmation of an efficient and transparent State (Approved on July 22, 2002) SDG 16 

25. Caution of the institutionality of the Armed Forces and its service to democracy 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 16 

26. Promotion of ethics and transparency and eradication of corruption, money 

laundering, tax evasion and contraband in all its forms (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 16 

27. Eradication of illegal drug production, trafficking and consumption (Approved on 

July 22, 2002) 

SDG 3, SDG 8, SDG 12, SDG 16 

28. Full validity of the Constitution and human rights and access to justice and judicial 

independence (Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 16 

29. Access to information, freedom of expression and freedom of the press 

(Approved on July 22, 2002) 

SDG 16 

30. Elimination of terrorism and affirmation of national reconciliation (Approved on 

June 10, 2003) 

SDG 16 

31. Fiscal sustainability and reduction of the debt burden (Approved on September 

30, 2003) 

SDG 16, SDG 17 

32. Disaster risk management (Approved on December 17, 2010) SDG 1, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 13, SDG 16 

33. State Policy on water resources (Approved on August 14, 2012) SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 3, SDG 6, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 

13, SDG 14, SDG 15, SDG 16, SDG 17 

34. Territorial Planning and Management (Approved on September 24, 2013) SDG 1, SDG 6, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 10, SDG 11, SDG 

12, SDG 13, SDG 15, SDG 16, SDG 17 

35. Information society and knowledge society (Approved on August 16, 2017) SDG 1, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 16 

Source: National Agreement & UNDP (2017) 85 

Likewise, the PGG to 2021 has been aligned with various SDGs and conceives development 

around five interrelated axes with their respective guidelines that are specifically articulated 

with some goals of the SDGs. Thus, in the implementation , it can be seen how the Government  

> 85

National Agreement & UNDP (2017) 85 . Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible y Políticas de Estado del Acuerdo Nacional. 36 

is progressing towards the achievement of spe cific goals of the SDGs 86 . These are 46 priority 

goals corresponding to 14 objectives, as can be seen in Table 2. 

Table 2. Alignment of the axes and guidelines of the General Government Policy and the goals 

of the SDGs 

PGG Axis PGG Guideline SDG Target 

Axis 1. Integrity and the 

fight against corruption 

1.1. Fight corruption and illegal activities in all their forms 16.1, 16.2, 16.4, 16.5 and 16.a 

1.2. Ensure transparency in all government entities 16.6 and 16.10 

Axis 2. Institutional 

strengthening for 

governance 

2.1 Build political and social consensus for development in 

democracy. 

16.7 

2.2 Strengthen State capacities effectively meet citizen needs, 

considering their conditions of vulnerability and cultural 

diversity. 

1.b, 5.c, 16.6, 16.7 and 16.a 

Axis 3. Equitable, 

competitive and 

sustainable economic 

growth 

3.1 Recover fiscal stability in public finances. 8.1, 17.1 and 17.4 

3.2 Enhance decentralized and sustainable public and private 

investment. 

8.2, 8.3, 9.1 and 9.2 

3.3 Accelerate the process of reconstruction with changes, with 

an emphasis on prevention. 

1.5, 3.d, 9.1, 11.5, 11.b, 13.1, 

13.2 and 14.2 

3.4 Promote competitiveness based on the economic 

development potential of each territory, facilitating their 

artic ulation to the national and international market, ensuring 

the sustainable use of natural resources and cultural heritage. 

2.3, 2.4, 8.2, 8.3, 11a and 14.2 

3.5 Reduce poverty and extreme poverty, both at the rural and 

urban levels. 

1.1, 2.3, 1.2, 8.2, 2.3, 8.5, 8.6 

and 11.1 

3.6 Promote the generation of formal and quality employment, 

with an emphasis on young people. 

8.3, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7 and 8.8 

Axis 4. Social development 

and well -being of the 

population 

4.1 Reduce childhood anemia in boys and girls from 6 to 35 

months, with a focus on prevention. 

2.1 and 2.2 

4.2 Provide quality health services, in a timely fashion, with 

decision -making capacity and with a territorial focus. 

3.4, 3.7 and 3.8 

4.3 Improve the levels of student learning achievement with an 

emphasis on the groups with the greatest gaps. 

4.1, 4.2, 4.5 and 4.6 

4.4 Increase the sustainable coverage of water and sanitation 

services. 

6.1, 6.2 and 11.1 

4.5 Improve citizen security, with an emphasis on common and 

organized crime. 

16.1, 16.4 and 16.a 

4.6 Promote equality and non -discrimination between men and 

women, as well as guarantee the protection of children, 

adolescents and women against all types of violence. 

5.1, 5.2, 10.3, 11.3, 16.1, 16.2 

and 16.b 

Axis 5. Effective 

decentralization for 

deve lopment 

5.1 Institutionalize the territorial articulation of national policies. 17.4 

5.2 Promote, from the different territorial areas of the country, 

strategic alliances for their sustainable development. 

17.4 

Source: CEPLAN (2018) 87 .

The General Government Policy to 2021 is not the only one that refers to various components 

of the 2030 Agenda. There are various policies and plans of the various sectors that take one or 

more SDGs as a reference in their formulation 88 . Namely: National Policy for Development and 

Social Inclusion to 2030, National Multisectoral Policy for Childhood and Adolescence, National 

Multisectoral Health Policy: “Peru, Healthy Country”, National Policy for Higher Technical 

Productive Education, National Migration Policy 2017 - 2025, National Urban Transport Policy, 

National Policy for Native Languages, Oral Tradi tion and Interculturality, National Policy for 

Culture to 2030, National Policy for Disaster Risk Management to 2050, National Human Rights 

Plan, National Policy for Gender Equality, National Policy for Youth, National Policy of Culture, 

National Developme nt Plan for the Afro -Peruvian Population, National Multisectoral Policy on 

Disability for Development by 2030, National Multisectoral Policy for Older Adults to 2030 and 

National Housing Policy (in consultation). Likewise, four plans are identified that c onsider the 

goals of the SDGs in monitoring their results, such as the National Strategic Plan for Road Safety 

2017 -2021, the National Plan for Comprehensive Solid Waste Management, the National Plan 

for Human Rights 2018 -2021, and the National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights 2021 - 

> 86

CEPLAN (2018): Perú: Info rme Nacional 2018 para el desarrollo sostenible.  

> 87

Ibid.  

> 88

The list of revised state policies and documents can be accessed through the following link: 

https:/ /drive.google.com/file/d/1n9PoYShkCNjXrplzCCKyMdkqummRQMvz/view?usp=sharing 37 

2025. There are also other national policies that, although do not make direct reference to the 

SDGs because they were formulated before the approval of the 2030 Agenda, such as the 

National Environmental Policy, are impl emented through action plans, programs and projects 

that contribute to the compliance with the SDGs, and several of them are in the process of being 

updated, in compliance with the provisions of CEPLAN, such as the National Strategy for Climate 

Change to 2 050. 

The growing presence of the SDGs as references in the government plans of political parties for 

the 2021 General Elections, as illustrated in figure 2, are also worth highlighting. 

Figure 2. The SDGs of the 2030 Agenda and Government Plans   

> Source: Sc hool of Public Management of the Universidad del Pacífico (2021) 89

## 1.4. Progress and challenges towards achieving the SDGs 

According to the 2020 Sustainable Development Report, Peru ranks 61 out of 166 countries in 

the SDG Index, with 71.8%, ranking above the regional average of 70.4%. According to its degree 

of progress (see figure 3), the data shows that Peru has made signif icant progress in three 

objectives (SDG 4, SDG 7 and SDG 8), moderately improving in six objectives (SDG 1, SDG 3, SDG 

5, SDG 6, SDG 11, and SDG 14), stuck on five goals (SDG 2, SDG 9, SDG 13, SDG 16 and SDG 17) 

and getting worse on one goal (SDG15). There are two SDGs (SDG 10 and 12) for which there is 

not enough data to know their degree of progress.   

> 89 School of Public Management of the Universidad del Pacífico (2021). Informe especial: Los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible de
> la Agenda 2030 y los Planes de Gobierno.

38 

Figur e 3. Peru: SDG Implementation Dashboard 

Source: Sachs, J. et al. (2020). 90  

> 90

Sachs, J. et al. (2020). "The Sustainable Development Goals and COVID -19". Sustainable Development Report 2020. Cambridge 

University Press. 39 

This index is developed based on data generated at an international level or that countries 

report through the different existing international mechanisms 91 . Additionally, the UNS in Peru 

has developed a detailed and multidimensional analysis for each of the SDGs in the CCA, 

considering not on ly what is communicated by the country, but also the evidence developed by 

the UNS, civil society, workers' organizations and the private sector. Based on this analysis, great 

challenges have been found in all the SDGs, which have been accentuated due to t he impact of 

COVID -19. Likewise, the CCA has identified the following megatrends 92 that in the national 

context have influenced the progress of the 2030 Agenda and the achievement of the SDGs in 

Peru: 

§ Urbanization : Peru has gone from being an eminently rur al country, with two out of every 

three Peruvians living in that area, to being a predominantly urban one, with four out of every 

five living in urban areas in the 2017 census 93 . The phenomenon of uncontrolled urban 

expansion that develops largely informal ly with significant quantitative and qualitative 

deficiencies of adequate services, equipment and infrastructure is highlighted, giving rise to 

situations of socio -spatial segregation that deepen multiple levels of vulnerability. Thus, 

although recent inte rnal migration often shows greater access to services for people who 

have moved to urban areas (water through the public network, electricity, and education), it 

also highlights a context of loss of rural population and persistent population dispersion 

whi ch, in addition to constituting a challenge for public policies, largely explains the greater 

rural aging: those with the least possibilities of migrating remain. It is important to mention 

that the phenomenon of this migration continues to be the search f or opportunities, which 

is a direct consequence of the lack of equitable investment in the regions. On the other hand, 

the disorderly growth of cities has exacerbated supply problems in urban transport services, 

with the absence of integrated public transp ort systems, the proliferation of inappropriate 

means of transport (growth of individual motorization of cars, taxis and motorcycle -taxis), 

generating serious congestion problems and high accident rates that translate into a high 

social cost. Thus, Peru ha s the highest mortality rate from traffic accidents (15.9 per 100,000 

inhabitants) when compared to other countries in the region such as Chile (12.3), Colombia 

(15.6) and Argentina (12.6). In this sense, the Ministry of Transport and Communications 

(MTC) recognizes in its management instruments that improving road safety is one of the 

fundamental pillars that will reduce accident rates and consequently the number of deaths 

due to accidents. 

§ Demographic changes: Demographic aging has been occurring at an accelerated rate in Peru, 

along with other processes of demographic change. These changes configure, in turn, a set 

of important opportunities and challenges for the development of the country, among them, 

the tr ansformations in educational and health models. Of particular importance among these 

opportunities is that related to the demographic bonus, that is, the window of opportunity 

generated by the change in the age structure and demographic transition in progr ess and 

related to the reduction of the dependency ratio. If this bonus is properly used, to which 

female labor participation and the Venezuelan refugee and migrant population also 

contribute, a positive impact on the country's economic development can be achieved.     

> 91 Such as th e voluntary national reports or the Global Framework of Indicators for the SDGs was developed by the Inter -
> Institutional and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG -SDG).
> 92 United Nations (2020). Report of the UN Economist Network for the UN 75th Anniversary: Shaping the Trends of Our Time.
> https://n9.cl/p2oe0
> 93 INEI (2019). Perfil Sociodemográfico de la Población con Discapacidad, 2017.

40 

§ Emergence of digital technologies: Digitization is transforming each of the dimensions of the 

human experience, and the positive impact of accelerating digital disruption in our societies 

is essential for the achievement of each of the SDGs. At t he end of 2019, 78.6% of households 

in Peru had at least one mobile device to connect to the Internet, almost 20% more than just 

5 years ago 94 . However, the possibility of access does not necessarily mean connection, and 

when we analyze the official data a t the individual level, we discover deeper inequities. For 

example, only 57.1% of people aged 6 years and over in Peru used the Internet, a figure that 

reflected greater gaps according to geographic area, with 66.4% of urban areas connected, 

in contrast to only 22.6% of people in rural territories 95 . In this regard, the 2019 HDI report 

recommends a “technological transformation”, which implies taking advantage of digital 

technologies quickly. If policies promoting access to these technologies are not bolste red, 

the lack of access to these technologies can generate greater inequality between countries, 

and between people. Likewise, open government and digital government, as well as access 

to digital education, particularly in the context of the pandemic and i nstitutional deficit, are 

extremely necessary. 

§ Climate Change : Peru has up to seven of the nine characteristics defined by the United 

Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 96 to qualify as a "particularly 

vulnerable" country in the face of the adverse effects of climate change. Studies have 

determined that the impact of climate change by 2025 would be 4.5% in sectors such as 

agriculture, fishing, water, and electricity 97 (see more information on the effects of climate 

change in Peru in sect ion 1.1). 

§ Inequalities: Inequality in Peru is presented as a problem of a structural nature and historical 

roots that acquires greater relevance as the decades go by. Inequality factors such as 

geographic location, socioeconomic status, gender, ethnic grou p and immigration status, as 

well as sexual orientation and disability status have largely determined which households 

have been hit hardest by the COVID -19 pandemic 98 . However, the lack of disaggregated data 

in the country makes it difficult to truly unde rstand inequality and its impact on the 2030 

Agenda and the SDGs. Boxes 7 and 8 have more information on the situation of people with 

disabilities and lesbians, gays, bisexuals, trans and intersex ( LGBTI).                     

> 94 OSIPTEL (2020). “Los servicios de telecomunicaciones en los hogares peruanos. Encuesta Residencial de Servicios de
> Telecomunicaciones (ERESTEL) 2019” https://repositorio.osiptel.gob.pe/handle/20.500.12630/736
> 95 SUTEP (2020) “Brecha digital en el Perú impide aprovecha r las TICs” https://n9.cl/bldc
> 96 i) Low -lying coastal areas, ii) arid and semi -arid areas, iii) areas exposed to floods, droughts and desertification, iv) fragile mountain
> ecosystems, v) disaster -prone areas, vi) areas w ith high urban air pollution and vii) dependent economies largely from the income
> generated by the production and use of fossil fuels.
> Revised from: National Climate Change Strategy. MINAM, 2015. pp.20
> https://cdn.www.gob.pe/uploads/document/file/374120/ENCC -FINAL -250915 -web.pdf
> 97 Andean Community of Nations (CAN) (2008). El cambio climático no tiene fronteras: Impacto del cambio climático en la
> Comunidad Andina. Lima, El Comercio and Bernard Francou. https://repositorio.ana.gob.pe/handle/20.500.12543/4600
> 98 World Bank (2020). Impacto de la COVID -19 (#Coronavirus) en los hogares peruanos.

41 

BOX 7. SITUATION OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES IN PERU 

As of 2017, the population with disabilities represented 10.3% of the national population (INEI, 2021), 

approxima tely 3 million people (57% women and 43% men) have one or more deficiencies (physical, sensory, 

intellectual, or mental) of a permanent nature and that, by interacting with environmental or attitudinal 

barriers, see limited or impeded the exercise of their rights and their full and effective inclusion in society. 

According to the MINJUSDH (2020), 61% of the Peruvian population considers that people with disabilities 

are discriminated against. Despite the fact that discrimination is a problem that affects th ese groups, there 

are stereotypes and aggravated discriminatory attitudes. Likewise, according to the INEI's SDG Progress 

Report (2021), by 2019 21.9% of PwD are considered monetary -poor; 31.5% of PWD live below 50% of the 

median income; only 25.6% of PWD over 14 years of age have pension insurance. According to the 

Ombudsman's Office, the educational system does not guarantee access to all, violating the right of hundreds 

of thousands of people with disabilities (Ombudsman's Office, 2019). This situation c ould be seriously 

aggravated in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic. Peru ratified the International Convention on the Rights 

of Persons with Disabilities and has received various recommendations related to the situation of persons 

with disabilities both in the framework of the Third cycle of the Universal Periodic Review, by the Treaty 

Bodies and some Special Procedures, among which are summarized: (i) exercise of their legal capacity; (ii) 

access to justice; (iii) independent ways of life; (iv) access to health, social security, reasonable 

accommodation habilitation and rehabilitation; (v) inclusive education; (vi) access and permanence at work; 

(vii) accessibility and universal design; (viii) sexual and reproductive rights; (ix) participation and 

represe ntativeness; and (x) violence and discrimination. 

BOX 8. SITUATION OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANS AND INTERSEX (LGBTI) PEOPLE IN PERU 

The II National Survey on Human Rights (MINJUSDH, 2020) recognizes that 1.7 million adult Peruvians (8%) 

identify as non -heterosexual. Likewise, the aforementioned survey such as Ombudsman Report N° 175 of the 

Ombudsman's Office (2016) indicates that lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI) people face a series 

of problems in the exercise of their rights because of the prejudices, stereotypes and stigmas that exist about 

their sexual orientation and gender identity. It is a vulnerable group and prone to suffer aggressions and attacks 

against their life and integrity, discrimination, insults, exclusion and denial of rights, even by their own fa mily 

and environment. In addition, they have problems with health and education access, equitable working 

conditions, abusive conditions for renting homes, transiting safely and with ease on the streets or public 

transportation, or accessing certain public places. Trans people have serious difficulties in gaining recognition 

for their gender identity and obtaining their identity document (Defensoría del Pueblo, 2016, 2018). Peru has 

received various recommendations related to the situation of LGBTI persons both within the framework of the 

Third cycle of the Universal Periodic Examination, by the Treaty Bodies and some Special Procedures, among 

which are summarized: (i) equality and non -discrimination, fight against discrimination, paying special attention 

to the structural elements of discrimination that may affect the effective exercise of the rights to health, 

education, decent work and participation in decision -making; (ii) administration of justice and fair trial, 

investigate all types of aggressions for reasons of sexual orientation or gender identity and those responsible 

are punished; (iii) prohibit torture and cruel treatment (including cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment); (iv) 

equal rights to marry; and, (v) collect data and information, improve st atistical systems to measure and evaluate 

the human rights situation of LGTBI people. 42 

In addition to these megatrends, the CCA identifies that cross -border dynamics are also having 

an important impact on the achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. Among these cross -

border dynamics, th ose that have to do with the management of hydrographic basins ( of the 

159 basins of Peru, 34 are cross -border basins shared with Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Bolivia 

and /or Chile) , human mobility, and illicit flows ( especially those associated with drug pro duction 

and trafficking and money laundering) , have been identified as most relevant. 

Finally, as part of the CCA, six “accelerators” have been identified with the potential to impact 

all areas of sustainable development, which would be especially relevan t for Peru in the 2022 -

2026 period: i) address inequalities that mainly impact people in a situation of vulnerability and 

promote equity that allows and promotes true equality of opportunities; ii) take into account 

demographic changes, territorial conditi ons and urbanization processes when designing actions 

(this in turn is key when addressing inequalities); iii) harness the potential of digitization; iv) 

promote the circular economy; v) establish alliances between the government and the different 

actors ( civil society, companies, workers' organizations, academia, international cooperation), 

taking into special consideration the private sector and financial institutions because of the role 

that they will be able to play to support the financing and governan ce of the 2030 Agenda and 

the SDGs in the country, and vi) support the country for the generation, processing and use of 

high quality, accessible, reliable, timely, open and reliable disaggregated data. 

# 2. United Nations System Support to the 2030 

# Agenda for Sustainable Development 

The Final Evaluation of the UNDAF 2017 -2021 in Peru, provided a series of recommendations 

and lessons learned, which were considered for the design of the new CF :

• The displacement of the Venezuelan population, the El Niño Costero ph enomenon and the 

crisis caused by the COVID -19 pandemic have posed great challenges in achieving the 

results set out in the UNDAF. The UNCT has been able to respond to these challenges and 

reprogram the necessary resources both to address the new reality a nd to continue working 

on everything agreed in the UNDAF framework. However, it is important to note that a large 

part of this work was carried out using coordination spaces and instruments that were not 

part of the UNDAF, such as the SERP and the Working Group for Refugees and Migrants 

(GTRM). Therefore, it is important that the new CF properly analyze the new priorities and 

integrate all the instruments and coordination spaces that were ad hoc created for specific 

challenges. In addition, it will be key t o keep the CCA updated to keep UNS interventions 

aligned with national priorities at all times. 

• The UNS should strengthen the coordination mechanisms between the AFPs . The new 

guidelines for the elaboration of the new Cooperation Frameworks already outline 

mechanisms that must be implemented to improve the coordination spaces. The guidelines 

should be the starting point for the task of identifying the most appropriate strat egies and 

incentives to improve the coordination and management of the Groups. The format of the 

Work Plans and annual reports should be harmonized to facilitate comparisons, 

understanding and the usefulness of these instruments. In addition, the Work Plan s should 

be focused on the expected products and not have a project design with many activities. 

This approach could enable changing strategies for high -level advocacy. 43 

• The monitoring system needs to be strengthened. The indicators established in the UNDA F

and the Joint Work Plans (JWP) are not the most convenient to make visible the contribution 

of the UNS in Peru or could be complemented with other more specific ones. It would have 

been useful to have not only final indicators of the Direct Effects but a lso of progress, 

especially at the JWP level. For the new CF , results -based management must be 

strengthened, and a clear strategy must be established to support the country in 

strengthening official monitoring and evaluation systems for the production and use of 

strategic information aligned with the SDG indicators, including the relevant disaggregates 

for monitoring the aspects of gender, interculturality and vulnerable populations. 

• The Human Rights -based approach must be strengthened . To strengthen or obt ain better 

results in the area of human rights and gender under the new CF , there must be a more 

sustained exercise of results review by the focal points of gender and human rights. It would 

be necessary to work more on human rights institutionality with d uty bearers and on 

reinforcing the subjects of rights in enforceability and limits. Likewise, it is necessary once 

again to work on participation and accountability to civil society and the groups with which 

the UNS works. A robust framework of accountabil ity should be defined towards the people 

to whom the CF is directed, people who are discriminated against, in poverty or exclusion. 

• Integration of the Venezuelan population. To respond to the humanitarian crisis faced by 

Venezuelan refugees and migrants in the country, one of the main achievements of the UNS 

actions has been to contribute to the response along the humanitarian nexus and with 

development interventions thinking of strategies for the strengthening of national capacities 

in various sectors. How ever, the strengthening has not been uniform or comprehensive 

within all public sectors to ensure the sustainability of the results and adequate care for the 

refugee and migrant population. The new CF must maintain the perspective of " leaving no 

one behind " and work to include the Venezuelan population in the country’s gaze as an 

immediate need that will remain in the long term as national attention. For this, it is essential 

to preserve the dynamics of coordination between the AFPs within the GTRM, which 

guarantees better facilitation for consensus and fluid communication, with the participation 

and collaboration of the State. Box 9 shows more information on the situation of refugees 

and migrants from Venezuela. 44 

• Food security, nutrition and family farming. The UNS has permanently provided technical 

assistance on t he subject of food security, nutrition, and family agriculture despite not 

having developed a joint Work Plan in this regard (the AFPs have individually maintained an 

active role channeled through technical actions and resources to work in this line). In t he 

new CF , food security must be positioned as a key issue to address the needs that have 

emerged from the COVID -19 pandemic, such as setbacks in anemia, chronic malnutrition, or 

the appearance of overweight in the face of junk food consumption. 

• Volunteeri ng. In the design and implementation of the next UNSDCF 2022 -2026, it is 

important to emphasize that volunteering is valued as a strategic tool that adds value to AFP 

interventions, genuinely involving citizens, which enables the increase in scope, impact and 

sustainability of UNS interventions. It is pertinent that volunteering is not only considered 

BOX 9. SITUATION OF REFUGEES AND MIGRAN TS FROM VENEZUELA 

The continuous deterioration of the socioeconomic, health, political and human rights situation in 

Venezuela has triggered unprecedented and large -scale movements of Venezuelan refugees and migrants, 

who arrive in neighboring countries in situations of gre at vulnerability and with immediate urgent needs, 

including regularization and documentation, as well as development. Most Venezuelans have the prospect 

of staying in the country in the short and medium term. Despite this, access to sustainable livelihoods and 

other integration tools are increasingly difficult due to the impact of the pandemic. 

Peru is the second country with most refugees and migrants from Venezuela in the world and first in the 

number of asylum applications. It is estimated that there ar e around 1.05 million Venezuelans in the 

country, including more than 530,000 asylum seekers. Despite the generous welcome provided by the 

country's government, the vast majority of refugees and migrants from Venezuela are in a situation of 

humanitarian cr isis with very limited access to basic health services, decent accommodation, and 

sustainable livelihoods and decent work, forcing them into the informal economy, inadequate 

employment, underemployment, and, in several cases, into situations of labor explo itation. Prior to the 

COVID -19 emergency, only nine percent of the Venezuelan refugee and migrant population had access to 

health insurance, 94 percent of people of working age (14 years and older) were carrying out some activity 

but only 12 percent had a work contract and 50 percent lived below the monetary poverty line (ENPOVE 

2018). Recent studies show the increase in food insecurity and the increase in job insecurity. 

Those in an irregular situation and with a lack of access to documentation face the gr eatest risks of 

exploitation, including human trafficking and smuggling of migrants, as well as lack of protection. However, 

people who have documentation or are regularly in the country face great challenges to validate their 

studies and practice their pr ofession, to access a decent job, opportunities for financial inclusion or to 

access the public education system, since many platforms do not recognize the documentation they have 

to access services or apply for a job. Within the Venezuelan population comm unities are pregnant or 

breastfeeding women, children and adolescents, people with chronic diseases (including HIV) and / or 

disabilities, older adults, LGTBIQ people and single -parent households with high economic, social, 

environmental, education and health vulnerability. Recent studies sho w the increase in food insecurity 

and forced evictions. 

The majority of the refugee and migrant population of Venezuela, even in a regular situation, is not 

included in the national social protection systems or in their programs, so the impact of the pande mic has 

considerably hampered their situation and living conditions. It is estimated that in 2021 a total of 523 

thousand people face food insecurity, 685 thousand have urgent integration needs, 533 thousand for 

health, 492 thousand for protection services , 437 thousand for shelters, 414 thousand for water, sanitation 

and hygiene, 362 thousand for education and 71 thousand for transportation (GTRM, 2020). 45 

as a solidarity practice oriented to the common good or the care of populations in situations 

of vulnerability or exclusion. Volunteering is a strategy that c ontributes to reducing social 

gaps, increasing social capital, strengthening citizen values, generating community 

resilience, among other multiple and diverse contributions to development. 

## 2.1. Strategic priorities 

The strategic priorities (SP) of the UNSDCF 20 22 -2026 have been defined through a joint 

construction process between the UNS in Peru (including all AFPs with activities in the country, 

regardless of whether they have a permanent presence in Peru or not), the Government of Peru 

(national sectors and au tonomous bodies), non -governmental actors such as civil society 

(including organizations of populations in vulnerable situations, such as organizations of people 

with disabilities, LGBTIQ + and people with HIV / AIDS), academia, tripartite constituents of ILO, 

private sector and donors. This process has taken as a reference the National Agreement and 

the Strategic Plan for National Development. Thus, between March and June 2021, 10 virtual 

workshops were held (on account of existing restrictions to carry ou t face -to -face meetings due 

to the pandemic), and innovative alternatives were sought to make them as participatory as 

possible. These alternatives included the use of the Mural tool, sharing by mail all the documents 

to be discussed prior to the meeting a nd keeping the space open to receive comments by email 

up to 2 weeks after each meeting (see more information on the workshops carried out in Annex 

3). 

As a starting point for the definition of strategic priorities, the following inputs were considered :

• The recommendations and lessons learned from the UNDAF 2017 –2021. 

• The main challenges and accelerators identified in the CCA (see section 1.4). 

• The development priorities in Peru's medium and long term, as they have been collected 

by the Vision of Peru to 2 050 and the policies of the National Agreement (see sections 

1.2 and 1.3). 

• The recommendations issued on Human Rights issues since 2015, both by the treaty 

bodies, special procedures, and Universal Periodic Review (see Annex 2). 

• A virtual survey on the add ed value of the UNS in Peru (see section 2.6). 

As a result of these workshops, information was also obtained on the expectations regarding 

the way the UNS works in Peru. The sectors consulted recommended that, in a transversal way, 

the UNSDCF 2022 -2026 con sider the approaches of gender, human rights, life cycle, 

interculturality, resilience and leave no one behind. In addition, the need to develop the 

capacities of the State was emphasized, and to facilitate dialogue and alliances between 

different populati on groups and sectors of society on structural and high -impact issues, which 

contribute to accelerating the achievement of the 2030 Agenda, the SDGs and the national 

development priorities. Additionally, it was emphasized that subnational development plans 

provide a spatial or geographic dimension to national development priorities and needs. Such 

information, contrasted with data from the CCA, will be essential to design specific interventions 

that reach the groups that have been left behind and resolve th e root causes of exclusion. 

Based on all the above, the UNS will prioritize, accompany and assist the country in four strategic 

priorities: (a) Well -being of the people and equal access to opportunities; (b) Management of 

the environment, climate change and disaster risk; (c) Competitiveness and inclusive and 46 

sustainable productivity; (d) Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of 

citizenship. The expected results of the UNS work to address each of the strategic priorities are 

reflected in a results matrix (see Annex 1). 

Figure 4. Strategic priorities and transversal approaches of UNSDCF 2022 -2026  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

To respond to the need to work with different approaches in a transversal way, UNSDCF 2022 -

2026 integrates as a transversal axis from its design and for its implementation, monitoring, 

follow -up and evaluation, an integrated approach that includes six tran sversal approaches (the 

perspective of gender, intercultural approach, rights -based approach, life cycle approach, 

territorial approach, resilience approach) and the principle of leaving no one behind, presented 

below: 

§ Gender perspective to make visible t he structural and historical inequalities that persist 

between women and men, girls and boys, in all dimensions of sustainable development; 

focus efforts on closing gender gaps in key areas for the advancement of women, and 

placing substantive equality as a requirement, accelerator and result of sustainable 

development. 47 

§ Intercultural approach that establishes the recognition of cultural differences as one of 

the pillars of the construction of a democratic society, based on the establishment of 

relations of equity and equal opportunities and rights. The intercultural approach in public 

management is the process of adaptation of the different institutions, at the normative, 

administrative and civil service level of the State to attend in a pertinent way the cu ltural 

and social needs of the different ethnic -cultural groups of the country. 

§ Human rights approach as a conceptual framework for the process of human 

development that, from the normative point of view, is based on international human 

rights norms and fr om the operational point of view, is oriented to the promotion and 

protection of human rights analyzing inequalities at the heart of development problems 

and correct discriminatory practices and the unfair distribution of power that hamper 

development prog ress 99 . It recognizes people as holders of rights and agents of change 100 

that requires that the principles of human rights (equality and non -discrimination, 

participation, accountability) guide development cooperation within the United Nations, 

and that at tention is paid to capacity development of “ duty -bearers” to fulfill their 

obligations and of “rights holders” to claim their rights. It consists of a three -stage process 

for programming analysis and evaluation that identifies who is left behind and why: 

causality analysis, role analysis, and capacity gap analysis 101 .

§ Life cycle approach to address the gaps determined by age, identify the chain of 

inequalities at each stage of the life trajectory of people and their interaction with other 

structural factors of inequality (gender, ethnic and cultural belonging, territory, 

socioeconomic status, disability status, immigration status, among others), and reverse 

inequalities assuming a differentiated, pertinent and favorable perspective based on the 

age of the people (girls, boys, adolescents, young people, adults, older adults). 

§ Territorial approach that seeks to make visible and understand territorial inequalities, 

socio -spatial diversity, biodiversity, the comparative advantages of each regio n or sub -

region of the country and, based on this, build public policies, strategies or instruments 

that specifically respond to these needs, promoting sustainable development aimed at 

reducing inequalities and favoring territorial cohesion. 

§ Resilience ap proach that contemplates the capacity of social, economic, and 

environmental systems to face a phenomenon, trend, disturbance or danger, responding 

or reorganizing in such a way that they maintain their essential function, identity and 

structure, and prese rve the capacity to adapt, learn and transform. 

§ Leave no one behind , as the central transformative promise of the 2030 Agenda for 

Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It represents the 

unequivocal commitment of all UN Memb er States to eradicate poverty in all its forms, 

end discrimination and exclusion, and reduce inequalities and vulnerabilities that leave 

people behind and undermine the potential of people and humanity as a whole. The 

approach not only involves reaching t he poorest of the poor but also seeks to combat 

discrimination and increasing inequalities within and between countries and their root 

causes. It is based on the normative standards of the UN, including the principles of     

> 99 OHCHR (2006). Frequently asked questions on a human rights -based approach to development cooperation.
> 100 UN (2012). The Guiding Principles on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights.
> 101 UNSDG (2019). A UNSDG Op erational Guide for UN Country Teams. March. https://unsdg.un.org/sites/default/files/Interim -
> Draft -Operational -Guide -on -LNOB -for -UNCTs.pdf

48 

equality and non -discrimination tha t are fundamental principles of the Charter of the 

United Nations, international human rights law and national legal systems throughout the 

world. It also implies addressing patterns of exclusion, structural restrictions and unequal 

power relations that pr oduce and reproduce inequalities over generations and moving 

towards both formal and substantive equality for all groups in society. This will require 

the support of legal, political, institutional, and other measures to promote equality and 

reverse the tr end of increasing inequalities. Finally, it will require the free, active, and 

meaningful participation of the interested persons, in particular those who are in a greater 

situation of vulnerability, in the review and follow -up processes to guarantee 

accou ntability, recourse and reparations for all 102 .

This integrated approach guides the efforts of the UNS in this CF , for the achievement of 

strategic priorities and direct effects, and will also be considered in all products, projects, and 

programs, as well as in their goals and indicators. Additionally, to ensure a harmonized 

programmatic approach within each of the four strategic priorities, the CF will be guided by the 

programmatic principles of sustainability and results -based manag ement. 

§ Sustainability: As an essential characteristic for development, sustainability directs 

attention towards the maintenance and consolidation of long -term results without 

prejudice or detriment to natural resources and to guarantee the rights of present and 

future generatio ns. The 2030 Agenda calls for guaranteeing this principle of sustainability of 

natural resources, as well as related cultural resources, supporting inclusive and sustained 

economic growth, eradicating poverty in all its dimensions and improving human well -being. 

It is essential to strengthen the capacities of communities and national and sub -national 

institutions. The UNSDCF will contribute to strengthening such institutions to promote the 

achievement of the 2030 Agenda. 

§ Accountability The UNSDCF promotes the accountability of the UNS, which requires 

establishing measures to take advantage of and achieve greater transparency and improve 

the measurement and reporting of results. This presupposes active and inclusive 

collaboration of local communities and the ir participation in decision -making throughout 

the UNSDCF cycle. This process, together with the strengthening of institutional integrity, 

represent, in turn, corruption prevention measures that seek to support the government to 

ensure that the assistance provided reaches the intended purposes and beneficiaries. The 

formulation of national policies and UNS programs will be based on accessible, timely and 

reliable quality disaggregated data with an integrated approach (which includes aspects 

such as gender a nd cultural relevance). Accountability also requires program design, 

implementation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as risk management for development 

results. 

## 2.2. Theory of change 

This theory of change lists and summarizes how and why the desired changes are expected to 

occur in the country. During the implementation of the CF , the theory of change will have the 

capacity to adapt, making use of continuous monitoring and evaluation, and the conclusions 

obtained during its application, as well as the update s of the CCA. Formally, the UNSDCF 2022 –

2026 theory of change is expressed below:  

> 102 UNSDG (2019). A UNSDG Operational Guide for UN Country Teams. March.

49 

IF 

• The well -being of people and equitable access to opportunities are guaranteed, where 

people, especially those who are in situations of vulnerability and discrimination, access a 

floor of social protection and decent work that make available and ensure universal health 

access, without discrimination, equitable, acceptable and of quali ty including sexual and 

reproductive health, education, nutrition, food security, adequate housing, basic income 

security, the care system and special protection, including the generation of initiatives and 

conditions that allow them to increase their resi lience and reduce their vulnerability to 

cris es. 

• The environment, biodiversity and disaster risk are effectively managed in a climate 

change scenario, where institutions and people implement policies and effective policy 

instruments for environmental mana gement, biodiversity, land use planning and 

management of the disaster risk (associated with climatic and non -climatic phenomena), 

with a view to preventing or reducing disasters that cause damage and victims; promote the 

conservation of protected and unpr otected ecosystems, the sustainable use of resources, 

intercultural governance, as well as more sustainable production and consumption models 

that minimize waste and favor recycling so that greenhouse gas emissions are reduced 

(including the promotion of u rbanization and sustainable mobility models, a renewable 

energy matrix, promotion of a circular economy, sustainable management of forests and 

resilient cities), and to strengthen the resilience of people and ecosystems to disasters facing 

a climate change scenario, especially those in vulnerable situations 103 .

• Inclusive and sustainable competitiveness and productivity are promoted , where people, 

especially those in situations of vulnerability and discrimination, improve their access to 

resilient livelihoods and decent work, through the construction of a diversified productive 

matrix, that values its biodiversity in a competitive, f ormalized, innovative, sustainable, 

low -carbon and inclusive way that takes into account the assets and weaknesses of the 

different territories and their communities .

• Effective, polycentric democratic governance is strengthened for the proper management 

of public affairs and goods, social and peaceful cohesion, access to justice, the fight against 

all forms of violence and discrimination (including gender inequality and all forms of 

discrimination and gender -based violence), prevention and fight against il licit activities 

(especially illicit drug production and trafficking, money laundering, corruption, human 

trafficking in all its forms, environmental crimes and crime in general); ensuring that people, 

especially those in situations of vulnerability, inequ ality and discrimination, exercise their 

rights under conditions of equality. 

THEN 

Peru lays the foundations for people (especially those in situations of vulnerability and 

discrimination) and ecosystems to benefit, on the one hand, from a sustainable, com petitive, 

diversified, innovative, formal, inclusive, participatory and low carbon model that guarantees 

the well -being of people and equal opportunities, that promotes the conservation and recovery 

of biodiversity and that is low in greenhouse gas emissio ns, and that increases the resilience of 

their territories and communities to disasters and humanitarian crises. On the other hand, that  

> 103 In relation to vulnerable people, Law No. 30754, Framework Law on Climate Change, in its Annex: Glossary of Terms, indicates
> that populations in vulnerable situations are those compri sed of women, children and adolescents, older adults, people with
> disabilities, indigenous or native peoples, people deprived of liberty, migrants and those in a situation of poverty, whose e conomic,
> social and cultural conditions diminish their capacity t o adapt and mitigate climate change, so they are more exposed to the impacts
> and risks of climate change.

50 

promotes a State with an effective, modern, decentralized and people -focused management, 

that promotes integrity and ac countability, fights against corruption, guarantees the full exercise 

of human rights, through quality services for all, and strives in an articulated way to achieve the 

2030 Agenda and the SDGs (see figure 5) and national development priorities (see figur es 6, 7 

and 8). 

BECAUSE 

• By guaranteeing people's well -being and equitable access to opportunities : i) people's 

access to decent work and a comprehensive social protection system will be increased, 

including a social protection floor, which ensures availa bility and universal, acceptable and 

quality access to health including sexual and reproductive health, nutrition, food security, 

adequate housing and basic services, basic income security and care system; ii) the inclusive 

and equitable access of people t o quality universal education and special protection will be 

improved , and iii) resilience to cris es will be increased by strengthening humanitarian 

response and post -crisis recovery mechanisms that, among others, will allow adequate 

management of human mo bility and inclusion of rural populations, refugees and migrants. 

All this will improve the well -being of the population, especially of people who are in 

situations of vulnerability and discrimination (whose conditions have worsened as a result 

of the effe cts of the COVID -19 pandemic), empowering them, strengthening their resilience 

to face crises and that they fully exercise their social, cultural, economic and environmental 

rights. 

This, in turn, will imply that a solid body of regulations exists and is implemented, with 

prioritized and articulated inclusive policies, with a human rights -based approach, with 

sufficient financing, progressive and quality spending, and strengthened management 

capacities to close the gaps of inequality and to ensure univers al access to goods, rights and 

basic and essential quality health services (including sexual and reproductive health), 

nutrition, food security, adequate housing, education and decent work under the principle 

of not leaving the no one behind. In addition, guaranteeing equitable access to opportunities 

will entail the production, analysis, use and dissemination of data, indicators, and 

disaggregated statistics, by vulnerable group and with a gender perspective, which makes 

visible those who are lagging behin d and informs decision making. 

• Implementing policies and effective policy instruments for the management of the 

environment, climate change and disaster risk management (including climatic and non -

climatic phenomena) will: i) promote responsible and susta inable production and 

consumption models; ii) reverse degradation and promote the recovery and conservation 

of biodiversity in protected and unprotected ecosystems; iii) reduce the excessive 

consumption of land in urbanization processes; iv) reduce greenho use gas emissions 

through a renewable energy matrix; clean, modern and electrified transportation; 

promotion of a circular economy; and best agricultural and livestock practices and 

sustainable forest management; v) accelerate the transition to a greener, more sustainable 

and circular economy that generates greater added value; vi) reduce the exposure and 

vulnerability of populations and ecosystems to the effects of climate change, and strengthen 

their resilience in urban and rural territories; vii) strengt hen the preparation, response and 

recovery of the population (including all vulnerable groups) in the face of disasters and 

humanitarian crises with a rights -based approach; viii) promote better management of 

scientific and traditional knowledge about the territory, the environment, disaster risks and 

conditions of vulnerability of the population, and of measures to reduce risk and promote 51 

innovation for sustainable use and occupation of the territory and its resources; ix) improve 

the effectiveness of urba n and territorial governance, environmental and disaster risk, 

through instruments and mechanisms of planning and multi -actor, inclusive and 

participatory management, in the management and decision -making about urban and rural 

territory; x) implement produ ctive and technological innovations that strengthen the 

resilience of the population's livelihoods, especially those that live directly from the 

territory; xi) support the concept of “recovering better”, seeking to take advantage of the 

opportunities broug ht by the COVID -19 pandemic; xii) promote an adequate mainstreaming 

of rights, gender, interculturality, life cycle and territory approaches. 

• By promoting a productive matrix based on diversification, innovation and technological 

and digital transformation; and aimed at economic, social and environmental 

sustainability, the inclusion of all vulnerable groups and the creation of decent work , the 

transition to a circular economy and a sustainable economic reactivation post confinement 

by COVID -19 will be supported and will be establishing the bases for increasing 

industrialization, productivity, and competitiveness of the country, having an effect on the 

prosperity of the population as a whole, their income, the enjoyment of their rights and thei r

quality of life. This prosperity will only be sustainable if the productive matrix is based in 

turn on the sustainable management of the territory (including social capital), nature and 

ecosystems, preserving the ecosystem services they provide to societ y. To have a productive 

matrix, low in carbon, diversified, competitive, inclusive and sustainable, there must be a 

human capital that is strengthened and included in its diversity in the processes of 

productive transformation, with an emphasis on people a ffected by discrimination and 

inequality based on gender and rural populations with little equality of opportunities and 

inclusion, adequate for the current and emerging demands of national and global markets, 

and adapted to technological change. Value cha ins should have been strengthened to 

promote their complexity, articulation, and inclusiveness, with new regulatory, financial, 

social and infrastructure tools to reduce informality and inequality in its extension, with an 

emphasis on closing gender gaps. The fragility and assets of the territories must be 

considered to maximize investments and the generation of value in a framework of a

comprehensive and systemic approach. 

• By strengthening effective democratic governance , institutions are strengthened and a 

modern, effective, decentralized public management and administration is promoted, 

based on the principles of integrity, transparency and accountability, and centered on 

people, which in turn facilitates spaces and cit izen participation mechanisms, such as 

volunteering, that promote social cohesion, a strengthened enabling environment for the 

full exercise of human rights, especially of groups in vulnerable situations, and a

strengthened justice system to guarantee prom pt, effective, independent justice and that it 

is accessible, transparent and without discrimination. Thus, the State will be able to better 

implement its policies and undertake profound reforms, public resources and services will 

achieve their legitimate purpose and intended beneficiaries, and civil society will have 

greater capacities to demand their rights, participate freely, actively and meaningfully under 

conditions of equality and non -discrimination and effectively influence inclusive decision -

making in all spheres of sustainable development. 

On the other hand, the State will have the institutional capacities to prevent and punish all 

forms and manifestations of violence and discrimination against all groups in vulnerable 

situations, in particular a gainst women, girls, boys and adolescents, as well as it will 

guarantee access to quality services for the due care and protection of victims. In addition, 

the capacities of State institutions and civil society will be articulated and strengthened to 

preve nt, report, and punish acts of corruption, illicit activities (especially the production and 

trafficking of illicit drugs), money laundering, and human trafficking and related crimes, 52 

environmental crimes, cybercrime and crime in general; and promote accou ntability and 

volunteer mechanisms and guarantee social and political participation. 

Figure 5. SDGs to which each Strategic Priority of UNSDCF 2022 -2026 contributes  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

53 

## 2.3. Direct Effects 

From the theory of change, the follow ing chain of results is identified that seek to address the 

four strategic priorities (SP) established in this Cooperation Framework. Six direct effects (D E)

are defined that represent the changes to which the AFPs will contribute collectively and 

substant ively through collaboration and alliance with other key development partners during 

the period 2022 -2026 104 .

The expected outcomes for each of the four SP s are detailed below: 

SP 1: Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct Effect 1. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability, increase 

their access to decent work and a comprehensive social protection system, including a social 

protection floor, which ensures universal access to health (including sexual and re productive 

health), nutrition, food security, basic income security and the care system, through an 

integrated approach with special emphasis on gender and rights. 

Direct Effect 2. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability have 

improved and equal access to quality universal education and special protection, through an 

integrated approach with special emphasis on gender and rights. 

Direct Effect 3. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability, lack of 

protection, poverty and food insecurity, increase their resilience to cris es through strengthened 

humanitarian response mechanisms and post -crisis recovery, through an integrated approach 

with special emphasis on gender , rights and territory. 

SP 2: Management of the environment, climate change and disaster risk 

Direct Effect 4. By 2026, the population and ecosystems, especially those in greater situations 

of vulnerability, strengthen their resilience as a result of instit utions and communities improving 

policies and implementing effective mechanisms or instruments for environmental, climate 

change, and disaster risk management and humanitarian crises management, through an 

integrated approach with special emphasis on gende r, rights, interculturality, life cycle and 

territory. 

SP 3: Competitiveness and inclusive and sustainable productivity 

Direct Effect 5. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and 

discrimination, improve their access to res ilient livelihoods through the construction of a 

diversified, competitive, formalized, innovative, sustainable and inclusive productive matrix, 

with decent work and aligned to the potential of each territory, through an integrated approach 

with special emp hasis on gender, particularly through the economic empowerment of women. 

SP 4: Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct Effect 6. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and 

discrimination such as girls and boys, adolescents, youth and women, exercise their rights 

equally as a result of the strengthening of effective governance, social cohesion, access to justice 

and the fight against gender inequality and all forms of discrimination and vi olence based on 

gender, through an integrated approach.  

> 104 During the process of joint construction of this MC, the possibility of including an additional DE under PE 4 focused on corr uption
> issues was discu ssed, but finally it was agreed to mainstream corruption issues in the 4 PE and concentrate efforts on transparency
> issues, accountability and citizen participation in DE 6.

54 

## 2.4. Synergies 

To maximize the impact of the UNSDCF 2022 -2026 to accelerate the achievement of the 2030 

Agenda and manage the possible counterparts concerning the SDGs in Peru, the strategic 

priorities ar e fully articulated with each other and aligned with the priorities of the State (see 

Figures 6, 7 and 8). 

Figure 6. Complementarity of the UNSDCF with the axes of the Vision of Peru to 2050  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

The interconnected nature of the SDGs requires normative coherence and an integrated 

systemic and cross -sectoral approach. For this reason, the UNSDCF combines the diverse and 

complementary mandates of the AFPs of the UNS, as well as their knowledge and sp ecialized 

contributions, and is strategically linked to national development policies and plans and 

promotes synergies at the level of direct effects. Thus, the six direct effects linked to the four 

strategic priorities have been designed to optimize their complementarity and the synergies 

between them, they are focused on people and on leaving no one behind and seek to integrate 

the triple nexus between issues of sustainable development, peacebuilding and humanitarian 

assistance (see Box 10 for more info rmation on the triple nexus). 55 

Figure 7. Complementarity of the UNSDCF with the objectives of the National Agreement  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

Following the principles of the United Nations, UNSDCF 2022 -2026 seeks to highlight how, 

through its strategic priorities and direct effects, the AFPs contribute to the Peruvian State in 

the protection, respect, and guarantee of human rights and in the implementation of human 

rights commitments assumed, within the fram ework of the Universal System for the Protection 

of Human Rights. Annex 2 includes the main recommendations made to the country since 2015, 

both by the treaty bodies, special procedures, and the Universal Periodic Review (UPR). 56 

Figure 8. Complementarity of the UNSDCF with the policies and Consensus of the National 

Agreement  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

57 

## 2.5. Sustainability 

Due to the interconnected n ature of strategic priorities and outcomes, and by working through 

an integrated approach, the implementation of the UNSDCF will help break silos of work and 

generate synergies, both within the UNS and in government. This, in turn, will facilitate the 

crea tion of structures and capacities that will guarantee the sustainability of the results beyond 

the 5 years of the CF .

On the other hand, the UNS plans to support the sustainability of the effects of the results by 

working simultaneously with: i) the establ ishment of alliances (see section 3.3) and ii) the 

strengthening of the national statistical system (see section 4.1). Both aspects were identified 

in the CCA as one of the accelerators of the 2030 Agenda in Peru (see section 1.4). In addition, 

they were a lso identified by different actors participating in the consultation workshops of the 

UNSDCF 2022 -2026, as key issues to support the transition of responsibility for the 2030 Agenda 

both to the government and to the relevant non -governmental actors. 

Linke d to the work to strengthen alliances, another basic element to achieve the sustainability 

of the effects beyond the UNSDCF cycle consists of expanding and strengthening the spaces for 

social participation with civil society actors, in a way that facilitat es cohesion and consensus -

building. Thus, by recognizing that civil society actors are a driving force in guiding development 

policies and guardians that guarantee the application of policies, the UNS in Peru will seek to 

facilitate the participation of civil society in all facets of the 2030 Agenda. 

BOX 10. THE TRIPLE HUMANITARIAN -DEVELOPMENT -PEACE NEXUS (HDP) 

The HDP triple nexus is used to describe the interrelationships between humanitarian, development and peace 

actors. Specifically, it refers to joint work efforts in order to develop more effective solutions without leaving 

anyone behind, mitigate risks and vulnerabilities, and at the same time build sustainable peace. This approach 

takes place within the framework of the new United Nations policy of New Way of Working (NWOW). This form 

of work seeks to strengthen national and local systems and anticipate crises. To achieve this purpose, it is 

necessary to seek collectiv e results linked to the goals of the SDGs at the national level, this must be done 

through collaborative analysis, as well as visible planning and strategic programming in multi -year programmatic 

and financing plans. Likewise, it is necessary to build capa cities at the local level to mitigate risks and 

vulnerabilities, and increase resilience. Finally, each actor involved in this network must contribute to the 

expected collective results through their comparative advantages. 

The OECD (2019) recommends that the person and their needs be at the center of all interventions carried out 

and that gender equality and inclusion be promoted through all actions. Likewise, it indicates that interventions 

must take into account the principles of “do not harm” to avoid negative externalities and maximize the positive 

effects of humanitarian, development and peace actions. With regard to financing, the OECD recommends 

developing evidence -based peace, development and humanitarian financing strategies at global, regional, 

national and local levels that include the most appropriate funding streams. This may include at the global level, 

working with multilateral partners, IFIs, governments, the private sector and civil society, and at the country 

level, working with government s, with the Office of the United Nations Resident Coordinator, multilateral 

partners, the IFIs, the private sector and civil society to establish multi -year financing strategies to support 

collective results. 58 

Finally, in the current context of the country, the vision of sustainability is not only based on the 

development of capacities but also on the support of coherent and comprehensive regulati ons .

Advocacy capacity has been considered one of the comparative advantages of the UNS in Peru 

(see section 2.6). The interconnected nature of the SDGs and the continuity of Peru's work on 

them, beyond the cycle of this UNSDCF , depends on the capacities m anaged by the State and on 

the coherence and harmony of the regulatory framework with the commitments acquired in the 

policies and programs that are designed, implemented, and evaluated, in order to guarantee 

compliance. Therefore, through the implementati on of the UNSDCF , strengthening of these 

regulatory capacities will be sought with a view to the 2030 horizon. 

## 2.6. Comparative advantages of the United Nations 

The UNS in Peru is made up of 22 AFPs with activities in the country, either with a presence and 

representation in the country or through projects and programs administered from regional or 

global headquarters outside the country but implemented in Peru. E ach entity has its own area 

of work and mandate, but all respond as a single UNCT. 

According to the results of a virtual survey 105 carried out by the UNS as part of the process of 

construction of the UNSDCF 2022 -2026, the main comparative advantages of the UNS in Peru 

are the following in order of importance: 1) high -quality technical assistance capacity for the 

State, 2) ability to create networks and strategic alliances to mobilize resources that support 

development priorities, 3) political advocacy capaci ty, 4) experience and ability to follow up on 

international commitments, 5) image of neutrality and legitimacy to build bridges between the 

different actors involved in the public debate, 6) have highly trained human resources, 7) ability 

to mobilize finan cial resources from different donors to finance development priorities, 8) ability 

to manage funds with transparency, efficiency and effectiveness and 9) have financial resources 

to implement concrete actions. 

According to the results obtained, the three main comparative advantages of the UNS identified 

by representatives of the AFPs, the government, civil society, the private sector, and the 

academy have been: 1) the ability of the UNS to provide high -quality technical assistance to the 

State, 2) the capa city of the UNS to create networks and alliances to mobilize resources, and 3) 

the capacity of the UNS to exercise advocacy. On the other hand, the actors of civil society, the 

private sector and the Academia identify as the main comparative advantage, the image of 

neutrality and legitimacy of the UNS, which allows building bridges with various actors, and 

unlike the UNS, they value the capacity of the UNS to manage funds in a transparent, efficient, 

and effective manner, and that the UNS has the resources to implement concrete actions (see 

figure 9).  

> 105 The survey was carried out on the Survey Monkey platform and was sent to more th an 500 actors, including UNS personnel,
> governmental and non -governmental actors (civil society, private sector, workers' associations, international cooperation, and
> academia). 60 responses were obtained, with 45% of the responses from non -governmental ac tors, 28% from the UNS and 27%
> from governmental actors.

59 

Figure 9. Comparative advantages of the UNS in Peru  

> Source: Prepared by the authors 106 .

Likewise, most people surveyed identify that the UNS has a “high” or “very high” added value to 

support the country in achieving the long -term development objectives identified in the five 

axes of Vision 2050: 1) People reach their potential in equal opportunities, 2) S ustainable 

management of nature, 3) Sustainable development and decent employment, 4) Democracy, 

peace and human rights, 5) Modern, efficient, and transparent state (see figure 10). 

Figure 10. Comparative advantages of the UNS and Vision 2050   

> Source: Pr epared by the authors.
> 106 This graph is built based on the question "What would be the three characteristics of the UNS in Peru that add more value to
> the achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs?"

60 

# 3. Cooperation Framework implementation plan 

To achieve the objectives of the UNSDCF 2022 - 2026, the UNS in Peru has defined a series of 

coordination mechanisms with national institutions and other key development partners, the 

governance of which is described in this section. 

## 3.1. Governance and joint work plans 

The structure for the implem entation of the UNSDCF 202 2–202 6 will have three levels of 

governance and coordination: i) direction and strategic political dialogue; ii) operational -

programmatic implementation; iii) advice and specialized support (see figure 11). 

The UNSDCF will be operationalized through joint work plans (JWP) that will expose in greater 

detail the necessary contributions and specific actions to achieve the proposed results. Every 

AFP program, work plan or activity in Peru is derived from this CF and is ali gned with it. In this 

sense, the CCTs will also provide greater clarity in accountability and transparency for the 

respective AFPs of the UNS and will help define the roles of the Government and other 

development partners in achieving shared results. The N ational Steering Committee ( CDN ), 

described below, will ensure that the implementation of the UNSDCF remains aligned with 

national priorities. 

The JWPs will be multiannual, in line with the period covered by the UNSDCF . These plans will 

be reviewed annuall y, or whenever necessary, allowing them to be updated and adjusted in an 

agile way. For each of the six direct effects of the UNSDCF , there will be a JWP whose 

preparation, implementation and monitoring will oversee the interagency Results Groups ( R). 

The specific formats for the joint work plans will be prepared by the RCO, the Program 

Coordination Group and the Monitoring and Evaluation Group, and results reporting (M&EG), 

based on the provisions of UN INFO. Additionally, the JWPs will serve as support fo r

accountability to the CDN and will contain, as a minimum: specific products, indicators, 

responsible entities and partners, and financial requirements. The JWCs will be coordinated with 

the Peruvian Government. In addition, the specialized working groups prescribed by the UNS 

guidelines will continue, also including the specialized groups on gender, human rights, and the 

GTRM in support of the operational, programmatic and political activities of the UNS in Peru. 

In addition, it is important to highlight that the UNSDCF will seek to articulate in all its actions 

the programming principles that were used in the formulation: a comprehensive approach, 

sustainability, results -based management, and quality information and evidence. 

## 3.1.1. Management and strategic po litical dialogue level 

National Steering Committee : To ensure a coordinated implementation and adequate 

orientation of this Cooperation Framework, a CDN will be established at the political -strategic 

level. This committee will be co -chaired by the Executiv e Director of the Peruvian Agency for 

International Cooperation (APCI) and the Coordinator or Resident Coordinator of the UNS in 

Peru. The institutions that make up the CDN will be the UNS, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

(RREE), the Ministry of Economy an d Finance (MEF), the Presidency of the Council of Ministers 

(PCM) and the APCI. The CDN will evaluate the relevance of inviting other entities to address 

specific issues, including the Ombudsman's Office, the National Assembly of Regional 

Governments, and the National Agreement Forum. The CDN will provide strategic guidance 

during the UNSDCF implementation period, permanently ensuring its alignment with national 

development priorities and providing direction and guidance to the Joint Work Plans and the ir 

evaluations. Likewise, as part of the strategic dialogue between the UNS and the Peruvian 

government, the following topics will be prioritized: (i) main challenges the country faces in 61 

achieving the prioritized SDGs; (ii) harmonization of the UNSDCF wit h national, regional, and 

international development priorities, and its link to voluntary national reviews; and (iii) added 

value of the UNS in Peru. 

The Resident Coordinator will be responsible for: (i) submitting the Country Results Report, the 

follow -up reports and the action plan to the CDN annually, and (ii) together with the Country 

Team, ensuring a final evaluation process of the independent and participatory Cooperation 

Framework, prepare an action plan based on its findings, conclusions and recomme ndations and 

incorporate these products into the Common Country Analysis, programming documents of the 

Country Team organizations and future Cooperation Frameworks, and guarantee its publication. 

The CDN will hold ordinary meetings twice a year, and other extraordinary meetings as 

circumstances warrant. The OCR of the UNS in Peru will act as the technical secretariat of this 

committee and will support the organization, preparation, and follow -up of the meetings. The 

members of this committee will also inclu de the representatives of the AFPs and the heads of 

the government ministries and secretariats that are key counterparts of the AFPs. In addition, 

representatives of civil society, the private sector and donors may be invited to the meetings, as 

deemed app ropriate. 

The UNSDCF will be evaluated by this committee once a year. To this end, the UNS will present 

a results report, with their respective indicators, to the CDN . This advancement of results will 

make it possible to guarantee the relevance of the UNS DCF in the face of the evolution of 

national circumstances, such as humanitarian, economic, political, or other unforeseen 

situations of such magnitude that they require reprogramming or immediate responses by the 

UNS and its partners. The existing terms o f reference for the CDN will be reviewed and updated 

jointly between APCI, the RCO and the UNCT for the period of this UNSDCF , and at the latest 

during the first 40 business days after signing it. 

United Nations Country Team : The UNCT is chaired by the Res ident Coordinator and is 

composed of the Heads of the United Nations AFPs operating in the country, working as a team 

under the principles of mutual responsibility as stipulated in the Framework of Management 

and Accountability, to ensure the harmonization and coherence of all the actions of the country 

team with the UNSDCF , and identify opportunities to establish synergies and complementarities, 

and avoid duplications and overlaps. The UNCT in Peru has overall responsibility for the 

coordination and operat ional management of United Nations programs and activities in the 

country, including the UNSDCF . Makes decisions on program and financial matters related to 

programming activities, as agreed with national authorities. The regular meetings of the UNCT 

will be held monthly ; in addition, extraordinary meetings will be held as circumstances warrant. 

This team will oversee strategically leading and internal monitoring of UNSDCF 2022 -2026, 

adopting the necessary measures for its proper implementation and scope of the intended 

effects, in collaboration with government counterparts at the national and municipal level ― 

encompassing the three branches of the State―, civil society, trade associations, academia, 

donors, private sector and other development partners. Th e AFP leaders of the RG will 

periodically report 107 to the UNCT on the progress of the implementation of the UNSDCF .

Consultative Space with the Private Sector, Civil Society and Trade Associations : This space will 

allow maintaining a structured and periodic dialogue between the UNS and the private sector, 

civil society actors and trade associations to strengthen the implementation of the UNSDCF 

based on the knowledge and experiences of their repres entatives and organizations. The 

meetings will be called by the Coordinator or the Resident Coordinator, in coordination with the   

> 107 This periodicity wil l be defined in the ToR of the RGs that will be established once the MC 2022 -2026 is signed.

62 

UNCT, inviting, for example, representatives of indigenous peoples, academics, youth, 

organizations of people with disabilitie s, women and men activists who work to promote human 

rights, actors or partners from the private sector and trade associations, among others, as 

appropriate. This space will also facilitate the identification of strategic partners to accelerate 

the achieve ment of the SDGs in Peru. 

## 3.1.2. Operational -programmatic implementation level 

Results Groups ( RG): Reporting directly to the UNCT, the RG are the main mechanisms, 

coordinated and collaborative, for planning, implementation and monitoring and evaluation 

(M&E) of the UNSDCF . The objective of ensuring interagency work to achieve the expected 

effects by 2026. Each RG covers one of the six DE s of the UNSDCF and will be made up of the 

AFPs of the SNU involved in each of them. The leadership and co -leadership of the gro ups will 

rotate 108 among the representatives of the AFPs participating in each DE. Likewise, the RGs will 

work in a coordinated manner with their main government counterparts to ensure the efficient 

implementation, technically and operationally, of the UNSD CF . In addition, the RG will be able 

to seek support from academic institutions, specialized agencies, and other development 

partners to strengthen the implementation of the UNSDCF . These groups will prepare their 

terms of reference (ToR) and JWP on a mult iannual basis, in accordance with the format 

provided by the RCO and in line with the requirements of UN INFO. The ToRs and the first JWP 

(2022 -2023) will be ready no later than 60 business days after the UNSDCF is signed. The terms 

of reference and joint work plans will be prepared by the M&E Group in coordination with the 

Program Coordination Group and approved by the UNCT. They will also oversee the 

development of activities and products, preparation of result s reports with specific indicators, 

and preparation of periodic inputs to update the CCA. They will meet a minimum of four times 

a year for planning and scheduling. Their responsibilities include the final evaluation, the 

preparation of the annual progress report and the preparation of the information required by 

UN INFO. The meeting formats will be adapted to the needs of each group, combining physical 

and virtual presence. The annual progress reports of the RGs will constitute an input for the 

annual repo rt of the UNS prepared by the RCO with the M&E Group (see section 3.1.3). The 

celebration of United Nations Day and other important commemorations will be the space to 

disseminate the joint achievements of the UNS in the country, in coordination with the 

Interagency Communication Group (see section 3.1.3). 

The RCO will oversee the coordination and articulation between the RGs to guarantee the 

efficient implementation of the UNSDCF . In this sense, the RCO will be responsible for (i) 

supporting the Results G roups and the Monitoring and Evaluation Groups, (ii) having a general 

vision of the financial, programmatic and monitoring and evaluation aspects of the Cooperation 

Framework, (iii ) keep the Resident Coordinator and the Country Team informed about the 

pro gress of the Cooperation Framework and bring to their consideration the actions they deem 

appropriate, and (iv) ensure the relationship and complementarity between the RGs with the 

joint programs linked to the same areas issues, and the adequate flow of in formation to the 

UNCT and the CDN .

Program Coordination Group ( PCG ): This group will consist of the AFPs of the UNS, leaders of 

the Results Groups, and will oversee programmatic and operational coordination, and quality 

control based on the JWP of the main interventions supported by the UNS in the country for the 

implementation of the UNSDCF , as well as providing support to the RGs. They will also be in 

charge of monitoring the progress of the SDGs and important cross -cutting issues, such as policy 

reforms, new laws, innovation processes and support for the preparation and monitoring of  

> 108 As the MC implementation period is 5 years, this rotation will be: 2 years, 2 years and 1 year.

63 

State reports on human rights conventions. This group will meet bimonthly or whenever 

necessary. The GCP will draft its own terms of reference and prepare its multi -year work plan 

with clear milestones and leadership distributed in various areas, with the methodological 

support and coordination of the M&E group, no later than 60 business days after the signing of 

the UNSDCF and will review both instruments annually. The terms of reference and the work 

plan of this group will be approved by the UNCT. This group will work closely with RCO and report 

back to the UNCT on major developments. This will be done through short written reports or 

briefings at regular or extraordinary UNC T meetings. The leadership and co -leadership of this 

group will rotate each year among its members (see figure 11). 

Figure 11. Governance and coordination mechanisms of the UNSDCF 2022 -2026  

> Source: Prepared by the authors.

## 3.1.3. Advice and specialized support level 

To have an effective implementation of this UNSDCF and other commitments assumed by the 

UNS, there will be support and technical advice of specialized UNS working groups who are 

available to the UNCT and will keep it informed on their specific issues. Each of th ese groups will 

review and adapt their stand ard terms of reference and develop their multi -year joint work plan. 

These two documents will be prepared in close coordination with the RG and will be approved 

by the UNCT. The working groups will be as follows: 

Operations Management Team (OMT) : This grou p will consist of officers or operation managers 

of the AFPs of the UNS, with leadership and co -leadership rotating every two years. The OMT 

oversees defining and implementing a joint Institutional Operations Strategy (BOS), providing a 

medium -term strateg ic focus on common United Nations operations in the country to be more 

efficient by reducing internal transaction costs and improving the quality of common services. 

Inter -agency Communication Group ( IC G): This group will consist of communication officers or 

managers of the AFPs of the SNU, under the leadership of an AFP with a maximum rotation of 

two years and the co -leadership of the RCO. It will be responsible for the design and 

implementation of the communication strategy of the UNS in the country in c oordination with 

the other communications areas of the UNS AFPs. In addition, it will oversee the design and 

brand positioning (branding), as well as the design and implementation of the biannual 

communication plan, which includes the promotion and dissemi nation of the UNSDCF , the 64 

visibility of joint programs, the SDGs and the global campaigns promoted by the UN General 

Assembly. 

Group for Monitoring and Evaluation and Reporting of Results (GM&E) : This group will consist 

of officials or persons in charge o f statistics, data management, monitoring and evaluation, 

under the leadership and coordination of the RCO. In practical terms, it will oversee advising and 

ensuring the planning, articulation, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the 

UNSDCF , in addition to reporting the results, providing technical and methodological support. In 

other words, deploy results -based management that implements the theory of change 

established in this UNSDCF throughout its entire program cycle that links all these elements in a 

logical /causal way. This not only publicize s the progress and results obtained, but also identifies 

the problems and risks that are being faced, and in this line inform the decision -making 

processes. Likewise, it will capture, systematize, an d disseminate the knowledge generated, 

good practices and lessons learned regarding the implementation of the UNSDCF , within a 

process of learning and continuous improvement. It will oversee preparing a monitoring plan for 

the UNSDCF , which aims to provide directives and guidelines on how the monitoring and 

evaluation of the UNSDCF will be operationalized. Likewise, it will be in charge of promoting the 

strengthening of national capacities in terms of data generation, analysis and visualization within 

the framework of the implementation and acceleration of the SDGs and the 2030 Agenda ( e.g., 

identification of data gaps or voids). 

Interagency Group of Alliances and Financing for Development (G A&F) : This group will be 

made up of officials or persons in charge of the AFPs to generate strategic alliances with agents 

external to the UNS. The leadership will be under an AFP with a maximum rotation of two years 

and the co -leadership of the RCO. Among its main objectives is to encourage and promote the 

establishment of effective alliances in the public, public -private and civil society spheres, to bring 

about a transformative change that involves all these actors to support the achievement of the 

Susta inable Development Goals in Peru. 

Gender Specialized Group (GEG) . This group will consist of officials or those in charge of gender 

equality and the empowerment of women and girls, under the leadership of UN Women, whose 

mandate is to coordinate mechanisms and tools at the UNS level, and co -leadership of the 

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and other interested AFPs with rotation every two 

years. It will oversee facilitating the mainstreaming of the gender equality perspective in all 

interagency work during the implementation of the UNSDCF , advising and supporting the efforts 

of the R Gs and the UNCT, particularly, in the implementation of the UNCT SWAP Gender 

Scorecard. In addition, this group will support the preparation and follow -up of reports on 

in ternational agreements related to women's human rights. 

Specialized Group on Human Rights ( SG HR). This group will consist of officials or those in charge 

of human rights issues, under the leadership of the RCO, through the Office of the United 

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and co -leadership of other AFPs with rotation 

every two years. It will oversee supporting the incorporation of the human rights approach in all 

interagency work during the implementation of the UNSDCF , advising and supporting the efforts 

of the RGs and the UNCT. This group will also support the preparation and monitoring of reports 

on international human rights agreements. 

Specialized Group for Refugees and Migrants ( SGR&M). This group will consist of officials or 

those in cha rge of refugee and migrant issues under the co -leadership of IOM and UNHCR, with 

the participation of other AFPs of the UNS that have complementary lines of work and will work 

in close coordination with the Group of Work for Refugees and Migrants (GTRM) in Peru. The 

official counterpart of the Government of this group will be the National Superintendency of 65 

Migration and the Foreign Ministry (who lead the Intersectoral Migration Management Table 

and who also preside over the Special Commission for Refugees) . The group will oversee 

supporting refugee and migration issues, as well as the preparation and follow -up of reports 

related to human mobility and social inclusion of refugees and migrants from Venezuela during 

the implementation of the UNSDCF , advising a nd supporting the efforts of the RGs and the 

UNCT. 

National Humanitarian Network (N HN ). This group is under the coordination of OCHA and 

includes the participation of other AFPs of the UNS that have lines of work related to 

preparedness and response to hum anitarian disasters. The official counterpart of the Peruvian 

state is the National Civil Defense Institute (INDECI), and it works closely with NGOs, the private 

sector, and other actors of national and international humanitarian cooperation. The RHN will 

strengthen the coordination and preparation of the actors involved for the response and 

recovery from humanitarian disasters of all origins (natural, biological, or man -made). 

Specialized Group on Interculturality ( SGI) . This group will consist of officials or those in charge 

of intercultural issues under the leadership of UNESCO, whose mandate is to coordinate the 

mechanisms and tools at the UNS level, and with co -leadership of any other AFP interested in 

the UNS and wi th rotation every two years. This group will work to ensure an intercultural 

approach in the complete cycle of implementation of public policies, as a transversal axis in the 

different areas of social, economic, and environmental development and as a key a pproach to 

ensure adequate implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Likewise, it will provide specialized 

support for access to cultural rights that are fundamental in the construction of identity, 

inclusion and citizenship. 

## 3.2. Harmonized Approach for Cash Transfer s (HACT) 

In order to promote a closer alignment between development assistance and national priorities 

and strengthen national management and accountability capacities to gradually move towards 

strengthening national systems, the AFPs that make up the Exe cutive Committee of the United 

Nations Development Group 109 will be governed by HACT. The other AFPs will be governed by 

their current corporate regulations. This operational framework will regulate monetary transfers 

between the UNS and its implementing pa rtners, allowing efficient risk management, reducing 

transaction costs, and promoting sustainable development in a coordinated manner. Likewise, 

this framework will be reflected in the AFP's country program documents or strategic notes. 

All cash transfers to an implementing partner will be based on the work plans 110 agreed between 

said partner and the AFP of the UNS. The AFPs may carry out cash transfers for activities detailed 

in the work plans through the following modalities: 

• Cash funds transferred direct ly to the implementing partner: 

o Before the start of activities: direct cash transfer. 

o After activities are completed: refund. 

• Direct payment to suppliers or third parties for the obligations contracted by the 

implementing partners based on the requests sig ned by the designated officer of the 

implementing partner. 

• Direct payment to suppliers or third parties for the obligations contracted by the UNS 

agencies in support of the activities agreed with the implementing partners.  

> 109 Includes: UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP. However, since WFP trans fers are made to beneficiaries directly using financial service
> providers, the HACT framework is not required for this agency at this time. This framework will be reflected in the AFP's cou ntry
> program documents or strategic notes

.  

> 110 Annual and multiannual work plans of the specific results groups or AFPs.

66 

Direct cash transfers may be requ ested and disbursed in cases where the program execution 

period does not exceed three months. Reimbursements of previously authorized expenses may 

be requested and disbursed on a quarterly basis or after completion of activities. The AFPs will 

not be oblig ed to reimburse the expenses incurred by the implementing partners that are above 

the authorized amounts. Upon completion of any activity, the entire remaining balance of the 

funds will be refunded or scheduled by mutual agreement between the implementing partner 

and the AFPs. 

The modalities of cash transfers, the amount of disbursements, as well as the scope and 

frequency of verification activities could depend on the conclusions derived from the evaluation 

of the management of public finances in the case of a government implementing partner, and 

those derived from an assessment of financial management capacity in the case of an 

implementing partner that is not part of the UNS 111 . Said evaluation may be carried out by a 

specialized firm or consultant, s elected by the AFPs, in which the implementing partner could 

participate. The implementing partner could also participate in the selection of the consultant. 

The modalities of cash transfers, the amount of the disbursements, as well as the scope and 

freque ncy of the verification activities may be reviewed during the execution of each program, 

based on the results of the monitoring, follow -up, and expenditure reporting activities, as well 

as audits. 

In the case of direct cash transfers or reimbursements, the AFPs will notify the implementing 

partner of the approved amount and will disburse the resources to the implementing partner 

within a specified maximum of business days, which may vary between agencies. In the case of 

direct payment to suppliers or third parties for the obligations contracted by the implementing 

partners based on the requests signed by the designated official of the implementing partner, 

or to suppliers or third parties for the obligations contracted by AFP in support of the agreed 

activit ies with the implementing partners, the AFPs will make the payment within a maximum 

period of 15 business days. 

The AFPs will have no direct responsibility for contractual arrangements made between the 

implementing partner and an external provider. Provide d that the AFPs and another UNS agency 

provide cash funds to the same implementing partner, program supervision, financial control, 

and auditing must be carried out jointly or in coordination between such UNS agencies. 

Implementing partners will use a stan dard Funding Authorization and Certificate of Expenditure 

(FACE) form, reflecting the lines of activity of the work plan, to request the release of funds or 

guarantee agreement by the which the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the 

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) or the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) will 

directly reimburse or pay the planned expenses. Implementing partners will use FACE forms to 

report on the utilization of cash funds received. The implementing partner must determi ne the 

designated official or officials authorized to provide bank details, request and certify the use of 

cash funds. The FACE forms will be certified by the designated officer of the implementing 

partner. Cash funds transferred to implementing partners s hould be used solely for the activities 

and within the timeframes agreed in the work plans. 

Cash funds received by the Government and national NGOs serving as implementing partners 

will be used in accordance with national regulations, policies and procedur es established by 

international standards, ensuring that cash funds are used for activities agreed in work plans 

and that reports on the use of all cash funds received are sent to UNDP, UNFPA, or UNICEF within 

six months of receipt of funds. If any of the national regulations, policies and procedures are not  

> 111 For the purposes of this clause, the UNS includes the International Financial Institutions (IFI).

67 

compatible with international standards, the financial standards, and other related standards of 

the AFP in question, as well as its regulations, policies and procedures, will apply. 

In the case of inte rnational NGOs and civil society organizations serving as implementing 

partners, the cash funds received will be used in accordance with international standards, 

ensuring that the cash funds are used for the activities agreed in work plans and that reports on 

the full utilization of all cash funds received are sent to UNDP, UNFPA, or UNICEF within six 

months of receipt of funds. 

To facilitate scheduled and special audits, each implementing partner that receives cash funds 

from UNDP, UNFPA, or UNICEF will pr ovide said AFP or its representative with timely access to 

(a) all financial records that establish the transactional record of transfers in cash provided by 

UNDP, UNFPA or UNICEF, along with relevant documentation; and (b) all relevant and personal 

docume ntation related to the functioning of the implementing partner's internal control 

structure through which the cash transfers have been made. 

The findings of each audit will be reported to the implementing partner and UNDP, UNFPA, or 

UNICEF, as the case may be. In addition, each implementing partner shall: (a) receive and review 

the audit report published by the auditors; (b) issue a timely statement of acceptance or 

rejection of any audit recommendation made to the AFP that provided cash funds, so that 

audi tors can include such statements in their final audit report before sending it to the 

corresponding AFP; (c) take timely action to take into account accepted audit recommendations; 

and (d) report to the AFPs on the measures adopted to apply the accepted re commendations 

made, on a quarterly basis. 

The AFPs of the UNS will entrust the audits to private auditing services. 

## 3.3. Strategic alliances and financing 

The 2030 Agenda and the United Nations Reform, created and promoted by the Secretary 

General, recognize th e need to work in global, regional, and local alliances for the timely 

fulfillment of the SDGs. Likewise, they spur to identify new and potential sources of financing 

that contribute to closing the current financial gap, which has been limiting countries in their 

mission to achieve the deve lopment goals by 2030. 

In Peru, the design of UNSDCF 2022 -2026 required the identification and participation of 

strategic partners, both traditional and non -traditional, current, and potential, to integrate their 

contributions, concerns and perspectives in the document and in future JWPs. This will allow the 

design of a strategy of inclusive, solid, and transformative alliances, based on shared principles 

and a vision of common development. The alliances generated will seek to mobilize and redirect 

financia l resources, knowledge, technology, and capacities that contribute directly and 

significantly to the achievement of the SDGs. This strategy will be defined by the GA&F during 

the first year of implementation of the UNSDCF .

Likewise, the strategic alliances will aim to contribute to the identification, implementation, and 

acceleration of solutions for the 4 strategic priorities that guide the UNSDCF . To contribute to 

solving the structural challenges of the country, reflected in the priority areas, solutions must 

be highly innovative, people -centered and built in a joint and participatory manner. In this sense, 

the alliances generated with the Peruvian State, the private sector, civil society organizations, 

unions, academia, and international cooperation will be of vital importance in the process of 

implementation of the UNSDCF .

Within the framework of the generated alliances, the AFPs will be able to provide technical 

support, supplies, basic products and equipment, procurement services, transportation, funds 68 

for promotion, research and studies, consultancies, formulation, program monitoring and 

evaluation, training activities, and staff support. Likewise, part of the support of the UNS entities 

may be allocated to non -governmental organizations and civil soci ety as agreed in the work 

plans. Additional support may include access to information systems and specialized agencies of 

the United Nations, as well as banks of consultants and development service providers. 

For the execution of the actions, programs, and technical assistance of the UNSDCF , as well as 

the monitoring and evaluation activities, the AFPs of the UNS will be in charge of appointing the 

respective work teams and consultants. Regarding the distribution of resources, this will be 

carried out throu gh the AFPs on an annual basis according to the budgets of the work plans and 

in accordance with the annual evaluations. With the consent of the Government and the AFPs, 

funds that are not executed as initially planned may be reallocated to other equally i mportant 

activities. 

The alliances ' strategy will place emphasis on strengthening the alliance that the UNS has been 

promoting with Peru2021, a network of private sector companies committed to the principles 

of sustainability, which through the Action Tabl es seeks to articulate with the public sector, civil 

society, academia, and international cooperation to identify solutions to the country's 

challenges, considering the SDGs as a roadmap. For its part, the National Confederation of 

Private Business Institu tions, the largest business union in the country, will be a key partner for 

the mobilization of its associates, as it proposes to become an ally for the sustainable 

development of the country, having recognized and declared its role as an agent of change. 

Likewise, a group composed by approximately 40 business leaders has been identified, the y are 

decision makers in their respective organizations, who share the same motivation to contribute 

in a concrete and significant way to the achievement of the country 's development goals, which 

represents a n enormous opportunity to promote directing their efforts towards strategic 

development priorities. 

For financing purposes, it will be key to mobilize resources through the shared actions of various 

agents. The magn itude of future investment requires a broad understanding of the resources 

that can be mobilized and the goals that can be achieved. A strategy will be designed for this, 

based on the diagnosis of financial flows carried out as part of the CCA, which inclu des trends in 

financing for development in Peru, an estimated calculation of the financial gaps of the SDGs 

and certain financing opportunities not explored to date. The financing strategy will also be 

defined in the first year of implementation of the UNS DCF and will be led by the RCO, deepening 

the aspects identified in the CCA and determining the instruments and modalities so that the 

financial flows are directed towards the national development goals and the SDGs. 

As part of the role of the private sec tor in the financing strategy, the social and environmental 

ventures that have been experiencing significant growth both in volume and profitability have 

been identified. These impact generating organizations are expected to maximize their 

contribution to the SDGs using market -based solutions. The recent enactment of Law No. 31072 

or Law of Benefit and Collective Interest Companies (BIC) that recognizes private companies that 

combine their economic activity with a scope of social and environmental benefit p urposes, 

provides the appropriate legal framework for the creation of more hybrid companies, which will 

allow the generation of profits simultaneously with the generation of value for society. The UNS 

has designed a new tool , “UNSDG Common Approach to Pros pect Research and Due Diligence 

for Business Sector Partnerships”, as a basic framework to harmonize around a set of operational 

principles and standards for the private sector due diligence. 

Impact investing is also a potential financial flow. As they are financial resources directed to 

organizations that produce goods or services to generate a positive impact on society while 69 

obtaining a financial return, they become an opportunity to align investment decisions to the 

strategic areas of the Cooperation Fr amework and the country's development priorities. 

Among the identified possibilities are impact bonds and sustainable finance. According to Pacific 

Corporate Sustainability (PCS), there is a high interest in corporate emissions, financial 

institutions, de velopment banking, sovereign issuers, and local municipalities that develop 

operations in renewable energy, water infrastructure, conservation, electric transportation, 

sustainable construction, energy efficiency, financial inclusion, productive developmen t and 

economic reactivation, sustainable tourism, among others, which are potential providers of 

sustainable finance instruments. Similarly, the financial sector has been promoting social and 

environmental financial products for companies and large corpora tions, among which are 

mortgage loans, financing for electric and hybrid cars, construction of industrial plants with LEED 

certification for energy efficiency and a fund that promotes gender equality. 

There is an opportunity to promote the growth of the su stainable finance sector through the 

creation of an articulation space between financial sector actors in which guidelines, standards, 

good practices are shared and a more structured and accelerated implementation of sustainable 

finance in the country is m otivated. From the point of view of regulation, SBS Resolution No. 

1928 -2015 approved the Regulation for the Management of Social and Environmental Risk, 

favoring the analysis of the relationship between social and environmental aspects with the risks 

of t he business of traditional loans. This regulatory advance provides certain enabling conditions 

for the promotion of sustainable finance in the country. 

In the same way, based on previous and ongoing successful experiences between the United 

Nations System and international financial institutions (IFI), the financing strategy will seek to 

incorporate them to strengthen the Cooperation Framework with their knowledge in policies, 

economic analysis, planning, implementation of projects and resources for develop ment. 

In the same way, international cooperation will continue to be an important source of resources 

for the implementation of development strategies. Even though the volume of ODA has 

decreased significantly since Peru entered the category of upper -middle -income country, there 

are still funds from traditional donors that represent important amounts for the implementation 

of the Cooperation Framework. Another item that the financing strategy will address will be 

South -South Cooperation , which will contribute to the achievement of strategic priorities with 

the exchange of technical knowledge, capacities and resources. 

With the adoption of the Funding Compact (ECOSOC, 2019) and the need for a strengthened, 

coherent, unified UNS and with a coordinated strategy for donors, strategic importance will be 

given to the design of joint programs that have already yielded positive results in the past. 

Experience has shown that t he complementarity of the mandates and technical expertise of the 

UNS agencies, funds, and programs lead to greater impact, the effectiveness of results, and 

efficiency in the use of resources. Likewise, the global competitive funds that the United Nations 

makes available to countries with the aim of closing development gaps, such as the Fund for 

Sustainable Development Goals and others channeled through the United Nations Multipartner 

Trust Fund (MPTF), will be of utmost importance. Along the same lines, t he launch of the 

mechanism “ UN Pooled Funds ” or Acceleration Fund is planned, with the aim of mobilizing 

funds from the AFPs, which will allow the leveraging of new resources for the implementation 

of the Cooperation Framework and the achievement of the SD Gs. 

The support that the Government can provide to the implementation of the financing and 

resource mobilization strategy for the Cooperation Framework will be key. It would also be 

expected to help encourage potential donor governments to make the necessa ry funds available 

to the AFPs for the implementation of the Framework initiatives, to support the mechanisms for 70 

leveraging resources from the private sector and other sources, and to enable contributions 

from individuals, companies, and foundations in Pe ru in support of the Cooperation Framework, 

which will be tax -exempt for the donor, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. 

# 4. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

The effective implementation of the UNSDCF requires that, if necessary, the required 

programmatic adjustments can be made to achieve the expected results within the estimated 

timeframes. This is proposed considering that the characteristics, conditions and needs of the 

country may vary in the next five years due to possible natural, socio -economic and political 

events, whether internal or external to the country. In fact, the need for adaptive and agile 

management has been highlighted among the findings of the UNDAF evaluation 2017 -2021 and 

is evid ent when considering the profound socio -economic effects generated in the last five years 

by the arrival of more than one million refugees and migrants or the COVID -19 pandemic in the 

country. 

In this sense, the UNSDCF 2022 -2026 will be reviewed and updat ed annually by the CDC to 

guarantee continuous monitoring and the use of objective data that periodically provides 

feedback on each programming cycle, not only to know the progress and report the results 

obtained but also to identify the problems and risks that are being faced to evaluate the 

necessary corrective measures. Likewise, it is especially useful within a learning and continuous 

improvement process such as the one involved in the implementation of the UNSDCF .

In practical terms, a monitoring and evaluation plan is necessary, one that allows the 

measurement of efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed strategies and provides feedback 

on the implementation processes of the country program, as well as its link with the content of 

the National Agre ement and the National Development Strategy Plan. One of the key elements 

for this purpose is the Results Matrix of this Cooperation Framework (see Annex 1), which 

through national indicators aligned with the SDGs translates and aligns the transformational 

change promoted by the UNS for sustainable development and well -being of the population in 

Peru, within a framework of acceleration and effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The 

JWPs will be key elements for the development of the monitoring and op eration plan since, as 

seen previously, these are the instruments to make the UNSDCF operational, reflecting the 

programmatic and financial contribution of all the AFPs. 

The monitoring and evaluation activities will be guided by the following guidelines: 

• National ownership and alignment with national development priorities to support 

the Theory of Change and the results established in this UNSDCF (see section 2.2). 

• Accountability in an objective and transparent manner to the government, society, 

and the donor community , through results -based management and a rights approach, 

the generation and use of indicators that allow the impact obtained on the target 

populations to be observed. It is important to bear in mind that this accountability will 

be carried out both based on the UNSDCF results matrix (see annex 1) and the JWP that 

will be defined once the UNSDCF is signed. 

• Strengthening of national capacities in the monitoring and evaluation of public 

policies and national development priorities , mo re precisely in terms of data 

generation, analysis and visualization and the use of information systems within the 

framework of the implementation and acceleration of the prioritized SDGs for the 71 

country and the 2030 Agenda, with an integrated approach. As mentioned in the 

previous section, this will be the responsibility of the M&E group, which will develop a 

joint strategy as UNS to address this issue. 

• Impetus and contribution to the generation of knowledge and empirical evidence in 

support of the govern ment in the progress reports towards the achievement of the SDGs 

(eg voluntary national reports) and other reports or policies and plans that the 

government prepares. 

• Coordination and harmonization of the UNS in the country with the various 

development par tners , based on results management and mutual responsibility. 

## 4.1. Collective approach to strengthening national capacities in 

# terms of monitoring and generating evidence 

National actors 

The National Center for Strategic Planning - CEPLAN, is the technical en tity that promotes a 

vision and strategic planning for national development. In other words, it is oriented towards 

the development of strategic planning as a technical instrument of government and 

management for the harmonious and sustained development of the country and the 

strengthening of governance. Therefore, it is the body in charge of the surveillance and planning 

of public policy, budget, monitoring and evaluation of the Strategic National Development Plan 

(PEDN). The UNSDCF 2022 -2026 takes as one of its guiding references the Vision of Peru to 2050 

prepared by CEPLAN and approved by consensus at the AN Forum. Vision 2050 defines a shared 

and concerted vision for the future of national development priorities and strategic goals and 

plans. In this se nse, monitoring and evaluation is an essential component of CEPLAN to provide 

feedback on public policy and planning cycles for decision -making that lead to the 

implementation of effective interventions, where not only the execution of the expenditure is 

evaluated, but also the quality of this, based on the use of indicators and evidence. 

The National Institute of Statistics and Informatics - INEI, is a specialized technical body 

dependent on the president of the Council of Ministers. It is the central and governing body of 

the National Statistical System, responsible for regulating, planning, directing, coordinating, and 

supervising the official statistical activities of the country. In compliance with its role, the INEI 

assumes the responsibility of tracki ng and monitoring the progress of the 17 Sustainable 

Development Goals. This implies the need for fluid coordination and permanent exchange of 

information between both entities to align the SDGs with the processes and instruments of the 

Strategic National Development Plan and national plans. 

It is important to note that the INEI has developed and made available the "System for Follow -

up and Monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals" 112 . This system uses the INEI surveys as 

the main data sources, as well a s population and specialized censuses, administrative records 

from sector entities, and existing policies, norms, and laws. By linking the information collected 

by these sources and the information required to measure progress in the SDGs, it has been 

poss ible to build national indicators that allow periodic monitoring to comply with the 2030  

> 112 INEI Web: http://ods.inei.gob.pe/ods/

72 

Agenda. 113 In addition, for several of the indicators it has been possible to build relevant 

disaggregations for the monitoring of vulnerable populations and to identif y existing 

information gaps. This System of Follow -up and Monitoring of the Sustainable Development 

Goals from INEI has been a key element for the elaboration of the results matrix of the present 

UNSDCF 2022 -2026, to be able to rely on the country's indicators, periodically updated. 

However, as will be seen in the next section, one of the missions of the UNS, and in line with the 

recommendations of the final evaluation of the UNDAF 2017 -2021, is to support the 

strengt hening of the INEI, in terms of generation, analysis and visualization of data within the 

framework of the implementation and acceleration of the SDGs and the 2030 Agenda (eg 

identification of data gaps or voids), so the UNSDCF contemplates supporting the government 

in this regard. 

The work with national actors will be carried out in coordination with the national Sectors linked 

to International Technical Cooperation (ITC), members of the National ITC System. 

UNS 

The UNS in Peru recognizes the importance of establishing a joint work agenda that allows 

strengthening the capacities of CEPLAN and INEI for the collection and analysis of data as well 

as the management and interaction of information systems so that the a chievement and 

monitoring of development goals in the country are promoted in a coordinated way. The 

statistical information compiled by the INEI, under the guidelines established by CEPLAN for the 

construction of indicators, plays a strategic role in moni toring and evaluating compliance with 

the expected achievements. Therefore, the alignment of national development objectives and 

the SDGs must also be reflected at the level of measurements generated for their monitoring. 

The relevance of the indicators sh ould also consider that as per the General Assembly Resolution 

68/261, the indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals should be broken down, whenever 

pertinent, by income, sex, age, race, ethnic origin, immigration status, disability and geographic 

lo cation and other characteristics, in accordance with the Fundamental Principles of Official 

Statistics. 

For this purpose, the UN in Peru has a joint approach to strengthen the capacities of INEI and 

CEPLAN in the collection of information and the generatio n of statistical data, which will be 

implemented through the Interagency Monitoring, Evaluation and Results Reporting Group 

(M&E) of this UNSDCF through the following objectives: 

• Strengthen CEPLAN's capacities by providing technical and methodological ass istance in the 

development and use of management and information generation systems. This 

strengthening includes supporting the capacities for the preparation of voluntary 

examinations on the implementation of the Agenda, in charge of CEPLAN. 

• Strengthen IN EI's capacities by providing technical and methodological assistance for the 

generation, analysis and visualization of data, this also implies the identification of data gaps 

or voids, to have more disaggregated data at the territory level, and with a n emp hasis on 

making visible populations in situations of greater vulnerability and discrimination in the 

country. The objective is to feed and improve the scope of the existing module "System for 

the Follow -up and Monitoring of the Sustainable Development Goal s".  

> 113 INEI (2017) https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/MenuRecursivo/boleti nes/ods_proyectar_24 -2-17.pdf

73 

• Develop and implement a monitoring and evaluation system of all UNS interventions to 

carry out effective and continuous monitoring of the progress and results obtained by the 

UNSDCF with an integrated approach. 

• Strengthen the M&E Group, the Results Gr oups and the Interagency Groups of the UNS ,

and the articulation of these with the partners of the national statistical system and other 

implementing partners. 

• Optimize and promote the use of existing monitoring platforms and mechanisms , and the 

disseminat ion of monitoring reports generated to raise awareness of society on the progress 

and fulfillment of the SDGs within the framework of the 2030 Agenda 

## 4.2. Responsibilities and commitments of implementing 

# partners 

This UNSDCF has a Results Matrix (see Annex 1) that summarizes, through indicators, the 4 

strategic development priorities and the 6 direct effects that guide the transformational change 

promoted by the UNS in Peru, in line with the national development priorities. These indicators 

are aligned to the SDGs for measurement at the national level, in addition to goals that it intends 

to achieve in 2026. The periodic monitoring of these measurements will feed the progress 

reports that will be carried out each year and highlight the contribution of the UNS i n addition 

to national efforts. The implementation and continuous monitoring of the UNSDCF 2022 -2026 

Results Matrix falls to the M&E group, under the leadership of the RCO, and in close coordination 

with the INEI. 

In operational and programmatic terms, fo r the achievement of these final goals each of the six 

direct effects will have a results group ( RG), which will consist of the participating UNS AFPs. 

Every two years, each RG will prepare a joint work plan. The RG s, in coordination with the 

government's technical sectoral teams, will agree on the products, indicators, and goals that 

they will follow up on through said joint work plans. 

Overall, the responsibility for monitoring and evaluating this UNSDCF oversees the M&E group, 

under the leadership of the RCO and in close coordination with the INEI. In this sense, the RCO 

will be responsible for preparing a monitoring and evaluation plan for the entire program cycle 

of the UNSDCF , ensuring that gender and human righ ts indicators are included to be able to 

measure and follow up on these transversal programmatic principles in the cooperation for 

development activities of the UNS in the country. The M&E Plan must include the mechanisms 

for monitoring data, goals, baseli nes, metrics, and indicators in the form of a calendar and 

integrate the pertinent information from the results monitoring of the actions planned within 

the framework of each direct effect, identifying the RG and the agency responsible for 

monitoring each of the indicators and the frequency of the data supply. Finally , the M&E plan 

constitutes a tool that helps make timely decisions to achieve the results proposed for each 

direct effect of the UNSDCF .

Monitoring and evaluation instruments and tools 

• Follow -up and Monitoring System for Sustainable Development Goals. Computer platform 

built by the INEI as the governing body of the National Statistical System (SEN), with available 

information from household surveys and administrative records for the quan tification, 74 

follow -up and monitoring of the progress of the SDGs at the national level. This platform 

constitutes a key input for reporting and keeping the UNSDCF Results Matrix updated. 

• UN Info 114 . Internal UN planning, monitoring, and reporting system th at harmonizes the way 

the UN System captures its operational footprint of development cooperation frameworks 

and its contributions to the SDGs and the 2030 Agenda. The objective is to improve 

coordination, accountability, and transparency within the Countr y Teams. The interagency 

M&E group, under the leadership of the RCO, is the team responsible for collecting and 

inputting the corresponding information. 

• Annual Reports of the Cooperation Framework. Joint report prepared by the Resident 

Coordinator Office (RCO), with the support of the Monitoring & Evaluation Group, the 

Results Groups and the Interagency Groups of the UNS, to systematize the monitoring and 

reporting of progress in achieving the direct effects. The annual reviews and conti nuous 

updates of the CCA will make it possible to identify changes in the country context and 

national priorities, with the objective that the Cooperation Framework and its Results Matrix 

are aligned with the national vision of development. 

• Annual report o f the UN country team . In line with the guidelines established by the UN, 

each year the country team, under the leadership of the RCO, will prepare an annual report 

that summarizes the work and the results obtained by the UN Agencies, Funds and Programs 

th at operate in the country. 

• Final Evaluation. Independent process at the country level that contributes to oversight, 

transparency, accountability, and collective learning across the UNS. It conforms to the best 

international practices for evaluation and t o the norms and standards of the United Nations 

Evaluation Groups (UNEG), with the aim of evaluating the relevance, effectiveness, and 

efficiency of the Cooperation Framework towards national development priorities and the 

acceleration of the SDGs, in addi tion to the coherence of the UNS support in the country, 

the support for the generation of transformational changes and the compliance with the 

transversal principles. The evaluation takes place in the penultimate year of the Framework. 

• Communication of re sults. Each year the scope and main results obtained by the 

cooperation framework will be transmitted, both within the UNCT and with the government 

and external counterparts. The final evaluation report will be submitted for approval by the 

UNCT and the CD N prior to its publication. The administration's response to the evaluation 

findings will then be developed, along with an action plan to address each of the findings. 

Implementing partners benefit from cooperating with United Nations System agencies in 

monitoring all activities supported by cash transfers and will facilitate access to financial records 

and staff responsible for managing cash funds contributed by the agencies of the United Nations 

system. To this end, the implementing partners agree to ca rry out the following activities: 

• Periodic on -site examinations and random verifications of its financial records by the UNS 

agencies or their representatives, as appropriate and in accordance with the specific clauses 

of their collaboration documents /cont racts with such agencies; 

• Programmatic monitoring of activities through the norms and guidelines of the UNS 

agencies for visits and monitoring in the field;    

> 114 UN Info -Web: https://uninfo.org/es/login

75 

• Scheduled or special audits. Each United Nations body, in collaboration with other United 

Nations system organ s (when they so desire and in consultation with the coordinating 

ministry), will establish an annual audit plan, prioritizing audits of implementa tion partners 

that receive large amounts of cash assistance from the United Nations system organ s, and 

those whose financial management capacity needs to be strengthened. 

## 4.3. Assumptions, risks and opportunities 

Cross -cutting assumptions 

The achievement of th e objectives identified in this Cooperation Framework is based on the 

following assumptions: 

• The new incoming Government in July 2021 maintains the political will to advance 

towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs and the commitment to the 

Vision of Peru to 2050. 

• The new government maintains and strengthens the normative, institutional and policy 

framework towards the advancement of the rights and freedoms of the people, 

respecting what is established in the international t reaties to which Peru is a party and 

the commitments assumed before the human rights protection system. 

• The UNS in Peru maintains the technical, human, and financial capacities necessary to 

implement this Cooperation Framework. 

• The UNS Agencies, Funds and Programs are moving towards greater integration and 

complementarity of their efforts to jointly contribute towards shared objectives and 

results for the sustainable development of Peru. 

• A level of political, economic, and social stability is maintained th at allows promoting 

development through medium and long -term government and state policies. 

• The country has the national capacities and the mobilization of national and international 

assistance to face disasters of great magnitude during the period 2022 -20 26. 

Cross -cutting risks 

During the process of preparing the Theory of Change, the following risks were identified for the 

correct implementation of UNSDCF 2022 -2026: 

• As a result of political polarization and fragmentation in Congress, high -level political 

turbulence and confrontations between state powers persist after the change of 

government, which in turn affect the normal progress of public policy processes. 

• Gaps in the enjoyment of rights, discrimination, hate speech, as well as the reduction of 

civic space , are deepening. 

• The sustainable development priorities and interests of the new Government that takes 

over as of July 2021 differ substantially from those set out in this Cooperation Framework. 

• Corruption undermines good governance and the rule of law, diverting planned resources 

for public services and sustainable development, and creating an environment conducive 

to the proliferation of organized crime. 

• That the direct impact of the COVID -19 crisis continues over time, further increasing levels 

of poverty and inequalities, and fueling social tensions and conflict. 76 

• The occurrence of a new large -scale disaster that further delays progress towards the 

2030 Agenda, impacts public finances, deviates priorities to respond to the emergency 

and postpones the post -COVID -19 recovery. 

• The limiting of capacities of certain implementing partners puts at risk the advancement 

of the programs and projects necessary to achieve the effects and outputs of this 

Framework. 

• Insufficient mobilization of funds (national and international) to financ e the 2030 Agenda, 

due to a fiscal imbalance and /or lack of external resources. 

• Excessive centralism that prevents protagonism by local governments and cities. 

Opportunities linked to the added value of the UNS 

To face the identified risks, the following o pportunities have been identified which, linked to the 

UNS and the construction process followed to prepare UNSDCF 2022 -206, would mitigate their 

effect: 

• Alignment with long -term national priorities. The UNSDCF has been aligned with national 

development p riorities in the medium and long term, through the links established with the 

2030 Agenda, the Vision of Peru to 2050 and with the policies of the National Agreement. 

In addition, the flexible and adaptive UNSDCF approach allows directing UNS efforts towar ds 

priorities that fluctuate over time. 

• Association with multiple actors. UNS ability to convene and dialogue with actors from 

government, civil society, trade associations, private sector, academia, and international 

cooperation agencies to promote inclu sive and sustainable alliances. 

• Emphasis on capacity building and political advocacy . In line with the government's 

perception of the added value of the UNS in Peru, the UNSDCF focuses on generating results 

by taking advantage of the technical and politica l advocacy capacities of the AFPs. 

• Mobilization and attainment of financial resources. The ability to reprogram and mobilize 

financial resources were put to the test during the early response to the health emergency, 

in addition to the ability to channel global financing mechanisms through specialized calls. 77 

# Annex 1: Results Matrix of the Cooperation 

# Framework 

Strategic priority PE1: Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

National 

development 

priority 

Vision 2050: 

Axis 1: People reach their potential with equal opportunities and without discrimination to enjoy a full 

life 

National Agreement: 

10. Poverty alleviation 

11. Promotion of equal opportunities without discrimination 

12. Universal access to a free and quality public educat ion and promotion and defense of culture and 

sport 

13. Universal access to health services and social security 

15. Promotion of Food Safety and Nutrition 

16. Strengthening the Family, Promotion and Protection of Children, Adolescents and Youth 

28. Full val idity of the Constitution and human rights and access to justice and judicial independence 

35. The Information Society / the Knowledge Society 

Related SDGs SDG 1: No poverty 

SDG 2: Zero hunger 

SDG 3: Good health and well -being 

SDG 4: Quality education 

SDG 5: Gender equality 

SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation 

SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth 

SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure 

SDG 10: Reduc ing inequality 

SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 

SDG 16: Peace, justice and strong institution s

SDG 17: Partnership for the Goals 

HR commitments 

and 

recommendations 

to which it 

contributes 

• Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (2018) 

• Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 

(2015) 

• Universal Periodic Review (2017) 

• Working Group on Business and Human Rights (2018) 

• Committee on the Rights of the Child (2016) 

• Working Group Against Dis crimination Against Women in Law and in Practice (2015) 

• Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent (2020) 

AFP OHCHR, UNHCR, FAO, PAHO / WHO, UN HABITAT, UN WOMEN, UNAIDS, UNDP, IOM, ILO, UNFPA, 

UNESCO, UNICEF, UNODC, UNOPS, UNV, WFP 

Direct Effect 1. By 2026, people increase their access to decent work and the comprehensive social protection system, 

including a social protection floor, which ensures universal access to health including sexual and reproductive health, nutri tion, 

food se curity, basic income security and care system, with an integrated approach and special emphasis on gender and rights. 78 

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indicator 115 Specific 

Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Bl Year Source Available 

disaggregations 116 

1a 1.2.1 1.2.1. 

Proportion of 

the population 

living below the 

national 

poverty line, 

disaggregated 

by sex and age 

Incidence of 

total monetary 

poverty 

National: 30.1% 2020 ENAHO Sex, age group, 

mother tongue, 

ethnic self -

perception, 

disability status, 

rural / urban, 

natura l region, 

geographic 

domain and 

department. 

1b 1.3.1 1.3.1 

Proportion of 

the population 

covered by 

systems or 

minimum levels 

of social 

protection, 

disaggregated 

by sex, 

distinguishing 

between 

children, the 

unemployed, 

the elderly, 

people with 

disabilities, 

pregnant 

women, 

newborns, 

victims of work 

accidents, the 

poor and the 

vulnerable. 

Proportion of 

the population 

aged 14 and 

over with 

pension 

insurance 

Pension 

insurance: 

30.4% 

2019 ENAHO Lima / rest of the 

country, 

rural /urban, 

natural region ,

department, 

employed / 

unemployed, age 

group, disability 

status. 

Households 

with at least 

one person 

between 3 to 11 

years of age, 

who attends 

state schools, 

who receives 

school 

breakfasts or 

lunches. 

Qali Warma 

(breakfasts): 

55.1% 

Qali Warma 

(lunches): 16.5% 

2020 ENAHO 

Heads of 

households 

elderly persons 

beneficiaries of 

the social 

program 

Pension 65 

Pension 65 

(heads of 

household): 

18.3% 

2020 

(IV 

quarter) 

ENAHO 

Percentage of 

beneficiaries of 

the Juntos social 

program duly 

registered 

Juntos (boys and 

girls): 51.2% 

Juntos 

(pregnant): 

59.3% 

2019 MIDIS 

1c 3.8.1 3.8.1 Coverage 

of essential 

health services 

(defined as the 

average 

coverage of 

essential 

services among 

the general 

population and 

Proportion of 

the population 

with health 

insurance 

Health 

insurance: 

77.2% 

2020 ENAHO Sex, urban / r ural, 

department. 

Population with 

Social Health 

Insurance 

according to the 

health care 

network 

EsSalud 

(thousands): 

11,811 

2019 ESSALUD  

> 115

This matrix may be updated as a result of joint work between the UNS and the Government to develop new indicators and 

breakdowns. In addition, it is important to bear in mind that additional indicators will be included in the JWPs that will co mplement 

thos e presented in this matrix.  

> 116

Although the table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as an illustration, the different indicators will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 79 

the most 

disadvantaged) 

(ESSALUD), in 

thousands 

Population with 

Comprehensive 

Health 

Insurance (SIS), 

in thousands 

SIS (thousands): 

20,058 

2019 SIS 

Refugee and 

migrant 

population with 

Comprehensive 

Health 

Insurance (SIS), 

in thousands 

SIS: 8% (85,000 

people) 

2020 MINSA Refugees and 

migrants from 

Venezuela 

1d 3.1.1 3.1.1 Maternal 

mortality ratio 

Estimation of 

the Maternal 

Mortality Ratio 

(MMR) in Peru -

Preliminary 

Estimate 

MMR x 100 

thousand NV: 

60.7 

2016 CDC / 

MINSA 

1e 2.2.1 2.2.1 

Prevalence of 

stunting 

(height -for -age, 

standard 

deviation < -2

from the 

median of the 

World Health 

Organization 

(WHO) child 

growth 

standards 

among children 

under 5 years 

of age 

Chronic 

malnutrition 

rate among girls 

and boys under 

5 years of age 

National: 12.1% 2020 ENDES Sex, Lima / rest of 

the country, urban 

/ rural, natural 

region. 

1f Prevalence of 

anemia in boys 

and girls under 

3 years of age 

Girls and boys 

from 6 to 35 

months with 

prevalence of 

anemia 

National: 40.0% 2020 ENDES Sex, urban / rural, 

department. 

Direct Effect 2. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability have improved and equal access to 

quality universal education and special protection, through an integrated approach with special emphasis on gender and rights .

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indica tor 117 Specific 

Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Bl Year Source Available 

disaggregations 118 

2a 4.1.1 4.1.1 

Proportion of 

boys, girls and 

adolescents 

who, a) in the 

second and 

third grades, b) 

Proportion of 

second grade 

primary school 

students with a 

satisfactory 

level in Reading 

Comprehension 

2nd grade 

primary 

- Reading 

Comprehension: 

37.6% 

- Mathematical 

2019 ECE Sex, urban / rural, 

department.  

> 117

This matrix may be updated because of joint work between the UNS and the Government to develop new indicators and 

breakdowns. In addition, it is important to bear in mind that additional indicators will be included in the JWPs that will co mplement 

those presented in this matrix.  

> 118

Although t he table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as an illustration, the different indicators will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 80 

at the end of 

primary 

education and 

c) at the end of 

lower 

secondary 

education, have 

achieved at 

least a 

minimum level 

of proficiency in 

i) reading and 

ii) mathemati cs, 

disaggregated 

by sex 

and 

Mathematical 

Reasoning 

Reasoning: 

17.0% 

Proportion of 

fourth grade 

primary school 

students with a 

satisfactory 

level in Reading 

Comprehension 

and 

Mathematical 

Reasoning 

4th grade 

primary 

-Reading 

Comprehension: 

34.5% 

- Mathematical 

Reasoning: 

34.0% 

2019 ECE Sex, ur ban / rural, 

department. 

Proportion of 

second grade 

secondary 

school students 

with a 

satisfactory 

level in Reading 

Comprehension 

and 

Mathematical 

Reasoning 

2nd grade 

secondary 

- Reading 

Comprehension: 

14.5% 

- Mathematical 

Reasoning: 

17.7% 

2019 ECE Sex, urban / rural, 

department. 

2b 4.5.1 4.5.1. Parity 

indices 

(between 

women and 

men, rural and 

urban areas, 

upper and 

lower wealth 

quintiles, and 

groups such as 

the disabled, 

indigenous 

peoples and 

those affected 

by conflict, as 

data become 

available) for all 

education 

indicators in 

this list that can 

be broken 

down. 

Parity index in 

enrollment in 

initial, primary 

and secondary 

education of the 

population 

Enrollment: 

- Initial: 1,014 

-Primary: 1,002 

-Secondary: 

1,001 

2019 ENAHO Age range, urba n / 

rural, natural 

region, poverty 

quintile. 

Parity index in 

enrollment in 

initial, primary 

and secondary 

education of the 

population 

Attendance: 

- Initial: 1,014 

-Primary: 1,003 

-Secondary: 

1,006 

2019 ENAHO Age range, urban / 

rural, natural 

region, poverty 

quintile. 

Parity index in 

enrollment in 

initial, primary 

and secondary 

education of the 

refugee and 

migrant 

population 

Enrollment: 

- Initial: 1.34 

-Primary: 1.3 

-Secondary: 1.12 

2020 MINEDU Refugees and 

migrants from 

Venezuela 

2c -- Secondary 

completion 

rate, age group 

17 -19, 

disaggregated 

by sex, area of 

residence, 

mother tongue, 

poverty level, 

region 

Completion 

rate, secondary, 

age group 17 -19 

as a proportion 

of the 

population 

Age group 1 7-

18: 76.8% 

Age group 18 -

19: 

79.2% 

2019 ENAHO Sex, area of 

residence, mother 

tongue, poverty 

level, region 

2d 4.3.1 4.3.1 

Participation 

rate of youth 

and adults in 

education and 

in academic 

and non -

Higher 

education 

attendance rate 

of the 

population aged 

17 -24 

National: 28.7% 

University: 

19.3% 

Non -university: 

9.4% 

2019 ENAHO Sex, urban / rural, 

department. 81 

academic 

training in the 

last 12 months, 

disaggregated 

by sex 

Direct Effect 3. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability, lack of protection, poverty and food 

insecurity, increase their resilience to crisis situations through strengthened humanitarian response mechanisms and post -

crisis recovery, throu gh an integrated approach with special emphasis on gender, rights and territory. 

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indicator 119 Specific 

Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Year of 

the LB 

Source Available 

disaggregations 120 

3a -- Index of 

vulnerability to 

food insecurity 

MIDIS 

Vulnerability 

Index to Food 

Insecurity (VIA) 

National: 0.251 

(18% population 

high or very high 

vulnerability) 

2018 MIDIS 

3b -- Number of 

Venezuelan 

population in 

an irregular 

situation and 

total by type of 

documentation 

Estimated 

population: 1.05 

million 

Immigration 

permits: 

481,000 (PTP, 

CME, other 

migratory 

qualities) 

Refugee 

applications: 

532,000 

People in an 

irregular 

situation: 

160,000 

2020 GTRM 

with SNM 

and CEPR  

> 119

This matrix may be updated as a result of joint work between the UNS and the G overnment to develop new indicators and 

breakdowns. In addition, it is important to bear in mind that additional indicators will be included in the JWPs that will co mplement 

those presented in this matrix.  

> 120

Although the table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as an illustration, the different indicators will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 82 

Strategic priority PE2: Management of the environment, climate change and disaster risk 

National 

development 

priority 

Vision 2050: 

Axis 2: Sustainable management of nature and measures against climate change 

National Agreement: 

10. Poverty alleviation 

11. Promotion of equal opportunities without discrimination 

19. Sustainable development and environmental management 

20. Development of science and technology 

21. Development in infrastructure and housing 

23. Agricultura l and rural development policy 

32. Disaster risk Management 

33. State policy on water resources 

34. Land use planning and management 

35. The Information Society / the Knowledge Society 

Related SDGs SDG 1: No poverty 

SDG 2: Zero hunger 

SDG 3: Good healt h and well -being 

SDG 4: Quality education 

SDG 5: Gender equality 

SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation 

SDG 7: Sustainable energy 

SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth 

SDG 9 Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure 

SDG 10: Reduc ing inequality 

SDG 11: Resilient cities 

SDG 12: Responsible consumption and production 

SDG 13: Climate action 

SDG 14: Life below water 

SDG 15: Life of terrestrial ecosystems 

SDG 16: Peace, justice and strong institutions 

SDG 17 : Partnerships for the Goals 

HR commitments 

and 

recommend ations 

to which it 

contributes 

• Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (2018) 

• Universal Periodic Review (2017) 

• Working Group on Business and Human Rights (2018) 

• Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent (2020) 

AFP OHCHR, UNHCR, FAO, IFAD, IOM, ILO, UNIDO, UN HABITAT, PAHO / WHO, UNDP, UNEP, UNESCO, 

UNICEF, UNOPS, UNODC, UNV, WFP 

Direct Effect 4. By 2026, the population and ecosystems, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability, strengthen their 

resilience as a result of institutions and communities improving policies and implementing effective mechanisms or 

instruments for environmen tal, climate change, and disaster risk management and humanitarian crises management, through 

an integrated approach with special emphasis on gender, rights, interculturality, life cycle and territory. 

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indicator 121 Specific 

Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Year of 

the LB 

Source Available 

disaggregations 

> 122

4a -- Percentage of 

the terrestrial 

and marine 

environment 

that is under 

Total 

Protected 

Natural Area in 

the marine 

and terrestrial 

29,434,628.23 2021 MINAM  

> 121

This matrix may be updated as a result of joint work between the UNS and the Government to develop new indicators a nd 

breakdowns. In addition, it is important to bear in mind that additional indicators will be included in the JWPs that will co mplement 

those presented in this matrix.  

> 122

Although the table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as a n illustration, the different indicators will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 83 

some form of 

conservation 

environment 

(hectares) 

Reserved 

Zones 

National: 

625,755.25 

2019 MINAM 

4b 9.4.1 9.4.1 CO2 

emissions per 

unit of added 

value 

GHG Emissions National: 

205.29 

MtCO2eq. 

2016 INGEI, MINAM 

4c -- Number of 

national and 

territorial 

institutions 

with 

provisions, 

normative 

and technical 

instruments 

and strategies 

to manage 

disaster risk 

Percentage of 

Institutional 

Strategic Plans 

that 

incorporate 

disaster risk 

management 

National: 

56.76% 

2018 ENAGERD Level of 

government 

Percentage of 

financial 

execution of 

public 

investment in 

DRM 

National: 

51.40 

2018 ENAGERD Level of 

government 

4d -- EPCI 

Emergency 

Preparedness 

Capabilities 

Index 

Level of 

Emergency 

or Disaster 

Preparedness 

by Level 

Sector level: 

2.33 

Regional level: 

2.91 

Province level: 

1.92 

2019 EPCI Department 84 

Strategic priority PE3: Competitiveness and inclusive and sustainable productivity 

National 

development 

priority 

Vision 2050: 

Axis 3: Sustainable development with decent employment and in harmony with nature 

National Agreement: 

6. Foreign policy for peace, democracy, development and integration. 

8. Political, economic and administrative decentra lization to promote the integral, harmonious and 

sustained development of Peru. 

10. Poverty alleviation 

11. Promotion of equal opportunities without discrimination 

14. Access to Full, Decent and Productive Employment 

18. Search for competitiveness, prod uctivity and formalization of economic activity 

19. Sustainable development and environmental management 

20. Development of science and technology 

21. Development in infrastructure and housing 

24. Foreign trade policy for the expansion of markets with reci procity 

23. Agricultural and rural development policy 

28. Full validity of the Constitution and human rights and access to justice and judicial independence 

35. The Information Society / the Knowledge Society 

Related SDGs SDG 1: No poverty 

SDG 2: Zero hu nger 

SDG 4: Quality education 

SDG 5: Gender equality 

SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation 

SDG 7: Sustainable energy 

SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth 

SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure 

SDG 10: Reduc ing inequality 

SDG 11: Resilient cities 

SDG 12: Responsible consumption and production 

SDG 13: Climate action 

SDG 14: Life below water 

SDG 15: Life of terrestrial ecosystems 

SDG 16: Peace, justice and strong institutions 

SDG 17: Partnerships for the Goals 

HR commitments 

and 

recommendations 

to wh ich it 

contributes 

• Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (2018) 

• Universal Periodic Review (2017) 

• Working Group on Business and Human Rights (2018) 

• Working Group Against Discrimination Against Women in Law and in Practice (2015) 

• Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent (2020) 

AFP OHCHR, UNHCR, FAO, IFAD, IOM, ILO, UNIDO, UN HABITAT, UN WOMEN, UNDP, UNESCO, UNOPS, 

UNV, WFP 

Direct Effect 5. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and discrimination, improve their access 

to resilient livelihoods through the construction of a diversified, competitive, formalized, innovative, sustainable and incl usive 

productive matrix, with decent work and aligned to the potential of each territory, through an integrated approach with special 

emphasis on gender, particularly through the economic empowerment of women. 

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indicator 123 Specific Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Year 

of the 

LB 

Source Available 

disaggregations 124  

> 123

This matrix may be updated as a result of joint work between the UNS and the Government to develop new indicators and 

breakdowns. In addition, it is imp ortant to bear in mind that additional indicators will be included in the JWPs that will complement 

those presented in this matrix.  

> 124

Although the table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as an illustration, the different indicat ors will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 85 

5a -- Proportion of 

informal 

employment 

Informal 

employment rate 

(8.3.1.2) 

National: 

75.3% 

2020 ENAHO Sex, Lima / rest of 

the country, urban / 

rural, natural region, 

department. 

5b 9.5.1 9.5.1 R & D & I 

expenses 

Research and 

development 

expenditures as a 

proportion of GDP 

10% 2019 INEI / 

MEF 

5c -- Growth rate of 

the number of 

formal MYPEs 

in the country 

Number of formal 

MYPEs in the 

country 

2,377,244 2019 SUNAT 

5d 9.c.1 9.c.1 

Population 

with access to 

mobile 

network, 

broken down 

by technology 

Households with 

access to 

Information and 

Communication 

Technology 

services and goods 

- ICT: Mobile 

Telephony, 

Computer and 

Internet 

Mobile 

telephony: 

95.0 % 

Internet: 

38.7% 

2020 ENA HO Sex, Lima / rest of 

the country, urban / 

rural, natural region 

Strategic priority PE4: Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

National 

development 

priority 

Vision 2050: 

Axis 4: Democratic, peaceful society, respectful of human rights and free from fear and violence 

Axis 5: Modern, efficient, transparent and decentralized state that guarantees a just and inclusive 

society, without corruption and without leaving no one behind 

National Agreement: 

1. Strengtheni ng the democratic regime and the rule of law 

2. Democratization of political life and strengthening of the party system 

3. Affirmation of national identity 

4. Institutionalization of dialogue and agreement 

5. Government according to objectives with strateg ic planning, national prospective and transparent 

procedures 

6. Foreign policy for peace, democracy, development and integration 

7. Eradication of violence and strengthening of civility and 

citizen security 

8. Political, economic and administrative decent ralization to promote the integral, harmonious and 

sustained development of Peru 

9. National security policy 

24. Affirmation of an efficient and transparent State 

25. Caution of the institutionality of the Armed Forces and its service to democracy 

26. Pro motion of ethics and transparency and eradication of corruption, money laundering, tax evasion 

and contraband in all its forms 

27. Eradication of illegal drug production, trafficking and consumption 

28. Full validity of the Constitution and human rights an d access to justice and judicial independence 

29. Access to information, freedom of expression and freedom of the press 

30. Elimination of terrorism and affirmation of national reconciliation 

31. Fiscal sustainability and reduction of the debt burden 86 

Related SDGs SDG 1: End Poverty 

SDG 2: Zero Hunger 

SDG 4: Quality Education 

SDG 5: Gender Equality 

SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation 

SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth 

SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Insfrastructure 

SDG 10: Reducing Inequality 

SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 

SDG 16: Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions 

SDG 17 Partnerships for the Goals 

HR commitments 

and 

recommendations 

to which it 

contributes 

• Committee for the Protection of Persons from Enforced Dis appearance (2019) 

• Committee against Torture (2018) 

• Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (2018) 

• Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 

(2015) 

• Universal Periodic Review (2017) 

• Workin g Group on Business and Human Rights (2018) 

• Committee on the Rights of the Child (2016) 

• Working Group Against Discrimination Against Women in Law and in Practice (2015) 

• Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent (2020) 

• Working Group on Enforced Disappearances (2015) 

• Special Rapporteur on the rights of human rights defenders (2020) 

AFP OHCHR, UNHCR, IOM, ILO, UN WOMEN, UNAIDS, UN HABITAT, UNDP, UNESCO, UNICE F, UNLIREC, UNODC, 

UNOPS, UNV 

Direct Effect 6. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and discrimination such as girls and boys, 

adolescents, youth and women, exercise their rights equally as a result of the strengthening of effective governance, social 

cohesion, acce ss to justice and the fight against gender inequality and all forms of discrimination and violence based on 

gender, through an integrated approach. 

Nbr. SGD 

Nbr. 

Indicator 125 Specific 

Indicator 

(Proxy) 

Baseline (Bl) Year of 

the LB 

Source Available 

disaggregations 126 

6a 5.2.1 / 

16.1.3 

5.2.1 / 16.1.3 

Proportion of 

the population 

(women aged 

15 to 49) that 

has suffered a) 

physical 

violence, b) 

psychological 

violence and c) 

sexual violence 

in the last 12 

months by a 

partner or ex -

partner 

Proportion of 

women 

between the 

ages of 15 and 

49 who have 

suffered 

physical and / 

or sexual 

violence by 

their husband 

or partner in 

the last 12 

months 

Physical violence: 

8.3% 

Sexual violence: 

2.0% 

Physical and / or 

sexual violence: 

8.8% 

2020 ENDES 

Proportion of 

women 

between the 

ages of 15 and 

49 who have 

suffered 

psychological 

and / or verbal 

violence 

exerted by their 

Psychological and 

/ or verbal 

violence: 34.5% 

Physical, sexual 

and / or 

psychological 

viole nce: 37.0% 

2020 ENDES  

> 125

This matrix may be updated as a result of joint work between the UNS and the Government to develop new indicators and 

breakdowns. In addition, it is important to bear in mind that additiona l indicators will be included in the JWPs that will complement 

those presented in this matrix.  

> 126

Although the table shows the baseline value at the national and aggregate level as an illustration, the different indicators will 

be evaluated for each of the available disaggregations. 87 

husband or 

partner in the 

last 12 months 

Violence 

against women 

between the 

ages of 15 and 

29 at some 

time by a 

husband or 

partner 

Physical violence: 

29.5% 

Sexual violence: 

7.1% 

Psychological 

violence: 52.8% 

Total violence: 

57.7% 

2019 ENDES 

6b 10.3.1 10.3.1 

Proportion of 

the population 

that declares 

that they have 

felt personally 

discriminated 

against or 

harassed in the 

last 12 months 

for reasons of 

discrimination 

Proportion of 

the population 

aged 18 and 

over who 

indicate that in 

the last five 

years they have 

felt mistreated 

or others have 

tried to 

discriminate 

against them 

12.6% 2019 ENAHO Sex, age group, 

mother tongue, 

ethnic self -

perception and 

disability status 

6c. 16.6.2 16.6.2 

Proportion of 

the population 

that is satisfied 

with their last 

experience of 

public services 

Level of trust in 

the country's 

institutions 

Institutions: 

- National 

Registry of 

Identification and 

Civil Status: 

55.1% 

- Ministry of 

Education: 36.6% 

-Armed Forces: 

32.6% 

- Ombudsman's 

Office: 21.6% 

- National 

Superintenden ce 

of Customs and 

Tax 

Administration: 

21.4% 

- National Office 

of Electoral 

Processes: 20.8% 

- National Police 

of Peru: 19.0% 

- District 

Municipality: 

14.8% 

- National 

Elections Jury: 

15.5% 

- Provincial 

Municipality: 

14.0% 

- Public Ministry -

Attorney 

Gener al's Office: 

14.5% 

- General 

Comptroller of 

the Republic: 

14.0% 

2019/2020 

(Oct -19 to 

Mar -20) 

ENAHO 88 

- Anti -Corruption 

Attorney: 12.7% 

- High Level Anti -

Corruption 

Commission: 

13.9% 

- Judicial Branch: 

11.9% 

- Regional 

Government: 

10.7% 

- Congress of the 

Republic: 4.3% 

- Political Parties: 

3.0 %

6d -- Percentage of 

the population 

that recognizes 

corruption as 

one of the 

country's main 

problems 

Main problems 

of the country: 

Corruption 

National: 62.1% 2019 

(Jul -Dec) 

ENAHO 

6e. 16.10.1 16.10.1 

Number of 

verified cases 

of murder, 

kidnapping, 

forced 

disappearance, 

arbitrary 

detention and 

torture of 

journalists, 

associate 

members of the 

media, trade 

unionists and 

human rights 

defenders, in 

the last 12 

months 

Number of 

journalists, 

associate 

members of the 

me dia, trade 

unionists and 

human rights 

defenders who 

have been 

killed 

3.0 2021 MINJUS Sex, department, 

type of defender, 

class of attack, 

ethnicity and 

ethnic 

identification. 

16.10.1 

Number of 

verified cases 

of murder, 

kidnapping, 

forced 

disappearance, 

arbitrary 

detention and 

torture of 

journalists, 

associate 

members of the 

media, trade 

unionists and 

human rights 

defenders, in 

the last 12 

months 

0.0 2020 OHCHR 89 

# Annex 2: International Recommendations of the 

# Universal Human Rights System 

The following table presents the main recommendations made to the country on Human Rights issues 

since 2015, both by the treaty bodies, special procedures and Universal Periodic Review. This exercise 

includes documents issued by: 

• Special Rapporteu r on the rights of human rights defenders (2020) 

• Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent (2020) 

• Committee for the Protection of Persons from Enforced Disappearance (2019) 

• Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (2018) 

• Working Group on Business and Human Rights (2018) 

• Committee against Torture (2018) 

• Universal Periodic Review (2017) 

• Committee on the Rights of the Child (2016) 

• Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 

(2015) 

• Working Group Against Discrimination Against Women in Law and in Practice (2015) 

• Working Group on Enforced Disappearances (2015) 

Strategic Priority: PE1. Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Direct Effect 1. By 2026, 

people, especially those in 

greater situations of 

vulnerability, increase their 

access to decent work and a 

comprehensive social 

protection system, including a 

social protection floor, which 

ensures universal access to 

health (including sexual and 

reproductive health), nutrition, 

food security, basic income 

security and the care system, 

through an integrated 

approach with special 

emphasis on gender and rights. 

Recommends adoption of measures with an 

intercultural approach to guarantee Afro -

Peruvian and indigenous women access to 

employment and sexual and reproductive 

health and health (paragraph 35) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Ensure that the third nationa l plan to combat 

forced labor has specific goals, deadlines and 

that the human, technical and material 

resources necessary for its implementation are 

assigned (paragraph 29) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Strengthen the National Commission for the 

Fight against Forced Labor and the Labor 

Inspection System (paragraph 29) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Include in its next periodic report statistical 

information on the real dimension of the 

phenomenon of forced labor and how it affects 

indigenous peoples, Afro -Peruvians or other 

national or ethnic groups (paragraph 29) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Promote education and learning opportunities 

for people with disabilities (paragraph 90q) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Combat child labor and forced labor, for 

example, by improving data collection and the 

use of existing instruments and policies 

(paragraph 90I) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Redouble efforts to reduce labor informality 

(paragaph 90n) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Combat discrimination against lesbian, gay, 

bisexual, transgender and intersex people in 

accessing the labor market and in the 

workplace (paragraph 90s) 

A/HRC/38/ 48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Ensure that the rights to health, education and 

employment of the indigenous community and 

the Afro -descendant community are respected 

and guaranteed (paragraph 111.180) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Raise the minimum age for admission to 

employment to 16 years and prohibit all 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 90 

Strategic Priority: PE1. Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

dangerous forms of work for children under 18 

years of age (paragraph 111.89) 

increase employment opportunities for 

persons with disabilities living in rural areas, 

women with disabilities and older persons with 

disabilities (paragraph 111.149) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Protect the rights of indigenous people and 

Afro -descendants, with special emphasis on 

the fight against discrimination towards 

indigenous and Afro -Peru vian women in the 

areas of employment and health (paragraph 

111.160) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Establish effective mechanisms to monitor 

compliance with current legislation and 

relevant ILO conventions (paragraph 111.90) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Strengthen the protection of domestic workers 

(paragraph 111.91) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Guarantee equal remuneration for men and 

women for work of equal value (paragraph 

116.76) 

A/HRC/22/15 (EPU 2012) 

Ensure that the work of children is fully in line 

with international child labor standards with 

regard to the child's age, working hours, 

working conditions, education and health, 

including proper enforcement of the child 

labor system for authorization and 

registration. (paragraph 66.f) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Improving the accessibility and quality of 

education for all children, including 

intensifying quality training for teachers and 

improving their working conditions, 

particularly in rural areas, t o encourage them 

to provide high -quality education. (paragraph 

62.b) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Strengthen the measures adopted to combat 

school dropouts and increase the completion 

rate of secondary education, with special 

emphasis on children living in rural areas, 

indigenous and Afro -Peruvian children, 

pregnant girls and adolescent mothers 

(paragraph 62.e) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

a) Continue to intensify its efforts to combat 

child mortality and malnutrition, focusing 

primarily on childr en living in poverty, children 

living in rural and remote areas and indigenous 

children. b) Guarantee equal access to quality 

health care services for all children, including 

those living in rural and remote areas. c) 

Effectively implement its strategies a imed at 

reducing maternal mortality throughout the 

country, including strengthening the quality of 

prenatal care and the response capacity of 

health services. e) Intensify its efforts to 

promote breastfeeding up to 6 months of age. 

(paragraph 54) 

CRC/C/PE R/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Measures necessary to guarantee the 

protection of migrant border workers in 

accordance with Article 58 of the Convention. 

(paragraph 51) 

CMW/C/PER/CO/1 (CMW 2015) 

Eliminate existing limitations on the hiring of 

migrant workers and g uarantee treatment that 

is no less favorable than that received by 

CMW/C/PER/CO/1 (CMW 2015) 91 

Strategic Priority: PE1. Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

nationals of the party State in accordance with 

the Convention (paragraph 49) 

Addressing the high number of teenage 

pregnancies (paragraph 56.a) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Decriminalize abortion in all circumstances, 

ensure girls' access to safe abortion and post -

abortion care (paragraph 56.b) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Ensure equal access to mental health care 

services with a view to elimina ting the 

prevalence of suicide and depression among 

adolescents. (paragraph 56.d) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Fighting the incidence of drug use by children 

and adolescents, which entails, among other 

things, providing them with accurate and 

objective in formation and education 

(paragraph 56.e) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

fight child mortality and malnutrition, focusing 

primarily on children living in poverty, children 

living in rural and remote areas and indigenous 

children. (paragraph 54.a) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Reduce maternal mortality throughout the 

country, in cluding strengthening the quality of 

prenatal care and the response capacity of 

health services (paragraph 54.c) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Ensure that children with disabilities have real 

and free access to health and rehabilitation 

services, and early detection and intervention 

programs (paragraph 52.d) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 

Decriminalize abortion in cases of rape, incest, 

risk to the mental health of women and in 

cases of unviability of the fetus. Also consider 

exceptions for those under 16 years of age 

given the high risk to their health (paragraph 

86.b) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

Guarantee the free distribution of emergency 

contraception and ensure free and systematic 

access to contraceptives. (paragraph 86.c) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

Adopt a comprehensive labor legal framework 

to guarantee dece nt work for all working 

women (paragraph 86.f) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

Immediately implement the minimum wage 

and guarantee health insurance for all 

domestic workers (paragraph 86.g) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discriminat ion against Women, 

2015) 

Improve the system for granting reparations in 

health, symbolic, collective, in education 

(paragraph 88.d) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

Guarantee access to health services for all 

women, including prevention, particularly for 

women in a situation of socioeconomic 

precariousness (paragraph 89.e) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

Reinforce the adolescent pregnancy 

prevention strategy by ensuring that sexual 

educat ion is taught from primary school and 

providing differentiated services in sexual and 

reproductive health (paragraph 89.f) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 * (WG 

Discrimination against Women, 

2015) 

In order to address racial disparities in 

employment, quotas and incen tives must be 

effectively implemented in the public and 

private sectors. (pargraph 127) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 

Take emergency protection measures for the 

protection of the Afro -Peruvian population, 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 92 

Strategic Priority: PE1. Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

reporting structural racism in health care for 

Afro -Peruvians (paragraph 132) 

It is urgent to adopt a systematic and effective 

policy to combat malnutrition and anemia in 

Afro -descendant children. (paragraph 126) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 

Provide social protection for Afro -Peruvian 

women and children (paragraph 134) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 

Provide a larger budget to the Ministry of 

Health to expand and strengthen the health 

repair plan. (paragraph 81, e, h). 

A/HRC/33/51/Add.3 (GT Desap 

Forz, 2016) 

Direct Effect 2. By 2026, 

people, especially those in 

greater situations of 

vulnerability have improved 

and equal access to quality 

universal education and special 

protection, through an 

integrated approach with 

special emphasis on gender 

and rights. 

Recommends that it ad opt measures with an 

intercultural approach to guarantee Afro -

Peruvian and indigenous women access to 

education (paragraph 35) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Adopt measures to facilitate access to the 

labor market for people with disabilities 

(paragraph 90q) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Raise the minimum age for admission to 

employment to be the same as the age for 

completion of compulsory schooling (15 years) 

(paragraph 90p) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 2018) 

Protect the rights of indigenous people and 

Afro -descendants, with special emphasis on 

the fight against discrimination towards 

indigenous and Afro -Peruvian women in the 

areas of employment and health (paragraph 

111.160) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Increase children's access to information and 

education on sexual and reproductive health 

and rights, particularly in schools, as well as 

access to sexual and reproductive health 

services (paragraph 111.141) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Guarantee the full recognition of sexual and 

reproductive rights through access to 

comprehensive sexuality education. 

(paragraph 111.100) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Step up its efforts to implement an inclusive 

education system (paragraph 52.b) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/ 4-5 (CRC 2016) 

Establish a system to provide education for 

children with disabilities who have been out of 

school for many years and cannot read or 

write (paragraph 52.c) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5

(CRC, 2016) 

Continue to improve the accessibility and 

quality of education for all children (paragraph 

62.b) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5

(CRC, 2016) 

Guarantee the right to free and compulsory 

education without indirect or hidden costs 

(paragraph 62.d) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5

(CRC, 2016) 

Strengthen the measures taken to combat 

school dropout and raise the secondary school 

completion rate (paragraph 62.) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5

(CRC, 2016) 

Direct Effect 3. By 2026, 

people, especially those in 

greater situations of 

vulnerability, lack of 

protection, poverty and food 

insecurity, increase their 

resilience to crisis situations 

through strengthened 

humanitarian response 

Take more measures to combat poverty and 

improve the standard of living of the 

population, particularly those living in rural 

areas (paragraph 111.83) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Reduce widespread child poverty (paragraph 

111.140) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Intensify its efforts to eliminate poverty and 

extreme poverty and expand access to safe 

drinking water and sanitation, with special 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 2016) 93 

Strategic Priority: PE1. Well -being of people and equal access to opportunities 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

mechanisms and post -crisis 

recovery, through an 

integrated approach with 

special emphasis on gender, 

rights and territory. 

emphasis on rural areas and indigenous 

communities. (parapraph 60) 

The Government should take measures to 

mitigate climate change in partnership and 

consultation with Afro -Peruvians, including 

through the implementation of the framework 

law on climate change. (paragraph 138) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 

Strategic Priority: PE2. M anagement of the environment, climate change and disaster risk 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Direct Effect 4. By 2026, 

the population and 

ecosystems, especially 

those in greater situations 

of vulnerability, strengthen 

their resilience as a result 

of institutions and 

communities improving 

policies and implementing 

effective mechanisms or 

instruments for 

environmen tal, climate 

change, and disaster risk 

management and 

humanitarian crises 

management, through an 

integrated approach with 

special emphasis on 

gender, rights, 

interculturality, life cycle 

and territory. 

Establish an adequate and effective mechanism 

that allows the claim and restitution of ancestral 

lands and territories, ensuring the allocation of 

adequate human, technical and financial resources 

for the effective functioning of such mechanism 

(paragraph 17. a) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Step up it s efforts to empower rural women and 

women living in remote areas to cope with and 

adapt to climate change. (paragraph 38) 

CEDAW/C/PER/CO/7 -8

Guarantee the protection of the rights that 

indigenous peoples have to possess, use, develop 

and control their lands, territories and resources 

with full security 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 (CERD 

2018) 

Fill existing gaps in the protection of human rights, 

in p articular with regard to the rights of 

indigenous peoples to land and natural resources, 

the right to a healthy environment (paragraph 90. 

b) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Protect the rights of indigenous peoples with 

regard to wate r and a safe environment, especially 

when granting extraction concessions (paragraph 

111. 175) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Integrate a gender perspective in land acquisition 

and land use change, and ensure that women are 

provided with adequate compensation for large -

scale acquisition of land and other resources. 

(paragraph 38) 

CEDAW/C/PER/CO/7 -8

Strategic priority: PE3. Inclusive and sustainable competitiveness and productivity 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Direct Effect 5. By 2026, 

people, especially those who 

are in a greater situation of 

vulnerability and 

discrimination, improve their 

access to resilient livelihoods 

through the construction of a 

diversified, competi tive, 

formalized, innovative, 

sustainable and inclusive 

productive matrix, with decent 

Adopt measures with an intercultural 

approach to guarantee employment for Afro -

Peruvian and indigenous women. (paragraph 

35) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 

Eliminate barriers that, in practice, prevent 

access to employment services, including 

through the timely issuance of identity 

documents (paragraph 37.b) 

CERD/C/PER/CO/22 -23 

Measures aimed at evaluating the social and 

environmental sustainability of agro -industrial 

projects (paragraph 91J) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 94 

Strategic priority: PE3. Inclusive and sustainable competitiveness and productivity 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

work, aligned to the potential 

of each territory, and with an 

integrated approach and 

special emphasis on gender, 

particularly through the 

economic empowerment of 

women. 

Reduce labor informality (paragraph 90I) A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Combat discrimination against lesbian, gay, 

bisexual, transgender and intersex people in 

accessing the labor market and in the 

workplace (paragraph 90s) 

A/HRC/38 /48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Recommend all companies pay special 

attention to the effects of business activities 

on the human rights of some groups, such as 

indigenous peoples and women. 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Provide access to clear information on the 

negative consequences for human rights 

caused by business activities, such as special 

agreements between companies and the 

Government. (paragraph 91.e) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Increase the effectiveness of state 

mechanisms for out -of -court claims, as well as 

the capacity of the Ombudsman's Office to 

process complaints of human rights violations 

related to business activities. (paragraph 90.y) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Raise awareness of the Guiding Principles on 

Business and Human Rights. (paragraph 90.a) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Modify the legislation for the protection of 

human rights, in particular with regard to 

indigen ous peoples to land and natural 

resources, the right to a healthy environment 

and health and the right to freedom of 

expression and assembly, included in ILO 

Conventions (paragraph 90.b) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Advise state and private companies on human 

rights due diligence (paragraph 90.i) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Attention should be paid to protection against 

discrimination related to business activities, 

against women, LGTBI peop le, and people with 

disabilities. 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Apply general observations no. 16 (2013), on 

the obligations of the State in relation to the 

impact of the business sector on the rights of 

the child, and no. 11 (2009 ), on indigenous 

children and their rights under the 

Convention: 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Take into account the needs and interests of 

indigenous women in all social investment 

programs that allocate benefits or 

compensation for damages suffered as a result 

of extractive industries activities, including 

resettlement and training solutions; 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2* 

(GT Disc against Woman, 

2015) 

Ensure that the rights to employment of the 

indigenous community and the Af ro -

descendant community are respected and 

guaranteed (paragraph 111.180) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Protect the rights of people with disabilities, 

and study how to increase employment 

opportunities for people with disabilities living 

in rural areas, women with disabilities and the 

elderly with disabilities (paragraph 111.149) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 95 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Direct Effect 6. By 2026, 

people, especially those in 

greater situations of 

vulnerability and discrimination 

such as girls and boys, 

adolescents, youth and 

women, exercise their rights 

equally a s a result of the 

strengthening of effective 

governance, social cohesion, 

access to justice and the fight 

against gender inequality and 

all forms of discrimination and 

violence based on gender, 

through an integrated 

approach. 

Ensure that the definition of victim in domestic 

legislation is consistent with Article 24, 

paragraph 1, of the Convention; Guarantee 

that all victims of forced disappearance have 

access to comprehensive reparations and that 

all obstacles and limitations for their 

enrollment in the Com prehensive Reparations 

Program are eliminated; Ensure that the 

reparations system is sensitive to the 

individual conditions of the victims; Guarantee 

comprehensive reparation for victims of 

forced disappearances that occurred after the 

1980 -2000 period. (p aragraph 29) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

Adopt the legislative measures necessary to 

regulate, in accordance with Article 24, 

paragraph 6, of the Convention, the legal 

situation of disappeared persons whose fate 

or whereabouts has not been clarified and 

that of their relatives, in areas such as s ocial 

protection, family law and property rights. 

(paragraph 31) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

The Committee also wishes to emphasize the 

particularly cruel effect of enforced 

disappearances on the human rights of 

women and children. Place special emphasis 

on the need to integrate gender perspectives 

adapted to the sensitivity of boys and girls in 

the application of the rights and obligations 

derived from the Convention. (paragraph 37) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

Redouble efforts to search, locate and release 

all missing persons and, if found dead, for the 

dignif ied restitution of their mortal remains. 

(paragraph 33) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

Expressly include in its domestic legislation the 

prohibition of expulsion, return, surrender or 

extradition when there are well -founded 

reasons to believe that the person subject to 

said measure would be in danger of being a 

victim of forced disappearance; Ensure that 

there are clear and specific criteria and 

procedures to assess and verify risk. Ensure 

effective access to an appeal. (par agraph 29) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

From the beginning of the 

deprivation of liberty, all 

persons deprived of liberty 

have immediate access to a

lawyer and that their families or 

any other person of their choice 

be informed of their 

deprivation of liberty and the 

place where they are being 

held, as well as their transfer. 

All cases of deprivation of 

liberty, without exception, are 

registered in official registers 

and / or updated files 

(paragraph 25.a and b) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 96 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

The party State should adopt effective 

measures to guarantee that all detainees 

enjoy in practice all the fundamental 

safeguards from the very beginning of their 

deprivation of liberty in accordance with 

international standards (paragraph 13) 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

aga inst Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

The party State should guarantee the 

functional autonomy of the national 

preventive mechanism and provide the 

necessary resources for its operation. 

CED/C/PER/CO/1 (Committee 

against Forced 

Disappearance, 2019) 

Guarante e that all complaints of torture are 

investigated promptly and impartially by an 

independent body and facilitate the victims' 

access to justice, through the relevant legal 

support, including free legal assistance when 

justified, and guarantee that the alle ged 

perpetrators are duly prosecuted and, if found 

guilty, imposed penalties commensurate with 

the seriousness of their acts; e) Ensure that 

justice operators receive the necessary 

training that allows them to correctly 

determine the applicable criminal of fense in 

cases of torture and ill -treatment; f) Compile 

statistical data on the number of complaints, 

investigations, prosecutions, convictions and 

penalties imposed in cases of torture and ill -

treatment. (paragraph 17) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against To rture 

(2018) 

The party State should ensure that all police 

attacks based on sexual orientation or gender 

identity are investigated and those responsible 

are brought to justice. It must also take all 

necessary measures to guarantee the physical 

integrity of lesbian, gay , bisexual and 

transgender people in all settings, including 

places of detention. (paragraph 23) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

a) Redouble its efforts to alleviate 

overcrowding in detention centers, mainly 

through recourse to alternat ive measures to 

custodial sentences and continue work to 

improve prison facilities. In this regard, the 

Committee draws the party State's attention 

to the Standard Minimum Rules. b) Adopt 

urgent measures to correct deficiencies 

related to the general condi tions of life in 

prisons; c) Ensure that preventive detention is 

not excessively prolonged; d) Guarantee the 

strict separation between pretrial and 

convicted prisoners in all places of detention; 

e) Guarantee the allocation of human and 

material resources necessary for the correct 

medical and health care of inmates; g) Ensure 

that body searches are carried out respecting 

the intrinsic dignity of persons deprived of 

liberty. (paragraph 25) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

Ensure that all c ases of death during 

deprivation of liberty are investigated 

promptly and impartially by an independent 

body. Promote measures to prevent and 

reduce violence between persons deprived of 

liberty. (paragraph 29) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(201 8) 97 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Continue the development and 

implementation of mandatory training 

programs and provide the necessary 

instruction to all public servants, in particular 

members of the National Police of Peru, the 

Armed Forces, the administration of justice, 

prison officers and other people who may 

participate in the custody, questioning or 

treatment of persons subjected to any form of 

arrest, detention or imprisonment. (paragraph 

31) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

Continue the investigation and prosecuti on of 

cases related to human rights violations that 

occurred between 1980 and 2000. (paragraph 

33.a) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

Continue to ensure that the right to truth, 

reparation and safeguards of non -repetition 

are guaranteed, in accordance with the 

provisions of Article 14 of the Convention. 

(paragraph 35) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

Ensure that all cases of gender -based violence 

against women and girls, especially those 

cases in which there have been actions or 

omissions by State authorities or other entities 

that give rise to the international responsibility 

of the party State in acc ordance with the 

Convention, be thoroughly investigated, that 

the alleged perpetrators be prosecuted and, if 

convicted, duly punished, and that the victims 

obtain reparation, including adequate 

compensation; c) Provide compulsory training 

on the prosecutio n of gender -based violence 

to judges, prosecutors and members of the 

law enforcement, and carry out awareness -

raising campaigns on all forms of violence 

against women; d) Ensure that victims of 

gender violence receive medical care, 

psychological support an d the legal assistance 

they need. (paragraph 39) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 

The Committee urges the party State to adopt 

the necessary legislative and other measures 

in order to: a) Ensure that no person may be 

expelled, returned or extradited to another 

State when there are well -founded reasons to 

believe that they would be at pe rsonal and 

foreseeable risk of being subjected to torture; 

b) Guarantee that all persons who are in its 

territory or under its jurisdiction have effective 

access to the procedure for the determination 

of refugee status. (paragraph 47) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Comm ittee against Torture 

(2018) 

The party State should adopt the necessary 

measures to guarantee that human rights 

defenders and journalists can carry out their 

work and activities freely in the party State, 

without fear of reprisals or attacks. It must 

als o investigate promptly, exhaustively and 

impartially all violations committed against 

human rights defenders and journalists, and 

provide reparation to the victims. (paragraph 

49) 

CAT/C/PER/CO/7* 

Committee against Torture 

(2018) 98 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Take steps to ensure prior and informed 

consultations with indigenous peoples and 

other communities affected by development 

projects and business operations and take 

additional steps to ensure informed 

participation, such as the provision of legal 

and tech nical assistance, and full access to 

information, as well as the imposition of 

effective sanctions in case of non -compliance. 

(paragraph 88.d) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

Take measures to remove obstacles to the 

right to freedom of association and collective 

bargaining, the investigation of attacks and 

murders of trade unionists and the 

punishment of the perpetrators. (paragraph 

90.m) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Companies 

2018) 

It takes measures to strengthen the protec tion 

of human rights defenders, including the 

enactment of laws, as well as the 

establishment of mechanisms to deal with 

attacks and physically protect them from acts 

of aggression and intimidation. (paragraph 

90.u) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnational Comp anies 

2018) 

Take steps to address instances of excessive 

use of force by police officers and members of 

the security forces and promptly, impartially 

and effectively investigate allegations of 

excessive use of force. (paragraph 90.v) 

A/HRC/38/48/Add.2 (GT 

Transnation al Companies 

2018) 

Adopt measures to promote a safe, respectful 

and conducive space for civil society, including 

by abolishing legal and regulatory measures 

that unjustifiably limit the rights to freedom of 

expression and association, and ensuring that 

the rights of indigenous peoples' communities 

to prior consultation on extractive projects are 

rigorously applied (paragraph 111.176) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Apply the necessary measures to promote the 

rights of human rights defenders, in order to 

protect t hem against harassment, intimidation 

or physical violence (111.71); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Adopt effective legislative measures to 

guarantee the protection of human rights 

defenders (111.66); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue efforts to combat multiple forms of 

discrimination against women, particularly in 

rural areas, with regard to access to justice 

and decision -making positions (111.113); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Introduce a broad public policy that recognizes 

the role of human rights defender s, 

establishes mechanisms for their effective 

protection, and conducts exhaustive and 

impartial investigations in all cases of 

aggression, harassment, and intimidation 

committed against them (111.70, 111.72); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Strengthen technical cooperation with United 

Nations organizations to help address the 

problems of domestic violence and sexual 

violence, in particular violence against women 

and girls, and ensure that the perpetrators of 

such acts are brought to justice (111.123); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 99 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Intensify efforts to prevent and combat all 

forms of discrimination and violence against 

women and ensure that women victims of 

violence receive adequate help and that 

perpetrators are brought to justice (111.111); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 20 17) 

Protect the activities of human rights 

defenders (111.74); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue efforts to combat racism, racial 

discrimination and related intolerance based 

on gender, age, nationality, language, religion, 

belief, opinion, political activity, union activity, 

kinship, health status, disability, sexual 

orientation or other personal characteristics, 

paying special attention to the structural 

elements of discrimination that may affect the 

effective exercise of the rights to heal th, 

education, decent work and participation in 

decision -making (111.25); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Adopt measures to improve the 

representation of women in decision -making 

positions in the public sector, including 

considering the possibility of adopting 

tem porary special measures to accelerate the 

achievement of this objective (111.139) 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Improve access to justice for women, 

indigenous peoples, and migrants (111.81); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue the fight against corruption in 

government instances and support the 

independent investigation of the alleged 

extrajudicial executions of 27 people by 

members of the Peruvian National Police 

(111.48); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue the application of the 

recommendations o f the Truth and 

Reconciliation Commission, in particular the 

fight against impunity, the application of the 

Comprehensive Reparations Plan, and the 

effective application of the National Plan for 

the Search for Disappeared Persons (111.78); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue the fight against corruption and 

impunity at all levels of the criminal justice 

system (111.77); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue to advance efforts to address gender 

inequality and adopt new measures, such as 

the enactment of specific legislation to protect 

vulnerable population groups, such as women, 

children and indigenous peoples, from 

violence and exploitation (111.106); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Within the framework of the process of 

fighting impunity, effectively invest igate cases 

of forced sterilization (111.97); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Put in place effective measures to guarantee 

access to justice for victims of all forms of 

violence against women (111.126); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue its efforts to reduce and eradicate 

gender -based violence, guaranteeing due 

diligence in the prosecution and trial of the 

perpetrators and provide the relevant training 

to the competent authorities (111.128); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 100 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Apply specialized protocols to attend to and 

investigate cases of violence and 

discrimination based on sexual orientation and 

gender identity, particularly when the victims 

are children and adolescents (111.36); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue making progress in promoting 

gender equality, so that women have greater 

representation in politics and that quotas are 

respected in regional and municipal elections 

(111.136); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Ensure that the use of force and firearms by 

the security forces is regulated in accordance 

with the principles of necessity and 

proportionality, and that all cases of deaths 

and excessive use of force by the security 

forces during civilian demonstrations are duly 

investigated. (111.49); 

A/HRC/37/8 (E PU 2017) 

Consider the possibility of adopting measures 

to protect human rights defenders against 

threats and intimidation to guarantee that 

they can carry out their functions properly 

(111.73); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue working to improve access to justice 

and the economic, social and cultural rights of 

ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples 

(111.179); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Create and implement a specific mechanism 

that provides comprehensive assistance and 

protection to human rights de fenders, 

especially defenders of communities affected 

by mining and hydroelectric projects (111.68); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Take measures to reduce cases of violence 

against women, including training for security 

forces, prosecutors and judges to increase 

gender awareness and sensitivity (111,132); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Continue efforts to combat human trafficking 

and investigate, prosecute, and punish the 

individuals and groups involved (111.58); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Modify current legislation to recognize sexual 

orientation and gender identity as grounds for 

discrimination and allow the prosecution of 

crimes motivated by prejudice on this basis 

(111.27); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Adopt new measures to protect women and 

children, in pa rticular from violence and 

exploitation (116.41); 

A/HRC/37/8 (EPU 2017) 

Maintain the stability of judges and 

prosecutors in their positions to guarantee the 

continuity of complex judicial processes and 

ensure the impartiality and independence of 

the magistrates (paragraph c) 

A/HRC/33/51/Add.3 (GT 

Disappearances 2016) 

Strengthen the role of the Vice Ministry of 

Human Rights and Access to Justice, so that it 

may play a more active and leadership role, 

mainly in tasks of searching for the 

disappeared and managing the database 

(paragraph 78 d) 

A/HRC/33/51/Add.3 (GT 

Disappearances 2016) 

Provide training in national legislation and 

international standards on forced 

disappearance and other crimes against 

humanity (paragraph 80 e) 

A/HRC/33/51/Add.3 (GT 

Disappearances 2016) 101 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

Identify the greatest challenges in the work of 

the Peruvian justice administration system and 

overcome them. (paragraph 80 m) 

A/HRC/33/51/Add.3 (GT 

Dis appearances 2016) 

Ensure the effective application of the 

legislation that recognizes the right of the child 

to be heard in the pertinent judicial 

proceedings. (paragraph 32.c) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 

2016) 

Take appropriate measures to protect children 

from police and military actions in the context 

of measures taken to guarantee public safety 

and hold the perpetrators of human rights 

violations accountable. (paragraph 36) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 

2016) 

a) Properly investigate all cases of violence 

against children and hold perpetrators 

accountable for such crimes. b) Guarantee 

children's effective access to justice. 

(paragraph 42) 

CRC/C/PER/CO/4 -5 (CRC 

2016) 

Establish a centralized statistical system that 

makes it possible to ascertain access to justice 

for women, especially the c ases reported and 

tried and those archived. (paragraph 86.b) 

A/HRC/29/40/Add.2 (WG 

Discrimination against 

women 2015) 

Formulate and execute simple procedures for 

the regularization of migrants and make them 

known through information campaigns at the 

local and national level. It is also 

recommended that the procedures are in line 

with the principle of non -discrimination an d

are easily accessible to migrant workers in an 

irregular situation and their families. The 

Committee also recommends that permits be 

created to prevent the expulsion of groups in 

vulnerable situations and ties to the State and 

/ or family reunification ( paragraph 57) 

CMW/C/PER/CO/1 (CMW 

2015) 

Establish mechanisms for social dialogue with 

trade unions, to guarantee that migrant 

workers in an irregular s ituation can enjoy 

their union rights in accordance with Article 26 

of the Convention. (paragraph 37) 

CMW/C/PER/CO/1 (CMW 

2015) 

Focus public defense se rvices aimed at Afro -

Peruvians. (paragraph 72.m) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 

Facilitate reparatory justice for Afro -Peruvians. 

(paragraph 111) 

A/HRC/45/44/Add.2 (GT Exp 

Afrod, 2020). 

Take immediate steps to recognize and 

promote the work of human rights defenders 

and combat their stigmatization. (paragraph 

78) 

A/HRC/46/35/Add.2 (HRD 

Rapporteur, 2020) 

Promote the active public participation of 

women human rights defenders. (paragrap h

79) 

A/HRC/46/35/Add.2 (HRD 

Rapporteur, 2020) 

The Government should guarantee the safety 

of human rights defenders and in particular: a) 

Apply the necessary measures to guarantee 

complaints made by defenders to the 

authorities; b) Ensure that law enforcement 

agencies have the necessary means to 

safegu ard the life and health of defenders at 

risk; c) Intensify efforts to launch the register 

of risk situations for human rights defenders 

and ensure that it reflects the full picture of 

A/HRC/46/35/Add.2 (HRD 

Rapp orteur, 2020) 102 

Strategic Priority: PE4 Effective democratic governance and equitable exercise of citizenship 

Direct effect Recommendations - Treaty Bodies / Special 

Procedures / Universal Periodic Review 

Referral code 

the available data on attacks suffered by 

human rights defenders, includ ing 

criminalization and gender -based assaults; d) 

Strengthen the obligations incumbent on 

state, regional and municipal authorities; e) 

Establish a multisectoral mechanism for the 

protection of defenders by 2021. (paragraph 

81) 

In accordance with international human rights 

law, end the practice of criminally accusing 

defenders and community leaders who 

organize demonstrations for acts committed 

by third parties. (paragraph 82) 

A/HRC/46/35/Add.2 (HRD 

Rapporteur, 2 020) 103 

# Annex 3: Summary of queries for the preparation of 

# the UNSDCF 

Date Meeting name Participants Number of 

participants 

external to the 

UNS 

Dynamics 

03 .24 .21 Consultation and 

validation 

workshop. 

Priorities and 

direct effects of 

the new UN 

cooperation 

framework in 

Peru, 2022 -2026 

APCI, Chancellery, CEPLAN, 

MEF, PCM, SNU 

• 17 • Presentation of the 

CCA, process of 

construction of the 

UNSDCF , 4 

strategic priorities 

and 6 direct effects 

in charge of the 

UNS. 

• Round of 

interventions and 

contributions in 

plenary. 

03 .25 .21 Meeting held 

between 

the constituents 

of the 

ILO, the ILO 

Office 

For the Andean 

Countries and 

the Office of the 

Resident 

Coordinator of 

the 

United Nations 

system 

in Peru 

MTPE, CATP, CUT, CGTP, CTP, 

CONFIEP, ILO, RCO 

• 70 • Pre -workshop: 

material was sent 

in advance for 

review. 

• Presentation of the 

CCA, process of 

construction of the 

UNSDCF , 4 

strategic priorities 

and 6 direct effects 

in charge of the 

UNS. 

• Bilateral discussion 

in groups. 

• Round of 

interventions and 

contributions in 

plenary. 

• Post: there was a 

space to receive 

contributions by 

mail 

03.26.21 Consultation and 

validation 

workshop. 

Priorities and 

direct effects of 

the new UN 

cooperation 

framework in 

Peru, 2022 -2026. 

Civil Society Organisations 

Action Against Hunger, ADRA 

Peru, AHF PERU, Association 

of Agricultural Producers 

Guilds of Peru, Missi onaries 

Association of San Carlos 

Scalabrinianos, Help in Action, 

Biodiversity International, 

CARE Peru, Cáritas, Caritas 

Arquidiocesana de Cusco, 

CCEFIRO, CDD Peru, 

CEDEMUNEP, CEDET, CEDRO, 

Centro de la Mujer Peruana 

Flora Tristán, CEPESJU, 

CHIRAPAQ, CIRE MI -

Interreligious Committee, 

• 144 • Pre -workshop: The 

material for the 

workshop was sent 

to the participants 

in advance. 

• Presentation of the 

CCA, process of 

construction of the 

UNSDCF , 4 

strategic priorities 

and 6 direct effects 

in charge of the 

UNS. 

• Discussions in 4 

groups, moderated 

by th e UNS, 

according to 

strategic priority, 104 

CODIP, College of 

Obstetricians of Peru, 

CONDESAN, Conveagro, 

Peruvian Red Cross, Education 

with Equality, SJM 

Encounters, Es Hoy, Fe y 

Alegría Peru, France 

Volontaires / Red Soy 

Voluntari@, Fundación SM, 

GIVAR, GRD, GRI, Grupo GEA, 

HIAS PERU, ICRAF, IFRC 

Independiente, INPPARES, 

INSAP / SPC, IPRODES, Kunan, 

L + 1, Manuela Ramos, 

Mission Inclusion, ODISEX, 

Peru 2021, Plan International, 

Practical Action, PRISMA, 

Profonanpe, Promsex, PROSA, 

RAE, Recíclame, Red Arequipa 

Voluntaria (RAV), Red 

Interquorum, Red Transex, 

Reproductive Health Supplies 

COALITION / FOROLAC, RET, 

Socios en Salud, SPOG, 

TECHO, Terre des Hommes 

Suisse, Transparency 

International, Unión 

Venezolana en Perú, World 

Vision 

Academy: APDP, ANC, DESCO, 

GRADE, IDEHPUC P, PUCP, 

Toulouse Lautrec, IUCN South 

America, Universidad Católica 

Sedes Sapientiae, Universidad 

de Lima, Universidad del 

Pacífico, Universidad San 

Martín de Porres, UPCH, USIL 

Embassies / International 

Cooperation: AECID Peru, 

Swiss Cooperation - SDC, 

Emb assy of Japan, Embassy of 

the United Kingdom, 

European Union, USAID 

Unions: CATP, CTP, CUT PERU, 

SINTRAHOGARP 

Private Sector: CONFIEP -

Global, Antamina, ALOXI 

Others: National Agreement, 

Ombudsman's Office 

around the 

following 

questions: i) What 

challenges does the 

country face to 

achieve the 

strategic priority?; 

ii) What actions 

would you propose 

to take to address 

these challenges?; 

and iii) What actors 

should be tak en 

into consideration 

to carry out these 

actions? 

• The group 

discussions were 

supported by the 

Mural platform. 

This platform 

allowed an 

interactive 

participation of the 

participants that 

simulated a face -

to -face session. 

• The participants 

presented the 

concl usions of their 

group work in 

Plenary. 

• Closure: it was 

indicated that 

participants could 

continue to send 

their comments to 

the proposal. 

• Post workshop: 

reception and 

inclusion of 

comments. 

04.20.21 Consultation and 

validation 

workshop. 

Priorities and 

direct effects of 

the new UN 

cooperation 

APCI, MIDIS, MINSA, MINEDU, 

MIDAGRI, Defensoría del 

Pueblo, MVCS, MINCETUR, 

MTC, MINAM, MTPE, JNE, 

ONPE, MINCUL, PJ, SNU 

• 43 • Pre -work shop: The 

material for the 

workshop was sent 

to the participants 

in advance. 

• Presentation of the 

CCA, process of 105 

framework in 

Peru, 2022 -2026. 

construction of the 

UNSDCF , 4 

strategic priorities 

and 6 direct effects 

in charge of the 

UNS. 

• Discussions in 4 

groups, moderated 

by the UNS, 

according to 

strategic priority, 

around the 

following 

questions: i) What 

challenges does the 

country face to 

achieve the 

strategic priority?; 

ii) What actions 

would you propose 

to take to address 

these challen ges? 

• The participants 

presented the 

conclusions of their 

group work in 

Plenary. 

• Closure: it was 

indicated that 

participants could 

continue to send 

their comments to 

the proposal. 

• Post -workshop: 

comments were 

received that were 

included in the 

Cooperation 

Framework. 

05.13.21 Meeting held 

between 

the constituents 

of the 

ILO, the ILO 

Office 

For the Andean 

Countries and 

the RCO 

MTPE, CATP, CUT, CGTP, CTP, 

CONFIEP, ILO, RCO 

• 44 • Presentation of 

progress of the 

work carried out. 

• Round of 

interventions and 

contributions in 

plenary. 

06.15.21 Final Consultation 

and Validation 

Workshop of the 

new Cooperation 

Framework for 

Sustainable 

Development 

2022 -2026 

APCI, Chancellery, CEPLAN, 

MEF, Ombudsman's Office, 

PCM, SNU 

• 25 • Pre -workshop: The 

draft Cooperation 

Framework was 

sent to the 

participants before 

the workshop so 

that they coul d

review it. 

• Presentation to the 

Peruvian 

Government of the 

text proposal for 

the new United 

Nations Sustainable 

Development 106 

Cooperation 

Framework in Peru 

(UNSDCF 2022 -

2026). 

• Discussion and 

reception of 

comments in 

plenary, to be 

incorporated in the 

final version of the 

document. 

• Post -workshop: 

comments were 

received that were 

included in the 

Cooperation 

Framework. 

06.22.21 

and 

06.23.21 

4 Validation 

Meetings of the 

Cooperation 

Framework of the 

United Nations 

System 2022 -

2026 -

Government (1 

meeting fo r each 

SP )

CEPLAN, INEI, MINSA, MIDIS, 

CULTURA, MTPE, MINJUS, 

MINEDU, MEF, MINAM, 

PRODUCE, MINEM, 

MINCETUR, MIDAGRI, MTC, 

Public Ministry, JNE, Judicial 

Power, Ombudsman's Office, 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 

APCI 

• Session 1: 30 

• Session 2: 18 

• Session 3: 16 

• Session 4: 16 

• Presentation of the 

UNSDCF 

formulation 

schedule. 

• Review of Strategic 

Priorities 

Guidelines and 

Instructions for the 

establishment of 

national 

conformities. 

• Opinions from 

attendees were 

collected. 

• Agreement on the 

formality of the 

collection of 

sectoral opinions. Annex 4: PAHO / WHO Letter 108
