Title: Public Comment Received on Proposed Priorities

URL Source: https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/202308/88FR39907_public-comment_R.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 31 Jan 2024 21:14:54 GMT

Markdown Content:
United States Sentencing Commission 

# 202 3-202 4 Amendment Cycle 

# Public Comment on Proposed Priorities 

# 88 FR 39907 UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION 

# 202 3-202 4 PUBLIC COMMENT 

# PROPOSED PRIORITIES 

# 88 FR 39907 1

BAC2210-40 

UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION 

Proposed Priorities for Amendment Cycle 

AGENCY: United States Sentencing Commission. 

ACTION: Notice; Request for comment. 

SUMMARY: As part of its statutory authority and responsibility to analyze sentencing issues, including operation of the federal sentencing guidelines, and in accordance with its Rules of Practice and Procedure, the United States Sentencing Commission is seeking comment on possible policy priorities for the amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024. 

DATES: Public comment should be received by the Commission on or before 

August 1, 2023 . Any public comment received after the close of the comment period may not be considered. 

ADDRESSES: There are two methods for submitting public comment. 2

Electronic Submission of Comments . Comments may be submitted electronically via the Commission’s Public Comment Submission Portal at  https://comment.ussc.gov . Follow the online instructions for submitting comments. 

Submission of Comments by Mail . Comments may be submitted by mail to the following address: United States Sentencing Commission, One Columbus Circle, N.E., Suite 2-500, Washington, D.C. 20002-8002, Attention: Public Affairs – Priorities Comment. 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jennifer Dukes, Senior Public Affairs Specialist, (202) 502-4597. 

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The United States Sentencing Commission is an independent agency in the judicial branch of the United States Government. The Commission promulgates sentencing guidelines and policy statements for federal courts pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 994(a). The Commission also periodically reviews and revises previously promulgated guidelines pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 994(o) and submits guideline amendments to the Congress not later than the first day of May each year pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 994(p). 

The Commission provides this notice identifying the possible policy priorities that the Commission expects to focus on during the amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024. While continuing to address legislation or other matters requiring more immediate action, the Commission has decided to limit its consideration of specific guidelines amendments 3

for this amendment cycle. Instead, in light of the 40th anniversary of the Sentencing Reform Act, the Commission anticipates undertaking a number of projects examining the degree to which current sentencing, penal, and correctional practices are effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in the Sentencing Reform Act. 

See 28 U.S.C. 991(b)(2). The Commission expects to continue work on many of these priorities beyond the upcoming amendment cycle. The Commission invites comment on the proposed priorities set forth below, along with any additional priorities commenters believe the Commission should consider in the upcoming amendment cycle and beyond. Public comment should be sent to the Commission as indicated in the ADDRESSES section above. 

Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 994(g), the Commission intends to consider the issue of reducing costs of incarceration and overcapacity of prisons, to the extent it is relevant to any identified priority. 

The proposed priorities for the amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024, are as follows: 

(1) Assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of Prisons are effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2) and considering any appropriate responses including possible consideration of recommendations or amendments. 4

(2) Promotion of court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs by expanding the availability of information and organic documents pertaining to existing programs ( e.g. , Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence Alternatives (CASA) Program, Special Options Services (SOS) Program) through the Commission’s website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, implementing, and assessing such programs. 

(3) Examination of the Guidelines Manual , including exploration of ways to simplify the guidelines and possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

(4) Continuation of its multiyear study of the Guidelines Manual to address case law concerning the validity and enforceability of guideline commentary. 

(5) Continued examination of the career offender guidelines, including (A) updating the data analyses and statutory recommendations set forth in the Commission’s 2016 report to Congress, titled Career Offender Sentencing Enhancements ; (B) devising and conducting workshops to discuss the scope and impact of the career offender guidelines, including discussion of possible alternative approaches to the “categorical approach” in determining whether an offense is a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance offense”; and (C) possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 5

(6) Examination of the treatment of youthful offenders under the Guidelines Manual , including possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

(7) Implementation of any legislation warranting Commission action. 

(8) Resolution of circuit conflicts as warranted, pursuant to the Commission’s authority under 28 U.S.C. 991(b)(1)(B) and Braxton v. United States , 500 U.S. 344 (1991). 

(9) Consideration of other miscellaneous issues coming to the Commission’s attention. 

(10) Further examination of federal sentencing practices on a variety of issues, possibly including: (A) the prevalence and nature of drug trafficking offenses involving methamphetamine; (B) drug trafficking offenses resulting in death or serious bodily injury; (C) comparison of sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus plea; (D) continuation of the Commission’s studies regarding recidivism; and (E) other areas of federal sentencing in need of additional research. 

(11) Additional issues identified during the comment period. 6

AUTHORITY: 28 U.S.C. 994(a), (o); USSC Rules of Practice and Procedure 2.2, 5.2. 

Carlton W. Reeves, 

Chair. COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL LAW of the JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES United States District Court 333 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Room 4317 Washington, DC 20001 Honorable Cecilia M. Altonaga Honorable Kenneth D. Bell Honorable Mark J. Bennett Honorable Terrence G. Berg TELEPHONE Honorable Edmond E. Chang (202) 354-3020 Honorable Dee D. Drell Honorable Katherine Polk Failla Honorable Charles B. Goodwin Honorable Joseph Laplante Honorable Patty Shwartz Honorable Charles J. Williams 

> Honorable Randolph D. Moss, Chair

August 1, 2023 Hon. Carlton W. Reeves United States District Court Thad Cochran Federal Courthouse 501 East Court Street, Room 5.550 Jackson, MS 39201-5002 Dear Chair Reeves and Members of the Sentencing Commission: On behalf of the Committee on Criminal Law (Committee) of the Judicial Conference of the United States (Conference), we appreciate the opportunity to provide comment on the proposed priorities of the Sentencing Commission (Commission) for the 2023-2024 amendment cycle. The Committee’s jurisdiction within the Conference includes overseeing the federal probation and pretrial services system and reviewing issues relating to the administration of criminal law. The Committee provides comments about the Commission’s proposed priorities for the 2023-2024 amendment cycle as part of its oversight role regarding sentencing guidelines and its monitoring role regarding the workload and operation of probation offices. The Judicial Conference has authorized the Committee to “act with regard to submission from time to time to the Sentencing Commission of proposed amendments to the sentencing guidelines, including proposals that would increase the flexibility of the Guidelines.” 1 Moreover, the Judicial 1 JCUS-SEP 90, p. 69. In addition, the Judicial Conference “shall submit to the Commission any observations, comments, or questions pertinent to the work of the Commission whenever they believe such communication would be useful, and shall, at least annually, submit to the Commission a written report commenting on the operation of the Commission’s guidelines, suggesting changes in the guidelines that appear to be warranted, and otherwise assessing the Commission’s work.” See 28 U.S.C. § 994(o). Honorable Carlton W. Reeves Page 2 August 1, 2023 

2Conference has resolved that “the federal judiciary is committed to a sentencing guideline system that is fair, workable, transparent, predictable, and flexible.” 2 Past testimony presented and comments submitted on behalf of the Committee have expressed support for Commission efforts to resolve ambiguity, simplify legal approaches, reduce uncertainty, and avoid unnecessary litigation and unwarranted disparity. 

Discussion 

The Committee has reviewed the Commission’s proposed priorities for the 2023-2024 amendment cycle, and, as a general matter, we support the Commission’s engagement on so many important areas of criminal administration and justice. Of these, the Committee is particularly supportive of the third proposed priority, which highlights the importance of finding ways, where appropriate, to simplify the guidelines. Beyond that general observation, we simply urge the Commission to bear in mind the limited resources of the judiciary—including the courts and the probation and pretrial services offices—during these times of heightened budgetary constraints. Consistent with this concern, we offer the following particular input on the second proposed priority, which focuses on: Promotion of court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs by expanding the availability of information and organic documents pertaining to existing programs ( e.g. , Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence Alternatives (CASA) Program, Special Options Services (SOS) Program) through the Commission’s website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, implementing, and assessing such programs. As a preliminary matter, it is not entirely clear (1) whether the priority merely seeks to promote access to additional information regarding diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs, leaving it to the courts and probation offices to assess whether and when these programs are best and most efficiently deployed, or (2) whether it is intended to express a preference for increased use of these programs more generally. To the extent the priority is focused on the former, the Committee strongly supports any effort to establish a clearinghouse or other forum for exchanging ideas, best practices, and information about these court-sponsored diversion and alternatives programs. Such a clearinghouse could help fill a gap in the existing informational resources available. 3However, to the extent the priority is intended to “promote” or to place the Commission’s imprimatur on the various diversion and alternative programs set up by individual federal courts, 2 JCUS-MAR 2005, p.15. 3 The Commission’s website includes in its mission statement a purpose to “collect, analyze, research, and distribute a broad array of information on federal crime and sentencing issues, serving as an information resource for Congress, the executive branch, the courts, criminal justice practitioners, the academic community, and the public.” Serving as a clearinghouse for information about these programs would appear to fit within that description. Honorable Carlton W. Reeves Page 3 August 1, 2023 

3

the Committee urges the Commission to undertake broader conversations before taking any action. To start, these programs take a host of different forms, which are more or less resource intensive, which address different problems and concerns, and which may prove more or less effective in addressing the goals of sentencing and the positive reentry of those convicted of crimes. More generally, the “promotion of court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs” will likely require the expenditure of more time and resources by court staff and by pretrial and probation office personnel and, correspondingly, could pull scarce resources away from other programs. To be clear, the Judicial Conference is supportive of judicial discretion in sentencing, including the flexibility afforded by diversion and alternatives to imprisonment. 4 Our Committee can also attest, based on members’ personal experiences and anecdotal reports, that judges who participate in these programs often support their continued use. But rather than categorically promoting the use of these programs, which operate in such disparate ways, we urge the Commission to encourage further research into the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of these programs. The variety of existing programs and the innovations that courts continue to undertake should provide excellent opportunities for further study, and we support efforts to investigate which approaches produce the best results in the most cost-effective manner. The Commission states in its Federal Register notice that, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 994(g), “it intends to consider the issue of reducing costs of incarceration and overcapacity of prisons, to the extent it is relevant to any identified priority.” Although the Criminal Law Committee recognizes the importance of considering the budget and capacity of the Bureau of Prisons, it is necessary to pay similar attention to the limited resources of the courts and the pretrial and probation services system. Given current budgetary restraints, every new program requires a tradeoff and cuts to existing programs and activities. The best way to ensure that any such tradeoffs are worth the cost is to conduct the research necessary to evaluate the tangible and intangible benefits of the variety of court-sponsored programs. 

Conclusion 

The Committee appreciates the work of the Commission and the opportunity to comment on this ambitious list of proposed priorities for the 2023-24 amendment cycle. The Committee members look forward to working with the Commission to pursue initiatives that will improve the overall effectiveness of the sentencing guidelines and the fair administration of criminal justice. We remain available to assist in any way we can. Respectfully submitted, Randolph D. Moss, Chair 

cc: Hon. Roslynn R. Mauskopf     

> 4See, e.g., JCUS-SEP 17, p. 11. See also JCUS-SEP 15, pp. 12-13; JCUS-SEP 95, p. 47. 6/16/2023 15:04 PM

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

District Judge Stephen Bough, Missouri, Western 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs

# Comments: 

I would strongly urge the USSC to look at a host of specialty courts. State court systems have led the charge of problem-solving courts such as veterans courts, trauma courts, drug courts, domestic violence courts, etc. Our current system is ineffective at preventing recidivism and is horribly inexpensive and locks up too large of a percentage of our population. Specialty courts do a better job on recidivism and cost. The guidelines should be amended to encourage the referral to a problem solving court for lower-level defendants. 

> Submitted on: June 16, 2023

Building a Successful Team in a Problem -Solving Court 1–

The Western District of Missouri Model 

By: Carie Allen, Stephen Bough, Lajuana Counts, Arthur Diaz, Jeffery McCarther, Katie 

Meister, and James Parker 

Problem -solving courts work. We know that reentry programs and intensive supervision 

programs like drug courts are effective alternatives to incarceration that reduce recidivism. For 

example, the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri’s Reentry Court 

has an 85.7% success rate for graduates, meaning they complete their term of supervised release 

without any new charges. 2 A reduction of recidivism means hefty savings of tax -payer dollars. 

More importantly, successf ul problem -solving courts mean people engage in their communities, 

raise families, work productive jobs, and pay taxes. Politicians of all stripes have figured out that 

simply incarcerating drug addicts doesn’t work: “The incarceration level that we’re see ing – we 

can’t keep doing that. Locking them up is not the answer.” – Missouri Governor Mike Parson 

(R) 3 Courts and legislators and executive branches around the country are increasingly turning 

to problem solving courts to address the trauma, addiction s, and behaviors that underly the 

criminal behavior.  

> 1

The model used in the Western District of Missouri was created in 2010 with the help and input from mostly state 

drug courts, most importantly the drug court in Jackson County, Missouri. We didn’t create this program; it was 

simply adapted to fit our Cou rt. Judge Ortrie D. Smith and Judge John T. Maughmer successfully guided this 

program until 2015 when Judge Bough took over as the judicial team member . The credit for our success lies with 

all the team members (probation, employees, US Attorneys, Publi c Defenders, counselors, and judges) who have 

led , cared, celebrated, and cried for the last 13 years.  

> 2

Reentry Court , U.S. COURTS FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI , https://www.mow.uscourts.gov/reentry -court 

(last visited Jan. 31, 2023). Our comparato rs are individuals who were invited to participate in Reentry court but 

turned us down. We are enormously proud of our graduates.  

> 3

Celisa Calacal, Missouri Governor Parson Signs Drug Treatment Court Bill Into Law , KCUR 89.3 , (Oct. 24, 2018), 

https://ww w.kcur.org/government/2018 -10 -24/missouri -governor -parson -signs -drug -treatment -court -bill -into -

la w/. A one size fits all approach won’t work. The team of the Western District of Missouri 

Reentry Court is providing a hopefully interesting look inside how we function. We are not 

perfect and even after 13 years , experience continues to teach us lessons. Section one of this 

article gives a brief background on our Reentry Program. Section two allows each member of 

the team to discuss their role and what they get out of participating in our specialty cou rt. Each 

member of the team – A) Judge, B) Probation Office , C) Federal Public Defender, and D) U .S.

Attorney are equal partners in our program. Each member has veto power over who gets invited 

to participate in the program Other key members include E) a Resource Specialist (a member of 

the probation office) and F) Mental Health Counselor (contracted from an outside agency) .

Section three concludes with some random advice for people who are looking to add a problem -

solving court. 

I. Western District of Missouri’s Reentry Program 

To understand the Western District of Missouri’s Reentry Court, some discussion of 

specialty courts may be helpful. The first drug court was created in Miami, Florida in 1989, and 

the second was e stablished in 1993 in Jackson County, Missouri, by former Senator Claire 

McCaskill. 4 Specialty programs have since expanded to address a host of societal ills, including 

drug courts, problem -solving courts, veterans’ courts, and youthful offender courts. Specialty 

courts have fallen into two categories: (1) “back -end” programs which off enders participate in       

> 4Drug Court ,JACKSON CTY .COMBAT ,https://www.jacksoncountycombat.com/168/Drug -Court (last visited Jan. 31,
> 2023).

after serving a term of imprisonment; or (2) “front -end” or no -entry programs where an 

individual typically doesn’t go to prison. 5

Since their creation, there has been an explosion of alternative courts across state court 

systems. For example, Minnesota has developed a variety of treatment courts, including an 

Adult Drug Court, DWI Court, Family Dependency Treatment Court, Juvenile Drug Court, 

Mental Health Court, and Veterans Court. 6 Missouri Governor Mike Parson signed bills 

ex panding drug treatment courts to every county in Missouri and creating veteran’s treatment 

courts, allowing for diversion programs for military members or veterans dealing with substance 

abuse or mental health conditions. 7 The BRIDGE program in the Unite d States District of South 

Carolina was one of the first alternative -to -incarceration drug court programs. Over six years, 

the program saved taxpayers $3.5 million. 8 Of the 43 graduates during that time, only five of 

them had additional encounters with the law – an 89% success rate! Judge Brucie Hendricks 

runs the South Carolina program and noted “y ou need to get to the root of the problem – the 

substance abuse disorder – or you will have recidivism.” 9 In Kansas City, Missouri, municipal 

court Chief J udge Courtney Wachal developed a Domestic Violence Court that “seeks to  

> 5

WILLIAM H. PRYOR , JR. ET AL ., U.S. SENTENCING COMM ’N, FEDERAL ALTERNATIVE -TO -INCARCERATION COURT PROGRAMS at 6 –7

(September 2017), https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research -and -publications/research -

publications/2017/20170928_alternatives.pdf . 

> 6

Treatment Courts , MINNESOTA JUDICIAL BRANCH , https://www.mncourts.gov/Help -Topics/DrugCourts.aspx (last 

visited Jan. 31, 2023).  

> 7

Alisa Nelson, Parson Signs Bill to Create Veterans’ Treatment Courts in Missouri , MISSOURINET (July 10, 2019), 

https://www.missourinet.com/2019/ 07/10/parson -signs -bill -to -create -veterans -treatment -courts -in -missouri/ . 

> 8

The Honorable Judge Bruce Howe Hendricks, U.S. Dist. Ct. for the Dist. Of S.C., Written Statement to U.S. 

Sentencing Commission – Drug Courts (Mar. 2, 2017), https://www.ussc.gov/s ites/default/files/pdf/amendment -

process/public -hearings -and -meetings/20170418/Hendricks.pdf . 

> 9

E-mail from the Honorable Judge Bruce Howe Hendricks, U.S. Dist. Ct. for the Dist. of SC, to the Honorable Judge 

Stephen Bough, U.S. Dist. Ct. for the W. Dist. of Mo. (Feb. 3, 2023) (on file with author). improve victim safety and hold offenders accountable through increased supervision and a 

holistic approach towards offender needs.” 10 

While there are important distinctions between R eentry courts, the reality is that each 

program’s intensive supervision and lack of adversarial approach results in successful avoidance 

of recidivism. 11 These alternative courts are not without critics “who contend that they are not 

effective in treating addiction and reducing recidivism, wrongly reduce the punishment of 

culpable offenders for their volitional conduct, or wrongly criminalize drug addicts rather than 

genuinely treat them.” 12 However, the Department of Justice, National Institute of Justic e, 

reports that “in an unprecedented longitudinal study that accumulated recidivism and cost 

analyses of drug court cohorts over 10 years, NIJ researchers found that drug courts may lower 

recidivism rates (re -arrests) and significantly lower costs .” 13 

The Western District of Missouri’s Reentry Court is an example of an extremely 

intensive back -end supervision program. Graduation from the program results in a substantial 

reduction of the term of supervised release and, hopefully, a wealth of tools and s kills to avoid 

re -offending. Like other courts, we have a four -phase program that usually takes between one 

year to 18 months to complete. 14 Each of the four phases has different requirements for 

completion: 

Phase I: Attend five bi -weekly meetings, obta in employment, pass drug and 

alcohol testing for thirty -five days, and present a historical life inventory;                             

> 10 Domestic Violence Brochure ,KANSAS CITY MUNICIPAL DOMESTIC VIOLENCE COURT ,
> https://www.kcmo.gov/home/showpublisheddocument/2472/637454368119570000 (last visited Jan. 31, 2023).
> 11 PRYOR ,JR.ET AL .,supra note 5, at 5 –7.
> 12 Id. at 8.
> 13 Do Drug Courts Work? Findings From Drug Court Research ,NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE (May 11, 2008)
> https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/do -drug -courts -work -findings -drug -court -research .
> 14 Reentry Court ,U.S. COURTS FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI ,https://www.mow.uscourts.gov/reentry -court
> (last visited Jan. 31, 2023).

Phase II: Attend eight bi -weekly meetings, continue steady employment, pass 

drug and alcohol testing for forty -five days, and present a “comprehensi ve relapse 

prevention plan;” 

Phase III: Attend monthly meetings, maintain steady employment, be 

successful in substance abuse treatment, pass drug tests for sixty days, and 

participate in pro -social activities; 

Phase IV: Attend monthly meetings, maintain s teady employment, complete 

twenty -five hours of community service, pass drug tests for 133 days, and present 

a graduation speech. 15 

For each week of compliance, participants receive one week of credit towards their term 

of supervised release. If a partici pant violates any requirement (i.e., tests positive for a 

controlled substance) during a week, they may face additional sanctions, such as location 

monitoring or more counseling. Continued violations can result in removal from the program. 

Throughout the program, participants are treated by outside providers, subject to unannounced 

home and work visits from their probation officers, and rewarded with gift cards, praise, and 

fewer restrictions. 16 At the end of the program there is a party, gift card, grad uation plaque, 

picture with the judge, graduation speeches, and an order reducing the term of supervised 

release. 

II. Reentry Team Perspectives 

Each member of our team has been on reentry court for years. We have seen folks 

graduate, buy homes, reunite with families, and pursue their dreams. We have seen people fail,     

> 15 U.S. Courts for the Western District of Missouri ,A Guide to Reentry Court Program at 11 –14,
> https://www.mow.uscourts.gov/sites/mow/files/ Reentry CourtGuide.pdf .
> 16 Id.

relapse and get treatment, then relapse again , and get kicked out of the program . The heart 

breaks hurt more, and the hallelujahs are more joyful in reentry court . The team has bonded and 

the traditional adversarial roles mostly melt away during the program. Outside of the program 

the U .S. Attorney goes back to trying criminal cases, the Public Defender keeps filing motions to 

suppress, th e probation office keeps doing investigations, and the judge s keep arraigning 

defendants and sentencing people to prison. As mentioned before, graduation s from reentry 

court are especially meaningful, mostly because of the graduation speeches. We start o ff with 

each member of the team affirming the graduate in some way, then the graduate orally delivers a 

speech. Each person’s personality shows in different ways, but a recent graduate, Timothy 

Farmer, 17 shined. His introductions and affirmations of each team member were heartwarming 

and serve to introduce each section below. 

A. Judge – Stephen R. Bough & Lajuana Counts – Building a Team and Losing the 

Adversarial Role 

So last but not least I would like to thank Judge Counts for being a part of this 

program. You always have such a glow when talking to us about what’s next for us. 

So , thank you for that. And then you got Judge Bough, he will have you up thinking 

the night before on what positive thoughts 18 you are going to give him and what he 

has l ined up for you next. With that being said, now it’s my turn to have something 

lined up for him. I was told by Judge Bough that when I was done with this program 

that he would take me to lunch or dinner so I will be waiting on his call .

Judge Lajuana Counts 

Changing the trajectory of someone’s life is what the Western District of Missouri’s re -

entry court is all about. Being a part of the team is one of the most rewarding aspects of our     

> 17 Mr. Farmer gave us permission to publish his graduati on speech.
> 18 Every session involves calling each participant up to the podium. The first question is always the same :“Tell me
> something positive.”

lives. It is quite amazing to see the metamorphosis from anxiety to hesitancy to resolution to 

thankfulness in the participants in our re -entry program. It is not an easy feat to recover from a 

serious life -changing mishap within the legal system, but the journey with the assistance of the 

re -entry team, gives the men and women an opportunity to change the paths of their lives. It’s 

simply amazing and so very gratifying to see the growth and satisfaction as someone graduates 

from the program. I was fortunate to become a part of this team when I started my car eer on the 

bench as a Magistrate Judge in 2018. When Judge Bough cannot be there, then I preside over the 

re -entry sessions. Otherwise, I am another voice and am able to add to the conversation as we 

celebrate the successes and navigate through the chall enges that each participant experiences. 

We each rely upon our life experiences and backgrounds, both personally and professionally, to 

provide a holistic approach. 

From my perspective, the tone for our program is set by the district judge, which 

permea tes throughout the entire team. Each district judge, as well as each team member, from 

the inception of this program has poured their heart and soul, as well as their outside resources, 

into giving each of the participants all of the tools needed to navig ate through our program. Our 

team’s actions have shown each and every participant that we have a genuine vested interest in 

providing them every possible resource available – better paying jobs, decent affordable housing, 

educational opportunities, and me ntal and physical health support. The only thing that our team 

can’t do is make a participant change – we’ve evidenced them wanting to change and actually 

making that decision to change throughout our program as we’ve held them accountable for their 

actio ns and treated them with respect, concern, and dignity. They are not numbers or statistics, 

they are human beings. This program is not a “one size fits all” type of approach. We have a general game plan, 

but what we’ve learned over the years is to focus on each participants’ individual needs. Our 

purpose is to be accessible, be straight -forward, and be reliable. Consistency between, with, and 

among all of the re -entry team is crucial to the success of each participant. 

Judge Stephen R. Bough 

I inherited a smooth running, well -staffed program that got great results. My job is to 

simply keep the car pointed in the right direction. Judge Ortrie Smith and Judge John Maughmer 

built the Reentry program along with countless Probation Officers, U.S. Attorneys, Public 

Defenders, and mental health providers. Like Judge Counts mentioned, those judges set the tone. 

Judges Smith and Maughmer were kind, gracious, and humorous men. They never took 

themselves seriously, but they did take pursuing justice as a high calling. These two judges were 

respectful and welcoming. When coming back to Reentry to watch folks graduate, they still 

greet everyone with a huge smile and a warm handshake. This approach is one of the many 

reasons for the program’s success. Imagine the trauma of committing a crime, being prosecuted, 

being found guilty (plea or otherwise), and then being sentenced to the Bureau of Prisons. Now, 

you are being asked to return twice a month to the same courthouse where you were sentenced. 

The normal response is a polite “no, thank you.” Of the many things I learned from these 

gentlemen, be kind. Every participant is greeted the same way with a request to “tell me 

something positive.” I tell them we want them to graduate, that I understand it will take a full 

phase for them to trust me, and that I am proud that they joined us. No one expects a participant 

to be able to continually flout the rules, use drugs, or skip appointments. Everyone deserves a 

second chance in life and Reentry when they are being honest. In short, Judges Smith and Maughmer showed me how to apply the golden rule to people in Reentry Court and I am grateful 

for the education .

B. Probation – Katie Meister – Probation Role and being Faithful to the Rules 

I first heard ab out the REC (Reentry) program from Katie. She gave me her pitch 

and I told her I would think on it. Then the next thing you know here comes smooth 

talking Tony Wheatley (another probation officer on our team). So , Katie, I would 

like to personally thank you for letting me be a part of this program. The thing that 

got me is they have someone for everything that you need .

As the Program Specialist for the U.S. Probation Office, developing strategies and 

programs that grow our district is a part of my core responsibilities. I oversee cases for our 

district that are in the Reentry Phase, at the Residential Reentry Center (RRC ). Individuals 

returning to the community from incarceration are generally afforded a period of transition time 

at the RRC as part of their custody sentence. I become involved in the case during this 

timeframe, and I am the first point of contact for refer ral to the Reentry Court (REC) program. 

My role as a specialty court team member is mostly administrative. I track referrals, data, 

historical context, and speak for the overall fidelity of the program from an evidence -based 

perspective. Specialty courts a llow team members from different agencies to view each other 

from a different viewpoint, one that is less adversarial and more collaboratively. Listening to 

varying viewpoints is an important part of the process, while staying true to the overall mission 

of the program. Moving forward, our district is moving less toward the Reentry Court model and 

focusing more on expanding our pre -trial treatment court. The treatment court model allows us to 

expand the types of cases we accept, be more inclusive toward all types of treatment needs 

(including trauma) and be very specific about services. We are excited to develop this program in 

2023 and have several new participants on the cusp of being admitted to the program. Successful completion of the treatment court ul timately results in the avoidance of incarceration for each 

individual and is a two -year, intensive process. Our office is not abandoning our mission to aid 

individuals in successful reentry, we are shifting our focus to adapt to the changes in legislation 

and in consideration of time and resources for the agencies that are involved in these programs. It 

is a very exciting time for our district as we venture toward growth of our treatment court, and 

we are so grateful to work for a district that allows us t o develop programs that are driven by our 

desire to positively impact the lives of the participants. 

C. Public Defender - Carie Allen – Support of the Participants as a Legal Advocate 

Mr. Farmer didn’t write anything about the Public Defender, Carie Allen, b ecause he 

went through our program perfectly. He didn’t have any issues, so Ms. Allen didn’t 

have to use her legal talents. 

Before going to law school, I always thought I wanted to be a social worker. As I was 

finishing undergrad, I was talked into goi ng to law school by an attorney I did some volunteer 

work with. He assured me it was an excellent advanced degree, and I absolutely did not have to 

be a lawyer. I took the bait. Twenty -one years ago, I started my first job as a lawyer - a trial 

lawyer with the Missouri State Public Defender system. When I heard that first jury declare my 

client “not guilty,” I was hooked. 

All these years later, I am still a trial attorney, now with the Federal Public Defender. My 

role as a trial lawyer is one of zealous ad vocacy. I fight for my clients whether that means going 

to trial (and occasionally getting that illusive “not guilty”) or, more often, fighting for a lower 

sentence. 

When I started at the Federal Defender, I would hear the assigned attorney talk about 

go ing to Reentry. I had no understanding of this mysterious court. But, as time went on, I went to some sessions, and learned that it was a team of people all there to help participants succeed after 

prison. A little over four years ago, I volunteered to be the Reentry attorney from the Federal 

Defender office. While there is always an aspect of social work in my job, twice a month, I now 

get to get my social worker fix. 

Unlike my role as a trial attorney, Reentry is rarely adversarial. There are no “not gu iltys” 

in Reentry Court. The primary goal is to be a team. And the team tries to do everything we can to 

do to lift the participants up. We all fight for them. And we all root for them. Often, we work 

together to come up with creative solutions for issues that the participants are going through. 

When a participant told us she was worried about her son, we encouraged her to sign him up for 

the Big Brothers program. We worked together to help a participant take care of warrants from 

traffic tickets that built up while he was in prison. We’ve rooted for many participants working 

towards their GEDs. Often, I am simply there as a cheerleader for people who need some 

cheering. 

The Reentry participants are still my clients . Unlike anyone else in that courtroom, I owe 

them the duty of confidentiality and zealous advocacy. This comes into play when someone is 

not sailing through the program; when they are accruing violations, when they are losing weeks, 

when they’ve encounter ed a legal problem. I’m typically the one who steps in. At the beginning 

of the program, I always introduce myself and let the participants know that I am their attorney. I 

give them my card with my cell phone number, and I make it very clear that they can call me 

confidentially. I only share with the rest of the team with their permission. 

Sometimes I play the role of the second counselor. Clients can call me to vent. They can 

tell me why they are frustrated and may want to drop out. I listen and I give t hem advice. Other 

times, they have received a violation. The most common one is positive tests for drugs or alcohol. And this is when I step into my role as confidential advocate. I advise them of what their 

best options are in the situation. I let them kn ow what the consequences will be. But, like in my 

typical trial work, my job is to advise, but not decide for them. 

Participants don’t always complete the program. On rare occasions, my client wants me 

to fight to stay in Reentry court, and that is what I do. More often, they have simply lost too 

many weeks, and cannot complete the program in the required time. In these cases, my clients 

know what is coming and understand that no amount of advocacy on my part can override the 

program’s rules. I am always the one that makes the call to let them know. As a rule, we don’t 

have them come to the next session to embarrass them by kicking them out in front of the other 

participants. I know this is appreciated. 

I remain their attorney even if they don’t get throu gh Reentry court. This may mean I 

have to go to court with them and fight for them in front of another judge if they accrue more 

violations. And it might mean they call me to ask me legal questions. And sometimes, they will 

still call me to just to vent. I always want my role to be the person they can 100% trust to always 

act in their best interest. 

I am the only person in the Reentry program that works with criminal defendants before 

their conviction and before they go to prison. I see how much success o ur participants have and 

how the team helps them get back on their feet. I have so many clients whom I know would 

benefit greatly from the program once they are released. Unfortunately, most don’t qualify 

because of their criminal history. If there is one place where I am not always a “team player” that 

is in my hope to greatly expand who qualifies for the program. Kansas City has a serious gun -

violence problem and one of the highest murder rates in the country. Giving as many people as possible the resourc es - and cheerleaders - to help them get their lives back on track makes a 

difference. It’s statistically proven to make a difference. 

Like most of the other people in our Reentry team, I live in Kansas City. I love my city. I 

don’t want my clients feel they must carry guns to feel safe. I don’t want to fear for their safety 

when they are released. I want them to have a team that can help them find a safer place to live, 

who can give them the counseling to foster positive relationships, and who can ultimately make 

sure they will never go back to prison. This is what Reentry court does and why I always look 

forward to walking into that cour troom twice a month. 

US Attorney – Jeffrey McCarther – “The prosecutor is not merely a case -processor 

but also a problem -solver responsible for considering broad goals of the criminal 

justice system.” 19 

D. With that being said, my first REC appearance had me ready for it to by my last. 

First and foremost, I was walking back in the courthouse that I told myself I would 

never be in again. And then who else but the man who recommended the time – Jeff 

McCarther. Not sure if this was ever talked about or not in the c ourtroom, but Jim 

(the mental health counselor) sure knew about that after our sessions. Jim had 

nothing but positive things to say about Jeff. So next thing I know me and Jeff are 

doing community service together. So that opened my eyes up to sow that I can’t be 

hateful of someone just doing their job when I was the one doing wrong. So, Jeff, I 

just want to tell you thank you for being part of this program. You helped me to see 

the federal system from a different view and perspective. 

The role of the criminal prosecutor in any given case typically ends at a defendant’s 

sentencing hearing. Rarely, if ever, would a prosecutor call any sentencing hearing a “joyful” 

endeavor. At sentencing hearings, prosecutors must earnestly and dispassionately advocat e for an   

> 19 American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Standards, Prosecution Function (4 th edition 2017), Standard
> 3-1.2(f).

outcome that best serves the interests of justice. Often, that outcome is a term of imprisonment. 

For the defendant and their family, it’s a somber occasion. At the conclusion of the hearing, the 

prosecutor closes the case and moves on to other matters – hoping, perhaps naively sometimes, 

that at the conclusion of the term of imprisonment, the defendant will have emerged reformed, 

ready to commit themself to pursuing a purposeful and lawful life. But, outside of a show cause 

or revocation heari ng for violations committed while on supervised release after serving a term of 

imprisonment – which would mean things have not gone well – a prosecutor would rarely have 

any idea how any defendant fares post -incarceration. The ambit of post -incarceration supervision 

lies exclusively with the United States Probation Office, and there is no realistic opening for the 

prosecutor to step in. Reentry Court, however, allows for a window. 

When I was first introduced to Reentry Court in 2015, I admit I was confused by the role 

of the United States Attorney’s Office. The program was a post -incarceration, enhanced -

supervision program, after all. Where does a prosecutor fit? After attending my first sessions of 

Reentry Court, my concerns were assuaged. The role of the United States Attorney’s Office is to 

discuss, consider, advise, and work with all the partners in the program with the joint goal that the 

participants in the program succeed – for themselves and society. It can’t be over -stated enough, 

the broad goal of the criminal justice system must be, for all participants in that system, that 

individuals reentering society post -incarceration become the absolute best person for which they 

are capable. With that premise central to Reentry Court, we ta ke off our “adversarial hats” as we 

walk through the doors. Absent a discrete circumstance wherein a participant needs to discuss 

legal issues with the public defender, over the weeks and months of the program, all of the program 

partners are privy to the same information about a participant – the good and the bad. Invariably, 

in our discussion for any given participant, I am, for instance, far closer to the public defender on “next steps” than we are apart from one another. All the team members experien ce disappointment 

when a participant fails, and we all experience joy and fulfillment when a participant betters 

themselves and reaches the zenith of graduation from the program. 

As the prosecutor on the team, however, I am highly cognizant of what I rep resent to a 

Reentry Court participant. Likely, each participant’s last interaction with the United States 

Attorney’s Office in court was where a prosecutor was attempting to persuade a judge to 

incarcerate them for a longer period of time than the partici pant was hoping for. For that reason, 

I understand that I’m probably the last person each participant wants to see in court – especially 

for those I personally prosecuted. When a participant begins the program, I can never be certain 

whether I’m viewed b y the participant as someone in their corner hoping all goes well in their life, 

an adversary anticipating a tumble backwards into an indictment, or something in -between. 

Regardless of the thought, it’s important that the United States Attorney’s Office i s part of the 

program, and for the participants to see, week after week, and month after month, that even the 

prosecutor (who may have recommended their sentence of incarceration) has a vested and genuine 

interest in seeing them succeed. 

E. Resource Specialis t – Arthur Diaz - Connecting Client to Employment, Educational, 

Supportive Service and Financial Literacy Resources 

They have the answer for everything or at least can point you in the right direction. 

Without even already knowing I had Mr. Diaz, he was trying to get me a GED and 

looking for me a job. Soon as I got in the program, I surprised him that I already had 

a GED and a job, but he had been around smooth -talking Tony too long so of course 

he talks me into doing a job resume anyway. So, thank you for that, Mr. Diaz. 

As the Community Resource Specialist for the U.S. Probation Office, I support the efforts 

of the supervising officers in helping our offenders’ transition into the co mmunity. 

Responsibilities include: 

• Assisting offenders in finding employment and/or career training opportunities. • Referring offenders to agencies for the provision of supportive services. 

• Establishing and maintaining relationships with businesses and s ocial service providers 

in the Kansas City metro area. 

• Updating supervising officers on events and programs that could benefit our offenders. 

My primary role in the Specialty Court is to provide employment and resource assistance 

thereby increasing the ch ances of a participant’s successful completion of the program. 

However, there are times when more intensive coaching or support is required to address a 

participant with a problem. 

Examples include: 

• Assisting a participant who was struggling to mainta in employment by holding “de -

briefing” sessions after every shift for two weeks thus providing the opportunity to 

address issues that occurred in previous jobs. 

• Providing referral to colleague at Legal Aid to help a participant who was confused about 

a pos sible sanction regarding his Social Security benefits. 

• Advocating for a participant who needed help in securing Federal funds to enroll in CDL 

training class. 

• Referring two participants to GED preparation classes and coordinating efforts with 

agency’s sta ff. 

I also take part in staffing sessions to review the progress of those in the program. 

F. Mental Health Counselor - Jim Parker - Breaking Down Barriers to Personal Growth 

and Change 

With that being said, who was all the crying and complaining to other than Jim. So 

learned to know me more than anyone in the program. He talked me into staying in 

the program numerous times. So , thank you for that, even though at the time I might 

had thought you was wrong but by the time I for to the house I realiz ed you were 

right. So , I am glad that I was able to meet you and work with you in this program. 

You are a very special man so thank you for your services. 

Professional counseling is a professional relationship that empowers diverse individuals, 

famili es, and groups to accomplish mental health, wellness, education, and career goals. 

Counselors work with clients on strategies to overcome obstacles and personal challenges that they are facing. 20 There are not many people in the world who seek out the se rvices of a 

counselor when everything in their lives is going great. To the contrary, people seek the services 

of a counselor when they have thoughts, emotions, or behaviors that are out of control, effecting 

their relationships and sense of well -being. Some clients bring goals or problems to the 

counseling sessions, while some are just there to fulfill the requirement of the program (Just 

checking the box). Some are willing to identify areas in their lives which need change, and some 

are not. The couns elor for the Reentry Court Program does not judge clients, but meets them 

where they are, being of maximum service to the client. 

The counselor in the Reentry Court Program spends a minimum of 18 hours with the 

client during their time in the program, which is more contact than any other member of the 

team, except for the probation officer. A barrier to overcome is the client’s belief that the 

counselor will report everything that is said in counseling sessions to the probation officer. 

Clients have the right to confidentiality and the counselor has an ethical duty to protect that 

confidentiality. All clients sign a release of information to allow the counselor to speak to the 

probation officer and the Court for progress reports. The counselor will provide the least amount 

of detail on the progress in treatment to protect the client’s confidentiality. Once the client 

understands this, they are much more likely to open to the counseling process and the real work 

begins. If a client becomes committed to the process, they can achieve their goals and experience 

more personal growth than they thought possible. 

The counselor and probation officer work very closely together. I would speak to the 

probation officer at least once per week to discuss client s’ progress in counseling. Then there      

> 20 What is Professional Counseling .American Counseling Ass’n., https://www.counseling.org/aca -
> community/learn -aboutcounseling/what -is -counseling (last visited May 21, 2023)

were the times when I would receive a phone call first thing Monday morning from the probation 

officer. Those phone calls were rarely to provide a positive report on a client. Those calls did 

provide me with a topic to address with the client. This type of sharing of information about a 

client is something a “normal” counselor does not get. A “normal” counselor does not receive a 

call to inform them their client relapsed with a substance or is experiencing anxiety. These 

Monday morning phone calls were a source of information which provided topics to address in 

the next counseling session and goals to work toward. 

I was the counselor for Reentry Court from 2019 to 2022. It was an honor to work with 

the Reentry Court team, but especially to clients in the program. The work I did with the clients 

was very difficult at times, but also very rewarding. It was difficu lt to work with a client who 

would fight the therapeutic process. These clients would often only speak of surface level issues 

while saying “everything is okay” or “I’m fine. Everything’s fine.” More than once, a client 

who did this would not make any c hanges in their lives, leading to bending, then breaking the 

rules of the program. It was painful when the client would break the rules one too many times, 

so they were dismissed from the program. Luckily, the painful times are overshadowed by the 

positi ve, rewarding times with clients. Watching a client change from someone who is 

apprehensive to speaking to a counselor to someone who is opening up, speaking about their 

feelings and processing difficulties in their life, is the reason counselors do what we do. 

III. Recommendations and Conclusion 

If there can ever be an agreement among all Americans, surely it is the criminal justice 

system is not working. The United States has the most expensive system, the highest recidivism 

rate, and incarcerate s the highest percentage of our population. This is not the American exceptionalism we expect. There is an obvious solution – problem -solving courts are cheaper 

and have improved recidivism rates. Each level of the criminal justice system needs to rethi nk 

the reluctance to fully embrace these innovations. 

What is clear to all of us in the justice system is that one size does not fit all. Each 

human, each child, and each defendant come to a situation with different experiences, limits, and 

skills. Pro blem solving courts try to take a person where they are at and, if they are willing, go 

on a new path. 

For the problem -solving court to work, all the parties to the program need to be on the 

same page. For judges, that means less adversarial or confront ational. For public defenders, 

modify the way they think of advocate role while respecting attorney client privilege. 

Prosecutors need the courage to advocate for success in the various programs, not just 

incarceration. Probation Officers have always tr ied to get people the help they need within the 

rules; welcome a collaborative approach. As with any team, respect and support for other 

members is vital. And when the graduation cake is sliced, generously partake! 2

## Commission can only add to the long-term stability and increased effectiveness of such programs that will benefit both participants and program teams alike. 

## I should note here that all stakeholder agencies have committed to the continued development of the programs in our District, through the assignment of dedicated personnel and by providing other supportive services. The Department of Justice has encouraged local United States Attorneys to engage in these alternative programs. Our United States Attorney’s Office has been a partner since CASA’s inception. The Office of the Federal Public Defender, with the support of the Defender Services Office of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts, has also committed personnel and other client supportive services (such as social workers) to CASA. The United States Probation and Pretrial Services Office has consistently shouldered much of the participants’ treatment expenses, as well as the assignment of specialized personnel. The District Court continues to foster our alternative programs, having established dedicated court dockets, and our judicial officers routinely refer cases to these collaborative courts. Together, we also have identified a number of community partners for the benefit of our program participants. With that said, however, there remains much room for a coordinated and focused discussion both within and between these stakeholder offices for the institutional acceptance, growth, and administration of such programs. 

## At last count, the Federal Judicial Center currently lists no less than 146 “problem-solving” courts – 92 post-conviction, 40 pre-trial and 14 hybrid programs, including a handful of mental health and veteran treatment courts. These numbers indicate that there are likely hundreds of federal court judges, prosecutors, defenders, probation officers and other affiliated team members combined that are engaged in diversion and/or alternatives-to-incarceration programs throughout the country. Yet, we cannot easily identify our respective colleagues nor effectively communicate amongst these programs as we do not have a national platform in which to do so. Surely, all of our programs will benefit from an organizing authority that can assist with the development, implementation, and assessment of alternative, court-sponsored programs, and where we may access resources, receive training, and evaluate the nature of our interventions. 

## At the core of many, if not most, of this nation’s collaborative courts we find that the informed application of evidence-based practices is critical to long-term success. As such, this calls upon jurists, legal practitioners, supervision officers, and others to better understand and address a participant’s behavioral health needs, including substance use and mental disorders. This is not an easy task for any of our 3

## stakeholders, particularly without focused training and the ready availability of relevant resources. 

## With the development of state drug courts in 1989, a handful of key national organizations were formed to provide necessary guidance, training, and funding for these innovative court programs. The non-profit National Association of Drug Court Professionals (recently rebranded as All Rise,  https://allrise.org ), for example, has spent the last 30 years in treatment court research, development of comprehensive training programs, and the publication of related materials. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration (SAMHSA,  https://samhsa.gov ) is an excellent example of a long-standing government organization with proven expertise and programmatic assistance. These, and other experienced public and private organizations, are dedicated to assisting with the faithful application of therapeutic treatment models for better outcomes for affected individuals involved in the criminal justice system. While some of these resources are available to our federal programs on a limited basis, the reality is that most of their efforts – including the granting of federal funds – are provided to state courts given the budget restrictions that we face as federal agencies funded by Congress and the fact that we have no collective national policy guiding our diversion or ATI efforts. 

## In my previous letter to the Commission dated March 13, 2023, you will recall that our program recommended “an expedited descriptive survey of the practices of ATI courts. . . .” We continue to believe that programs like CASA, POP, SOS and others will become more effective with the compilation of a national directory of such programs, sharing written overviews, characteristics of the participants that are served, and the characteristics of the program itself (from admission criteria to post-completion alumni data). As this information is gathered, we may look for commonalities, identify successful best practices, address specific challenges that we face, and turn to developing appropriate standards and training modules for the development, implementation, and assessment of our federal programs. Indeed, a national collaborative effort amongst all stakeholders is needed, and the Commission can certainly be instrumental to this process. 

## Expanding the Availability of Information and Organic Documents through the Commission’s Website 

## In addition to collecting descriptive information on our federal programs, we should include a needs assessment component to any such survey. By allowing each program to list what administrative, programmatic, and fiscal resources are necessary, we will identify specific items for continued team development, program 4

## improvement, and participant success. This, in turn, should lead us to further explore prospective policy initiatives, including applicable Guidelines Manual amendments and commentary as previously suggested to the Commission. 

## The proposed leadership of the Commission as a national repository of program information and organic documents is a timely and welcomed prospect. This is true for a few reasons: it will signal that this important federal sentencing authority believes that diversion and ATI programs now merit a more serious examination and wide-spread application; it will serve as a focal point for all stakeholders to submit relevant program and research documentation and establish an organized, annotated bank of materials for any district interested in developing, implementing, and assessing such programs; and it will help form working partnerships with organizations such as All Rise , SAMHSA, the National Drug Court Resource Center ( https://ndcrc.org/ ), the Council of State Governments Justice Center ( https://csgjusticecenter.org/ ), the United States DOJ Office of Justice Programs and their related divisions ( https://nij.ojp.gov/library/publications/drug-courts ), and several others that have developed an expertise in diversion and ATI courts. The efforts of the Federal Judicial Center in this regard may also prove helpful to the development of this new national resource, as it has established a similar effort. 

## Proposing Workshops and Seminars on Best Practices for Developing, Implementing and Assessing Diversion and Alternative-to-Incarceration Programs 

## As stated above, treatment programs by design should rely heavily upon behavioral health principles on which we, as judges and other legal professionals, are simply not well trained. We need to partner with some of the recognized experts in this field. In addition to those organizations that are listed above, there are others that may assist our efforts in understanding and effectively applying these basic principles in a forensic setting – including addiction, mental health, and co-occurring and other neurological issues. 

## A quick glance at some of the All Rise training programs, for example, shows that they not only address these issues based upon years of research, but also engage in team and role-specific training programs for each stakeholder (https://allrise.org/about/division/treatment-court-institute/ ). In addition, the Hazelden Betty Ford Foundation has an extensive series of workbooks, curriculum models, and other training materials which can prove to be very helpful for day-to-day participant support ( https://www.hazelden.org/store/publicpage/substance-use-5

## disorders-and-mental-health ). While the Commission and collaborative court teams would tailor a program to fit the generic needs as well as nuances of any district, we need not “reinvent the wheel” when there are a good number of already proven resources addressing the therapeutic needs of participants. 

## We encourage the Commission to develop its own series of workshops and seminars, either as stand-alone events or in conjunction with other stakeholder programs. The Training Division of the Defender Services Office, as well as The Federal Judicial Center, for example, have a number of national seminars on various related topics throughout the year. The Commission, also engaged in annual training, reports and other materials, can effectively dedicate such an event to diversion and ATI programs and/or prepare other teaching materials such as webinars and materials written specifically for our federal audiences. 

## I understand that these suggested efforts take time and resources to effectively plan and produce. In addition to internal staff, I believe that the Commission may call upon Temporary Duty candidates from various agencies to assist with these projects. However you decide to proceed will only bring additional recognition and support for these life-changing programs. On behalf of our entire CASA Team in the Central District of California, I thank you and the Commission for your commitment and efforts and we look forward to working with you in the years to come. 

## Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions about these comments. 

## Sincerely, 

## Dolly M. Gee 6/16/2023 11:45 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Magistrate Judge Veronica Duffy, South Dakota 

# Topics: 

1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 3. Simplification/Structural Reform 4. Case Law Relating to Guideline Commentary 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 6. Youthful Offenders 7. Crime Legislation 8. Circuit Conflicts 9. Miscellaneous Guideline Application Issues 10. Research Topics 11. Other Suggested Priorities 

# Comments: 

Your areas of study are stated so generally that there really is no notice and an opportunity to comment. For example, which Guidelines provisions will you be examining and what about them has attracted your interest? Are you looking to increase penalties or decrease or some other change? 

Submitted on: June 16, 2023 U.S. Department of Justice 

Criminal Division  

> Office of Policy and Legislation Washington, D.C. 20530

July 31, 2023 

The Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, NE 

Suite 2-500, South Lobby 

Washington, DC 20002-8002 

Dear Judge Reeves: 

The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 requires the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice to submit to the Commission, at least annually, a report commenting on the operation of the Sentencing Guidelines, suggesting changes to the Guidelines, and otherwise assessing the Commission’s work. 1 We are pleased to submit this report pursuant to the Act. This report also responds to the Commission’s Notice of Proposed Priorities (“Priorities”) published last month in the Federal Register. 2

I. Structural Review of Federal Sentencing 

The Department of Justice fully supports the Commission’s decision to undertake a multi-year evaluation of whether “current sentencing, penal, and correctional practices are effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in the Sentencing Reform Act.” 3 Last year in our annual report to the Commission, we highlighted the President’s commitment to “rethinking the existing criminal justice system – whom we send to prison and for how long; how people are treated while incarcerated; how prepared they are to reenter society once they have served their time; and the racial inequities that lead to the disproportionate number of incarcerated Black and Brown people.” 4 We agree with the Commission that now is the time to examine federal sentencing as a system; to look at the fundamental architecture of federal           

> 128 U.S.C. § 994(o).
> 2U.S. SENT ’GCOMM ’N, Notice of proposed 2023-2024 priorities and request for comment, 88 Fed. Reg. 39907 (June 20, 2023), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/06/20/2023-12991/proposed-priorities-for-
> amendment-cycle .
> 3Id.
> 4Proclamation No. 10171, 86 Fed. Reg. 17689 (Apr. 6, 2021),
> https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/04/06/2021-07179/second-chance-month-2021 .

2

sentencing and the federal Sentencing Guidelines; and to recommend a path forward for federal sentencing for the next twenty-five years or more. 

The Commission has itself recognized the disconnect between the legal landscape created by the Supreme Court’s Sixth Amendment jurisprudence and the structure of the Guidelines, which was crafted in a different legal context based on different assumptions. 5 The complexity of the current guidelines system – with its numerous aggravating and mitigating factors requiring multifaceted legal and factual determinations – reflects a pre-Booker framework that now leads to unnecessary inefficiencies and gross disparities. The rigid structure of the Guidelines is ill-suited to the holistic analysis required by 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). It leads to extensive litigation at both the district and appellate court levels, often of marginal value in light of the § 3553 analysis to come. And the Commission’s own data has shown that the current sentencing structure has led to significant disparities, with some judges adhering closely to the Guidelines while others deviate from them considerably. 

Comprehensive reform will be a lengthy process and require extensive engagement with all federal criminal justice stakeholders. Nonetheless, we believe that this work is long overdue. Piecemeal reform has not adequately addressed the challenges facing federal sentencing. Structural reform – including simplification – is essential to achieving equal justice under law, improving public safety, and restoring public trust. 

We look forward to the work ahead and the extensive engagement it will entail. 

a. The Categorical Approach and the Career Offender Guideline 

We believe a comprehensive examination of the Guidelines will ultimately lead to better sentencing policy and also offer solutions to many of the difficult issues that the Commission has long heard about from stakeholders. One of those issues is the categorical approach to determining what constitutes a crime of violence and a controlled substance offense under the Guidelines. We join the chorus of judges, probation officers, and practitioners who urge the Commission to reform the categorical approach and career offender guideline. 

This Commission began considering this issue during the last amendment cycle, but it ultimately deferred action. While the Commission has received several different reform proposals, there is general agreement on the goals underlying reform: eliminate the unwarranted sentencing disparities resulting from application of the categorical approach and better identify repeat offenders who pose a significant threat to public safety. The application of the categorical approach to the Guidelines’ “crime of violence” and “controlled substance offense” definitions has resulted in extensive litigation and produced unwarranted disparities and nonsensical sentencing results. Changing the crime of violence definition could substantially reduce these disparities, permit sentencing courts to appropriately exercise their discretion in assessing the offense conduct underlying a prior conviction, provide appropriately enhanced penalties for                        

> 5See U.S. SENT ’GCOMM ’N,REPORT ON THE CONTINUING IMPACT OF UNITED STATES V .BOOKER ON FEDERAL SENTENCING (2012), https://www.ussc.gov/research/congressional-reports/2012-report-congress-continuing-impact-
> united-states-v-booker-federal-sentencing .

3

violent and dangerous offenders, and dramatically reduce the litigation burden. We remain eager to work with the Commission on these issues. 6

As the Department explained during the last amendment cycle, we also recognize the legitimate concerns about the severity levels associated with many recidivist provisions, including the career offender guideline. 7 Indeed, the Attorney General has encouraged prosecutors to recommend variances in certain career offender cases, acknowledging the increasing rate of below-guideline sentences in these cases. We hope as part of its review, the Commission will update its research on the career offender guideline and ultimately consider proposing legislation that will allow the Commission greater flexibility in setting penalties for repeat offenders under the Guidelines. 

b. The Validity of Guideline Commentary 

Another structural issue ripe for review is the validity of guideline commentary. As the Commission is well aware, recent appellate decisions have called into question the authoritativeness of guideline commentary, provisions that serve a critical role in interpreting and explaining individual guidelines. Under this evolving line of case law, guideline commentary is left in a precarious position. 8 For example, courts have recently split as to whether the loss calculation under §2B1.1 includes intended loss. 9 Because commentary pervades the Guidelines, some have noted that “the current structure of the entire Manual itself is called into question” by these decisions. 10  The Supreme Court has repeatedly denied certiorari in cases presenting this issue, making Commission action imperative. We support a legislative proposal to protect and preserve the validity of the commentary as well as other steps the Commission could take to address this problem, such as moving commentary into the guideline text. 

c. Acquitted conduct 

During the previous amendment year, the Commission proposed amendments addressing the treatment of acquitted conduct, but ultimately deferred action on the issue. 11  The Supreme Court recently denied several petitions for writs of certiorari challenging the constitutionality of using acquitted conduct at sentencing under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments. Several justices          

> 6Letter from Kenneth Polite, Jr., Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, and Jonathan J. Wroblewski, Director, Office of Policy and Legislation, Criminal Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n on the Dep’t of Justice’s Priorities for the 2022 Amendment Cycle (Sep. 12, 2022),
> https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/20221017/doj.pdf .
> 7Letter from Jonathan J. Wroblewski, Director, Office of Policy and Legislation, Criminal Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (Feb. 27, 2023).
> 8United States v. Riccardi , 989 F.3d 476, 484-85 (6th Cir. 2021) (describing the complexities involved in citing guideline commentary)
> 9Compare, e.g. ,United States v. Banks , 55 F.4th 246, 258 (3d Cir. 2022) (holding that the loss enhancement in the guideline’s commentary impermissibly expands the word “loss” to include both intended and actual loss), with
> United States v. You , No. 22-5442, 2023 WL 4446497 (6th Cir. July 11, 2023) (holding that “loss” in §2B1.1 includes “intended loss” as defined by the guidelines commentary).
> 10 Memorandum from the Honorable Charles R. Breyer, Acting Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (Mar. 12, 2021).
> 11 See U.S. Sent’g Comm’n Public Meeting on April 5, 2023 , at 22-23; U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Proposed Amendments to the Sentencing Guidelines (Feb. 2, 2023).

4

wrote or joined statements respecting the denial of certiorari and indicated that the Court was deferring to the Commission to consider acquitted conduct in the first instance. 12 

The Department appreciates the Commission’s continued interest and careful consideration of this issue. As explained during the last amendment cycle, the Department’s position is that acquitted conduct generally cannot practically be distinguished from the definition of relevant conduct. 13  Likewise, any change should not unduly restrict judicial factfinding, create unnecessary confusion and litigation burdening the courts, or result in sentences that fail to account for the full range of a defendant’s conduct. 14  We therefore believe the most appropriate path forward is through broader reform and simplification of the Guidelines’ architecture, which could address many of the concerns raised by the Commission and litigants regarding the treatment of acquitted conduct and relevant conduct. 

d. Alternatives-to-Incarceration and Diversion Programs 

We share the Commission’s goals of promoting court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs. As reflected in Department policy, as well as the extensive financial and technical resources the Department provides to state and local governments, the Department strongly supports the use of alternatives-to-incarceration programs, pretrial diversion programs, and problem-solving courts, in appropriate cases. 15 

As the Commission examines the structure of federal sentencing and the Guidelines, we encourage it to consider how these programs could be incorporated into the Guidelines’  

> 12

McClinton v. United States , 600 U. S. ____ (2023) (Sotomayor, J., statement respecting denial of certiorari )(“The Sentencing Commission, which is responsible for the Sentencing Guidelines, has announced that it will resolve questions around acquitted conduct sentencing in the coming year. If the Commission does not act expeditiously or chooses not to act, however, this Court may need to take up the constitutional issues presented.”); 

id. (Kavanaugh, J., statement respecting denial of certiorari ) (“The use of acquitted conduct to alter a defendant’s Sentencing Guidelines range raises important questions. But the Sentencing Commission is currently considering the issue. It is appropriate for this Court to wait for the Sentencing Commission’s determination before the Court decides whether to grant certiorari in a case involving the use of acquitted conduct.”); id. (Alito, J., statement respecting denial of certiorari ) (“no one should misinterpret my colleagues’ statements as an effort to persuade the Sentencing Commission to alter its longstanding decision that acquitted conduct may be taken into account at sentencing” because even “if the Commission eventually decides on policy grounds that such conduct should not be considered in federal sentencing proceedings, that decision will not affect state courts”).  

> 13

Letter from Jonathan J. Wroblewski, Director, Office of Policy and Legislation, Criminal Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (Feb. 15, 2023), 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-hearings-and-meetings/20230223-

24/DOJ3.pdf . 

> 14

Id.  

> 15

In his December 16, 2022, memorandum regarding charging, pleas, and sentencing, the Attorney General stated that every U.S. Attorney’s Office “should develop an appropriate pretrial diversion policy.” Memorandum for All Federal Prosecutors from Merrick Garland, Attorney General, Regarding Additional Department Policies Regarding Charges, Pleas, and Sentencing in Drug Cases (Dec. 16, 2022),  https://www.justice.gov/media/1265321/dl?inline .

On February 10, 2023, the Department updated the Justice Manual to reflect that pretrial diversion programs “provide prosecutors with another tool – in addition to the traditional criminal justice process – to ensure accountability for criminal conduct, protect the public by reducing rates of recidivism, conserve prosecutive and judicial resources, and provide opportunities for treatment, rehabilitation, and community correction.” The Justice Manual now reflects that “[e]ach U.S. Attorney’s Office shall develop and implement a policy on the use of pretrial diversion appropriate for the Office’s district.” U.S. D EP ’ T OF JUST ., JUST . M ANUAL § 9-22.010 (2018). 5

structure. These programs, when crafted well, help foster trust and legitimacy with the communities we serve, reduce government costs, and produce just outcomes for victims and offenders. More research is needed, however, to identify the elements that lead to success of these programs at the federal level as well as how the programs should interact with the Guidelines. We believe the Commission has an important role to play in assessing programs, convening stakeholders to develop and discuss best practices, and providing guidance to courts on best practices and opportunities for more comprehensive deployment of these programs. 

e. BOP Practices 

The Commission has expressed an interest in “assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) are effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).” 16  The Department is committed to supporting BOP as it pursues its dual mission to “foster a humane and secure environment” and “to ensure public safety by preparing individuals for successful reentry” into the community. 17  We look forward to continuing the dialogue with the Commission about BOP’s operations and practices. 

The Department and BOP take seriously their responsibility to ensure that adults in custody return to their communities fully prepared to be good neighbors. Since assuming her post last August, BOP Director Colette Peters has focused on reinvigorating the Bureau’s mission and values. This includes through full implementation of the First Step Act, which plays a key role in promoting successful reentry for adults in custody. The Department recently published its comprehensive annual report on its progress in implementing the First Step Act, including its work to maximize the availability of time credits; enhance the use of home confinement and prerelease custody; increase capacity and participation in evidence-based programming to reduce recidivism; expand mental health and substance use treatment programs; and enhance reentry programs and practices. 18 

The Department is also deeply concerned by instances where BOP has failed to live up its mission, including egregious instances of abuse perpetrated by BOP personnel. As the Deputy Attorney General recently explained, it is “a top priority at the highest levels of the Department” to root out and prevent abuse of those in its custody. 19  Last year, the Deputy Attorney General asked officials and experts from across the Department to form an Advisory Group to address this issue. The group identified more than 50 recommendations to enhance the prevention, reporting, investigation, prosecution, and discipline of these crimes, and the Deputy Attorney General directed the immediate implementation of each recommendation. Over the summer, the Department has sent Sexual Abuse Facility Enhancement and Review (“SAFER”) teams to visit women’s facilities in each of BOP’s six regions and engage with leadership, staff, and women in        

> 16 Supra note 2.
> 17 Agency Pillars , Bureau of Prisons (last visited June 7, 2023).
> https://www.bop.gov/about/agency/agency_pillars.jsp .
> 18 The full report is available here: https://www.ojp.gov/first-step-act-annual-report-april-2023 .
> 19 Lisa O. Monaco, Deputy Attorney General, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Remarks at Bureau of Prisons Warden Training (Apr. 25, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/deputy-attorney-general-lisa-o-monaco-delivers-remarks-bop-
> warden-training .

6

custody at those facilities. 20  These teams are focused on ensuring safer environments for all in the BOP’s custody and care. Likewise, as the Department represented before this Commission last amendment cycle, in appropriate cases, it will support a sentence reduction for an individual who suffered sexual assault, or physical abuse resulting in serious bodily injury, committed by a correctional officer or other employee of the BOP while in custody. Indeed, just last week, the BOP Director moved for compassionate release for the victim of a sexual assault that was committed by a BOP employee as established by a conviction in a criminal case. 

The Department and BOP also welcome proper oversight of BOP operations. The Inspector General plays an essential role in overseeing BOP, and between January 1, 2021, and July 1, 2023, the Office of the Inspector General (“OIG”) has released more than 40 unique reports that address BOP. 21  OIG has also received funding to hire 16 new employees to support a BOP interdisciplinary team that will help identify, assess, and track significant risks in BOP programs and operations. In addition to increasing OIG’s investigative capacity, these new personnel will allow OIG to increase its oversight work, including audits, evaluations, and inspections. Indeed, OIG has recently established a proactive, unannounced BOP inspection program informed by ongoing investigations, audits, risk assessments, and other related work. Likewise, the Department is working with Congress to identify problems and solutions. Since January 2021, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) has published 19 reports addressing BOP. 22  In the last two years, Congress has held four hearings on conditions at BOP, and in the last year, Director Peters has testified twice before Congress and is scheduled to testify a third time this fall. 

We look forward to sharing more about our ongoing efforts with the Commission in the coming months. 

II. Critical Public Safety Issues 

The Department strongly urges the Commission to address two critical issues of national public safety: the epidemics of fentanyl 23  poisoning 24  and firearms violence. While we understand the Commission’s decision to limit its consideration of amendments this cycle, these pressing matters of public safety continue to demand the Commission’s urgent attention. We                   

> 20 Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, Readout of the First SAFER Team Visit to FCI Tallahassee (June 12, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/readout-first-safer-team-visit-fci-tallahassee .
> 21 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, Reports,
> https://oig.justice.gov/reports?keys=&field_publication_date_value=2021-01-
> 01&field_publication_date_value_1=2023-07-
> 01&field_doj_component_target_id=141&field_report_type_target_id=All&field_location_country_code=All&sort
> _by=field_publication_date_value&sort_order=DESC&items_per_page=25 (last visited July 28, 2023).
> 22 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Reports & Testimonies, https://www.gao.gov/reports-
> testimonies?f%5B0%5D=by_agency_name%3ABureau%20of%20Prisons&f%5B1%5D=date%3Astart%2B2021-
> 01-01%2Bend%2B2023-07-01 (last visited July 28, 2023).
> 23 For purposes of this letter, all references to fentanyl include fentanyl, fentanyl analogues, and fentanyl related substances.
> 24 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Provisional Data Shows U.S. Drug Overdose Deaths Top 100,000 in 2022 , N ATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS BLOG (May 18, 2023),
> https://blogs.cdc.gov/nchs/2023/05/18/7365/#:~:text=Findings%3A,2022%2C%20from%20107%2C573%20to%20
> 105%2C452 .

7

thank the Commission for the initial steps it took last amendment cycle to address these issues, but substantial work remains. Anomalies in the guidelines governing fentanyl and firearms offenses create significant and unwarranted sentencing disparities. While we appreciate that sentencing policy alone cannot solve these issues, the Commission has a critical role to play, as each lie at the core of federal sentencing policy and practice. Because they can be addressed with discrete amendments to the Guidelines, the Commission should identify each as priorities this amendment year. 

a. The Fentanyl Epidemic 

Fentanyl has transformed drug use and abuse across the country, leading to death and other harm at extraordinary scale. Fentanyl is cheap to make, easy to disguise, and all too often, deadly to those who take it. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the United States experienced more than 105,000 deaths from drug poisonings during 2022. 25  More than three-fourths of these deaths were from synthetic opioids – primarily fentanyl – with the number of deaths attributed to fentanyl continuing to increase from previous years. 26  Fueling the problem is the ease with which fentanyl can be produced, bought, and sold, as cartels use the dark web to operate with increased anonymity 27  and turn to social media 28  to market “to unsuspecting children, young adults, and members of the public who think they are getting legitimate prescription drugs” but are actually purchasing potentially fatal doses of fentanyl. 29 

Fentanyl is the leading cause of death for Americans between the ages of 18 to 45. 30  Further exacerbating the fentanyl epidemic is the increasing prevalence of xylazine, which potentially renders lifesaving medications, like naloxone, less effective in treating overdoses. 31  We urge the Commission to combat this public safety threat and consider the following proposals.  

> 25

Id . 

> 26

Id.  

> 27

Press Release, Drug Enforcement Administration, Fentanyl distributor who used the dark web and crypto currency sentenced to 30 years in federal prison (Oct. 3, 2019),  https://www.dea.gov/press-releases/2019/10/03/fentanyl-

distributor-who-used-dark-web-and-crypto-currency-sentenced-30 . 

> 28

Press Release, Drug Enforcement Administration, Drug Enforcement Administration announces seizure of over 379 million deadly does of fentanyl in 2022 (Dec. 20, 2022),  https://www.dea.gov/press-releases/2022/12/20/drug-

enforcement-administration-announces-seizure-over-379-million-deadly ; Glenn Kessler, DEA said it seized enough 

fentanyl to kill us all. The claim adds up , W ASH . POST , Jan. 20, 2023, 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/01/20/dea-said-it-seized-enough-fentanyl-kill-us-all-claim-adds-up/ . 

> 29

Press Release, Drug Enforcement Administration, Fentanyl Deaths Climbing, DEA Washington Continues the Fight (Feb. 16, 2022),  https://www.dea.gov/stories/2022/2022-02/2022-02-16/fentanyl-deaths-climbing-dea-

washington-continues-fight . 

> 30

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, U.S. Overdose Deaths In 2021 Increased Half as Much as in 2020 – But Are Still Up 15% ,

https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/nchs_press_releases/2022/202205.htm  (Synthetic opioids caused 71,238 

deaths in 2021, up from 57,834 the year before.); Center for Disease Control and Prevention, “Data Analysis & Resources” (last reviewed June 1, 2022),  https://www.cdc.gov/opioids/data/analysis-resources.html . Fentanyl 

appears to be the leading cause of death amongst 18- to 45-year-olds in 2019 and 2020, but not among all America adults. See Nusaiba Mizan, Fact-check: Is fentanyl the leading cause of death among American adults? , E L PASO T IMES (Feb. 2, 2023),  https://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/2023/02/02/fentanyl-overdose-cause-of-death-

among-adults-greg-abbott/69867350007/ . 

> 31

D RUG E NFORCEMENT A DMINISTRATION JOINT I NTELLIGENCE REPORT , T HE G ROWING T HREAT OF X YLAZINE AND ITS M IXTURE WITH I LLICIT D RUGS (Oct. 2022) at 2-4,  https://www.dea.gov/sites/default/files/2022-

12/The%20Growing%20Threat%20of%20Xylazine%20and%20its%20Mixture%20with%20Illicit%20Drugs.pdf .8

i. Distributing Drugs to Minors and Using Direct Communication via Online 

Platforms or the Dark Web 

The Centers for Disease Control reported a surge in overdose deaths in individuals under the age of 21: between 2019 and 2020, overdose deaths among those 14 to 18 years old increased 94%; between the second half of 2019 and the same period in 2021, the median monthly overdose deaths among those 10 to 19 years old increased 109%, with approximately 90% of 

those deaths involving opioids. 32  The widespread availability of illicit fentanyl, the proliferation 

of fake pills resembling prescription drugs but containing fentanyl or other unlawful controlled 

substances, and the ease of purchasing pills through social media have increased the fatal 

overdose risk among adolescents. 33  Compounding the problem is traffickers’ use of social media and anonymizing technologies to directly connect with and sell dangerous fentanyl to children and young adults. 

We recommend two amendments to combat this problem. First, we recommend that the Commission provide an enhancement applicable to all distributions of controlled substances to children and young adults under 21. Second, we also recommend that the Commission expand application of the existing enhancements in §2D1.1(b)(7) to apply to drug traffickers who use direct private communications associated with interactive computer services and to provide further enhancements for those who use anonymizing technologies to avoid detection. The existing mass-marketing enhancement does not cover distribution through direct electronic communication or the use of anonymizing technologies that evade detection, 34  and we urge the Commission to close these gaps. 

ii. Distributing Fentanyl Mixed with Xylazine 

Fentanyl alone can be lethal, but fentanyl mixed with xylazine is appreciably deadlier. Xylazine is a non-opiate sedative, analgesic, and muscle relaxant that is not currently controlled under federal law and is only authorized for veterinary use in the United States. The Drug Enforcement Administration (“DEA”) reports that the “detection of xylazine in drug mixtures – particularly in combination with fentanyl – is increasing across the country.” 35  Compounding the problem, xylazine can render lifesaving medications, like naloxone, less effective in treating                   

> 32 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Drug Overdose Deaths Among Persons Aged 10–19 Years — United States, July 2019–December 2021 , 71(50);1576–1582 (Dec. 16, 2022),
> https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7150a2.htm
> 33 Friedman J, Godvin M, et.al., Trends in drug overdose deaths among US adolescents , January 2010 to June 2021.
> JAMA 2022;327:1398–400; O’Donnell J, Tanz LJ, Gladden RM, Davis NL, Bitting J. Trends in and characteristics
> of drug overdose deaths involving illicitly manufactured fentanyls—United States, 2019–2020 . MMWR Morb
> Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:1740–6.
> 34 USSG §2D1.1, comment. (n.13). See, e.g. ,United States v. Victoria Martinez , 2020 WL 5823325 (5th Cir. Sept. 30, 2020) (affirming application of §2D1.1 (b)(7) enhancement when defendant posted to 3,100 Facebook friends that she had bags available and a co-conspirator sold through Facebook groups); United States v. Perz , 2021 WL 1111404 (5th Cir. March 23, 2021) (affirming application of §2D1.1(b)(7) when Facebook messenger and Facebook used to solicit large numbers of persons to buy drugs); United States v. Margenat-Castro , 2018 WL 5805923 (11th Cir. Nov. 6, 2018) (noting that district court applied §2D1.1(b)(7) enhancement when website and social media board used to further drug distribution).
> 35 U.S. DRUG ENFORCEMENT AGENCY ,The Growing Threat of Xylazine and its Mixture with Illicit Drugs ,supra
> note 33 at 2-4.

9

overdoses. 36  The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy has designated fentanyl adulterated or associated with xylazine as an emerging threat. 37  To address this threat and assist with “the whole-of-government response,” 38  the Commission should consider amending the Guidelines to account for convictions involving fentanyl that is adulterated with xylazine. The Department would be pleased to work with the Commission on appropriate language for such an amendment. 

iii. Death Resulting and Serious Bodily Injury 

Fentanyl and other drugs have generated unprecedented numbers of overdose deaths. Federal statutes impose lengthy mandatory-minimum sentences – and the Guidelines provide high base offense levels – when the offense of conviction establishes that death or serious bodily injury resulted from distribution. 39  But, consistent with the Department’s charging policy, 40  there may be particular cases where the circumstances suggest that it is inappropriate to pursue charges carrying a 20-year mandatory term of imprisonment. 41  Even where a mandatory minimum sentence is inappropriate, however, the Guidelines should still provide for a just punishment that appropriately reflects the defendant’s culpability. 42 

The current Guidelines provide for a sentencing enhancement for resulting death or serious bodily injury only when the defendant is charged and convicted under a provision carrying a mandatory term of imprisonment. This may lead to an unwarranted disparity between defendants convicted of charges carrying mandatory terms of imprisonment and defendants who engaged in the same or similar conduct, but who were not charged with an offense carrying a mandatory minimum sentence. Although the Guidelines provide for an upward departure when  

> 36

Id . 

> 37

Press Release, The White House, Biden-Harris Administration Designates Fentanyl Combined with Xylazine as 

an Emerging Threat to the United States (April 12, 2023),  https://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/briefing-

room/2023/04/12/biden-harris-administration-designates-fentanyl-combined-with-xylazine-as-an-emerging-threat-

to-the-united-states/ . 

> 38

Id.  

> 39

Multiple circuits have held that these enhancements do not apply unless death or serious bodily injury was an element of the crime of conviction. See, e.g. , United States v. Lawler , 818 F.3d 281, 285 (7th Cir. 2016). However, some courts have suggested that the guideline enhancement can be available without a statutory conviction. See, e.g., Young v. Antonelli , 982 F.3d 914, 919 (4th Cir. 2020) (finding Supreme Court’s but-for causation requirement for death resulting applies in application of death resulting guideline under §2D1.1).  

> 40

The Attorney General has instructed prosecutors that “charges that subject a defendant to a mandatory minimum sentence should ordinarily be reserved for instances in which the remaining charges would not sufficiently reflect the seriousness of the defendant’s criminal conduct, danger to the community, harm to victims and such purposes of the criminal law as punishment, protection of the public, specific and general deterrence, and rehabilitation.” Memorandum for All Federal Prosecutors from Merrick Garland, Attorney General, Regarding Additional Department Policies Regarding Charges, Pleas, and Sentencing in Drug Cases (Dec. 16, 2022), 

https://www.justice.gov/media/1265321/dl?inline  (alterations and internal quotation marks omitted).  

> 41

In instances where death or serious bodily injury results, the “safety valve” would not provide a remedy to avoid application of the mandatory minimum sentences. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(f); USSG §5C1.2.  

> 42

The Attorney General’s guidance to federal prosecutors also addressed the use of mandatory minimums, including guidance specific to drug cases brought under Title 21 of the United States Code. Memorandum for All Federal Prosecutors from Merrick Garland, Attorney General, Regarding Additional Department Policies Regarding Charges, Pleas, and Sentencing in Drug Cases (Dec. 16, 2022). 10 

death or serious bodily injury results, 43  these departures and variances can also result in inconsistencies and disparities. Courts and litigants would benefit from guidance in the form of a reformed guideline enhancement that meaningfully accounts for death or serious bodily injury resulting from drug distribution, regardless of whether charges carrying mandatory terms of imprisonment were brought. We recommend that the Commission adopt a new base offense level and enhancements – lower than those applicable when a mandatory minimum is charged but higher than that applicable to drug distribution that does not result in death. 

iv. Drugs and Multiple or Especially Dangerous Firearms 

The current Guidelines provide for an enhancement if the defendant possessed a dangerous weapon or firearm to “reflect the increased danger of violence when drug traffickers possess weapons.” 44  But this enhancement fails to account for the increased public safety risk posed by traffickers who possess multiple weapons or especially dangerous weapons while trafficking drugs. 45  We recommend that the Commission consider an enhancement for possession of especially dangerous firearms or quantities of firearms, including three or more firearms, a semiautomatic firearm capable of accepting a large capacity magazine, or a firearm as described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845. Consistent with the current Guidelines, we do not propose that this enhancement be used in conjunction with violations of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). 46 

b. Firearms Violence 

Too many Americans are dying from firearms violence. Recognizing this “public health crisis,” 47  the President and the Attorney General announced a strategy to “combat the epidemic of gun violence and other violent crime,” 48  which we continue to update to reflect new approaches, new threats, and new evidence-based interventions. 49  Last year, Congress passed the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act (“BSCA”), which strengthened federal firearms laws in several critical aspects. 50  And the Commission promulgated amendments during the last amendment year to, inter alia , address the threat of unlicensed and untraceable ghost guns,               

> 43 USSG §§5K2.1-5K2.2. See, e.g. ,United States v. Watley , 46 F.4 th 707, 717-18 (8th Cir. 2022) (affirming upward departures under §§5K2.1 and 5K2.2 where defendant sold drugs that caused one individual to overdose and another to die).
> 44 USSG §2D1.1(b)(1), app. n.11(A).
> 45 See, e.g., United States v. Fairchild , 189 F.3d 769, 779 (8th Cir. 1999) (affirming two-level firearms enhancement for defendant who possessed 32 firearms). The First Circuit has rejected an upward variance premised upon a defendant’s possession of multiple firearms when the defendant had received a two-level enhancement under USSG §2D1.1(b)(1). United States v. Ortiz-Rodriguez , 789 F.3d 15, 19-20 (1st Cir. 2015) (vacating and remanding for resentencing due to inadequate explanation of the basis of a large variance from the guidelines range).
> 46 USSG §2K2.4, comment. n.4.
> 47 President Biden and Attorney General Garland, Remarks on Gun Crime Prevention Strategy (June 23, 2021),
> https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/06/23/remarks-by-president-biden-and-attorney-
> general-garland-on-gun-crime-prevention-strategy/ .
> 48 Id .
> 49 Press Release, U.S. Department of Justice Office of Public Affairs, FACT SHEET: Update on Justice Department’s Ongoing Efforts to Tackle Gun Violence (June 14, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/fact-sheet-
> update-justice-department-s-ongoing-efforts-tackle-gun-violence .
> 50 Pub. L. No. 117-159, 136 Stat. 1313 (2022).

11 

incorporate the new straw-purchasing and firearms-trafficking offenses created by BSCA, and provide mitigating adjustments for duress and domestic violence. 

While we applaud the Commission’s efforts thus far, more change is needed. Current anomalies in §2K1.1 result in sentences that do not reflect the severity and dangerousness of conduct occurring in many cases. Simplification of the Guidelines’ architecture – especially for the firearms guideline – would help address the inequities created by this confusing and often misapplied provision. 51  We also recommend tailored guideline changes such as revising the definition of “firearm” in the application notes and ensuring that defendants with prior domestic-violence and firearm-related convictions are treated like other recidivists. 52 

i. Definition of Firearm in Application Note 1 

Machinegun conversion devices have emerged as an extraordinary threat to public safety. 

Also called “auto sears,” “switches,” or “Glock switches,” 53  these devices, which the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (“ATF”) reports “are flooding our communities,” 54 

convert “an already dangerous firearm into an extremely dangerous machinegun.” 55  They are cheaply produced – sometimes at home, using a 3D printer – and designed to turn a semiautomatic firearm into an automatic machinegun. 

Many courts, however, have construed the definition of “firearm” in Application Note 1 to §2K2.1 to exclude machinegun conversion devices. The application note refers only to “firearms” as defined by 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), which courts have held does not include machinegun conversion devices. It does not reference “firearms” as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a), which expressly includes such devices. As a result, the application note may be understood to exclude some of the most dangerous weapons in circulation. 56  Indeed, most courts to consider the question have held that machinegun conversion devices are not firearms under  

> 51

Letter from Lisa Monaco, Department of Justice Deputy Attorney General, to U.S. Sent’g Comm’n Celebrating the Commissioners Confirmations and Reiterating Policy Priorities (Oct. 17, 2022), 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/20221017/doj-dag.pdf . 

> 52

Although we are focusing on these priorities, we also renew our requests from last cycle that the Commission: (1) apply BSCA’s sentencing adjustments to prohibited persons, as well as straw purchasers; (2) adopt an offense-level increase greater than two levels in the new provision, §2K2.1(b)(5)(B), directed at a defendant engaged in straw purchasing or trafficking, to implement BSCA; (3) create a new enhancement for burglaries or robberies of Federal Firearm Licensees (FFLs); (4) create a new enhancement for transfers to minors; (5) create a new enhancement when a defendant has three or more predicate convictions for crimes of violence or drug-trafficking offenses; and (6) eliminate the use of any categorical approach in the Guidelines, including in Section 2K2.1.  

> 53

These devices have the same purpose, but auto sears convert AR-15 variant rifles to automatic firearms and switches or “Glock switches” convert Glock-variant semi-automatic pistols into automatic handguns.  

> 54

Chip Brownlee, ATF Director Urges Action on Auto Sears ‘Flooding Our Communities’ , T HE T RACE , Mar. 1, 2023,  https://www.thetrace.org/2023/03/atf-auto-sears-dettelbach-machine-gun/ . 

> 55

United States v. Hixson , 624 F. Supp. 3d 930, 940 (N.D. Ill. 2022) (“The dangerousness manifests itself not only in the sheer number of bullets that can be emptied from the magazine in the blink of an eye but also in the resulting lack of control of the firearm when discharging it.”)  

> 56

Section 921(a)(3) broadly defines “firearm,” whereas § 5845(a) limits the definition of “firearm” to a narrower class of weapons. 28 U.S.C. § 5845(a), (b); 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3). 12 

Section 921(a)(3) 57  and, as a result, generally do not trigger §2K2.1’s enhancements for multiple firearms, firearms-trafficking, and use of a firearm in connection with another crime. 58  This is a perverse result, as the statutory scheme and the Guidelines were drafted on the presumption that Section 5845(a) weapons are a more dangerous subset of Section 921(a)(3) weapons. 59  We recommend that the Commission amend the definition in Application Note 1 to make clear that it includes firearms under both Section 5845(a) and Section 921(a)(3). 

ii. Recidivism Enhancement for Prior Domestic-Violence and Firearm-Related 

Convictions 

Two categories of prior convictions qualify for the recidivism enhancement in §2K2.1 – violent felonies and drug-trafficking crimes. Defendants with prior misdemeanor domestic-violence convictions or prior firearm-related convictions who then commit additional firearms offenses do not currently qualify. We recommend that the Commission incorporate these two especially dangerous categories of prior convictions as qualifying predicates for §2K2.1’s recidivism enhancement, as each represents exactly the type of aggravated conduct that the enhancements should target. 

Domestic-violence offenders who unlawfully possess firearms pose a significant public-safety risk. Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9) – which prohibits gun possession by anyone convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence – precisely because “existing felon-in-possession laws were not keeping firearms out of the hands of domestic abusers, because ‘many people who engage in serious spousal or child abuse ultimately are not charged with or convicted of felonies.’” 60  Regrettably, “most of those who commit family violence are never even prosecuted” and when they are, roughly “one-third of the cases that would be considered felonies if committed by strangers are instead filed as misdemeanors.” 61  The presence of a firearm substantially increases the lethality of these offenses. 62  Homicide is a leading cause of death of young women, with intimate-partner violence accounting for half of those murders. 63  More than  

> 57

See, e.g., Hixson , 624 F. Supp. 3d 930, 936, 941-42; but see United States v. Hunter , 843 F. Supp. 235, 256 (E.D. Mich. 1994) (expressing the minority view that “conversion kits are . . . themselves ‘weapons’ under § 921(a)(3)” because “that section clearly envisions machineguns as weapons”).  

> 58

Hixson , 624 F. Supp. 3d at 941–42 (“[T]he advisory Sentencing Guidelines range . . . of 30 – 37 months woefully underrepresents the seriousness of the offenses. In particular, the range completely ignores the Glock switches, which Congress has defined as machineguns. Sentencing Mr. Hixson within the sentencing range does not account for the possession, sale, and distribution of the Glock switches.”).  

> 59

Sawed-off shotguns, short-barreled rifles, and machineguns qualify as firearms under § 921(a) and, because of their dangerousness, are subject to additional restrictions under 28 U.S.C. § 5861. Thus, when condensing the three prior firearms guidelines into what is now §2K2.1 in 1991, the Commission structured application note 1 to broadly define “firearms” for the purposes of the Guideline as a whole under § 921(a)(3) but reserved the narrower definition of “firearm” in § 5845(a) for the enhancements involving the most dangerous firearms in §2K2.1(a)(1), (3), and (5) to Section 5845(a).  

> 60

United States v. Hayes , 555 U.S. 415, 426 (2009) (quoting 142 Cong. Rec. S10377-01 (1996) (statement of Sen. Lautenberg)).  

> 61

142 Cong. Rec. S10377-78.  

> 62

D EP ’ T OF JUSTICE , Firearms and Domestic Violence: The Intersections (Dec. 13, 2016), 

https://www.justice.gov/archives/ovw/blog/firearms-and-domestic-violence-intersections . 

> 63

Emiko Petrosky et al., Racial and Ethnic Differences in Homicides of Adult Women and the Role of Intimate Partner Violence — United States, 2003–2014 , 66 MMWR M ORBIDITY AND M ORTALITY WEEKLY REPORT 741 (2017),  https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6628a1.htm?s_cid=mm6628a1_w .13 

half of male-perpetrated intimate partner homicides are by a firearm and studies have shown a correlation between limiting access to firearms for intimate-partner violence offenders and lower rates of intimate partner homicide. 64  And incidents of domestic violence are one of the more frequent circumstances of firearm homicide of children younger than 13 years old. 65  As Senator Lautenberg – the sponsor of what would become Section 922(g)(9) – put it, “all too often, the only difference between a battered woman and a dead woman is the presence of a gun.” 66  We appreciate that when it adopted the new trafficking enhancement during the last amendment cycle, the Commission equated misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence with felony crimes of violence, and we urge the Commission to treat these offenses equivalently for the purposes of the recidivism enhancement as well. 

Similarly, firearm offenders with prior firearm-related convictions pose an acute risk to public safety. As the Commission has observed, firearms offenders recidivate at a higher rate than non-firearms offenders. In its recidivism report focusing on firearms offenders, the Commission reported that “[o]ver two-thirds (68.1%) of firearms offenders were rearrested for a new crime during the eight-year follow-up period compared to less than half of non-firearms offenders (46.3%).” 67  And “nearly half of the §2K2.1 offenders had previously been convicted of a weapons offense (44.2%).” 68  Firearms offenders are not only more likely to reoffend but are also more likely to commit a future violent crime. 69  Section 2K2.1 should reflect the Commission’s findings regarding the danger posed by repeat firearms offenders. Accordingly, we agree with the recommendation put forward last amendment year by the Probation Officers Advisory Group to adopt a recidivism enhancement for prior firearm-related convictions.  

> 64

Websdale N, Ferraro K, Barger SD. The domestic violence fatality review clearinghouse: introduction to a new National Data System with a focus on firearms , I NJ E PIDEMIOL . 2019 6:6. doi: 10.1186/s40621-019-0182-2. PMID: 31245255; PMCID: PMC6582678,  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6582678/ . 

> 65

Zeoli, A. M., Goldstick, J., Mauri, A., Wallin, M., Goyal, M., Cunningham, R., & FACTS Consortium (2019). The association of firearm laws with firearm outcomes among children and adolescents: a scoping review. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 42(4), 741–762.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865-019-00063-y ; Fowler, K.A., Dahlberg, 

L.L., Haileyesus, T., Gutierrez, C., & Bacon, S. (2017). Children firearm injuries in the United States. Pediatrics ,140, e20162486.  

> 66

142 Cong. Rec. S10377. There is also a strong correlation between domestic violence and mass shootings. 

According to one peer-reviewed study, 59.1% of mass shootings between 2014-19 were domestic violence-related 

and, in 68.2% of mass shootings, the perpetrator either killed at least one partner or family member or had a history 

of domestic violence. See Lisa B. Geller, et. al., The role of domestic violence in fatal mass shootings in the United 

States, 2014–2019 (2021),  https://injepijournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40621-021-00330-0 . 

> 67

U.S. SENT ’ G COMM ’ N, Recidivism Among Federal Firearm Offenders (2019), at 4, 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-

publications/2019/20190627_Recidivism_Firearms.pdf . 

> 68

U.S. SENT ’ G COMM ’ N, What Do Federal Firearms Offenses Really Look Like? at 20, 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-

publications/2022/20220714_Firearms.pdf . 

> 69

Compared to non-firearms offenders, “a greater percentage of firearms offenders were rearrested for a violent crime as the most serious new offense.” U.S. SENT ’ G COMM ’N, Recidivism Among Federal Firearm Offenders at 19. 14 

iii. Simplification of Section 2K2.1 

Last year, the Department urged the Commission to undertake a broad review of §2K2.1. 70  We continue to support efforts to simplify this complicated and often-misapplied guideline. As currently drafted, §2K2.1 provides eight different base offense levels that depend on various factors, including the type of offense, the defendant’s prior criminal history, and the type of firearm(s) involved. Converting the base offense level enhancements for dangerous firearms and prior serious crimes into specific offense characteristics would significantly reduce the complexity of the calculation and allow the type of offense to dictate the base offense level. The current complex structure undermines pretrial resolution of these cases, as parties are often unable to agree on the appropriate base offense level – which may change when the Probation Office uncovers additional predicate offenses or applies the categorical approach in a manner contrary to the parties’ expectations. Simplifying the base offense level structure will also make it easier for the Commission to research and analyze §2K2.1 sentencing data to better inform future amendments. 

III. Other Critical and Discrete Sentencing Issues 

While we recognize that the Commission’s proposed priorities and addressing the two most pressing national public safety priorities discussed above will leave little room for other issues, we identify here several that we think are important and deserve the Commission’s attention in the coming amendment years. 

a. Cocaine Sentencing Policy 

For almost thirty years, there has been no greater symbol of racial inequity in sentencing policy than the disparity between offenses involving crack cocaine and those involving powder cocaine. In December 2022, the Attorney General instructed federal prosecutors to “promote the equivalent treatment of crack and powder cocaine offenses” through their charging decisions and sentencing recommendations. 71  The Commission has likewise recognized the unwarranted disparity between crack and powder cocaine and played a leading role in reform efforts. 72  

> 70

Letter from Lisa Monaco, Department of Justice Deputy Attorney General, to U.S. Sent’g Comm’n Celebrating the Commissioners Confirmations and Reiterating Policy Priorities (Oct. 17, 2022).  

> 71

The Attorney General observed that “mandatory minimum sentences based on drug type and quantity have resulted in disproportionately severe sentences for certain defendants and perceived and actual racial disparities in the criminal justice system.” He thus instructed prosecutors to decline to charge the quantity necessary to trigger a mandatory minimum for certain low-level, non-violent drug offenses where the defendant does not have ties to large-scale criminal organizations or a significant criminal history. Memorandum for All Federal Prosecutors from Merrick Garland, Attorney General, Regarding Additional Department Policies Regarding Charges, Pleas, and Sentencing in Drug Cases (Dec. 16, 2022).  

> 72

See U.S. SENT ’ G COMM ’ N, RECIDIVISM A MONG O FFENDERS RECEIVING RETROACTIVE SENTENCE REDUCTIONS :T HE 2007 CRACK COCAINE A MENDMENT (2014),  https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-

publications/research-projects-and-

surveys/miscellaneous/20140527_Recidivism_2007_Crack_Cocaine_Amendment.pdf ; U.S. SENT ’ G COMM ’ N,

F IFTEEN Y EARS OF G UIDELINES SENTENCING : A N A SSESSMENT OF H OW WELL THE FEDERAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM IS A CHIEVING THE G OALS OF SENTENCING REFORM 131–33 (2004), 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-projects-and-

surveys/miscellaneous/15-year-study/15_year_study_full.pdf .15 

While this issue is now primarily one for Congress, the Commission can and should take action, too. First, the Commission should advocate for the enactment of the EQUAL Act to remedy the current disparity. 73  Second, the Commission should remind sentencing courts of their obligation, when considering Section 3553(a) factors, to consider the pharmacological similarities between powder and crack cocaine and whether it is appropriate to impose a variance consistent with the relevant base offense level for powder cocaine. Analysis and advocacy by the Commission, the Judiciary, the Administration, and many non-governmental organizations led to the enactment of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010. The Commission’s subsequent conforming amendments to the Guidelines, and application of those amendments to thousands of incarcerated individuals, were supported by the Judiciary and by the Department and have made an important contribution to equity in sentencing. The same model can help achieve enactment of the EQUAL Act and other necessary legislative reforms. 

b. Human Smuggling Organizations 

On June 27, 2022, forty-six migrants were found dead inside a sweltering tractor-trailer vehicle abandoned on the side of a road near San Antonio, Texas. 74  Although this incident was one of the deadliest in recent history, similar tragedies have occurred for years. 75  To address the threats posed by transnational human smuggling networks, the Attorney General established Joint Task Force Alpha comprising agents and personnel from the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security. 76  The President and the Secretary of Homeland Security also announced an Executive Branch-wide effort to disrupt and dismantle human smuggling efforts in Latin America and along the Southwest border. 77  Congress’s objective in Section 1324 of Title 8 was clear: to provide increased punishment for each additional noncitizen smuggled. 78  The Guidelines, however, do not presently effectuate this intent. We continue to urge the Commission to review the guideline for smuggling offenses, §2L1.1, and to amend it to account for the grave victimization – including of children (regardless of whether they are “unaccompanied”) – caused by human smuggling, such as sexual assault, serious bodily injury, and death.” 79                           

> 73 Eliminating a Quantifiably Unjust Application of the Law Act or the EQUAL Act, S.79, 117th Cong. (2021).
> 74 See Arelis R. Hernández, et. al., 46 Migrants Found Dead in Texas Inside Sweltering Tractor-Trailer , W ASH .POST (June 28, 2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2022/06/27/migrants-dead-texas/ .
> 75 See, e.g. , Eva Ruth Moravec, et. al., 9 People Dead After at Least 39 Were Found Packed in a Sweltering Tractor-Trailer in San Antonio , W ASH .POST (July 23, 2017), https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/at-least-39-people-
> found-packed-into-sweltering-tractor-trailer-in-san-antonio/2017/07/23/c160b680-3b41-43ab-9e9c-
> cf133a3ca683_story.html .
> 76 See, e.g., U.S. DEP ’T OF JUSTICE ,Attorney General Announces Initiatives to Combat Human Smuggling and Trafficking and to Fight Corruption in Central America (June 7, 2021), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/attorney-
> general-announces-initiatives-combat-human-smuggling-and-trafficking-and-fight .
> 77 The White House, Fact Sheet: The Los Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection U.S. Government and Foreign Partner Deliverables , (June 10, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
> releases/2022/06/10/fact-sheet-the-los-angeles-declaration-on-migration-and-protection-u-s-government-and-
> foreign-partner-deliverables/ .
> 78 8 U.S.C. § 1324(a)(1)(B).
> 79 Letter from Jonathan J. Wroblewski, Director, Office of Policy and Legislation, Criminal Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (Sept. 12, 2022),
> https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/20221017/doj.pdf ; Letter from
> Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary, Dep’t of Homeland Security, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S.

16 

c. Evasion of Export Controls and Sanctions 

Finally, the Commission should act to address an important matter of national security – evasion of export controls and sanctions. Earlier this year, the Department of Justice and the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security launched the Disruptive Technology Strike Force to strengthen supply chains and protect critical technological assets. 80 

As the Deputy Attorney General explained when announcing the Task Force, “[t]oday, autocrats seek tactical advantage through the acquisition, use, and abuse of America’s most innovative technology. They use it to enhance their military capabilities, support mass surveillance programs that enable human rights abuses and all together undermine our values.” 81  The Strike Force “will bring together the Justice and Commerce Departments’ expertise to strike back against adversaries trying to siphon off our most advanced technology.” 82 

We anticipate that the Strike Force will send a letter to the Commission further explaining its proposal for amending the Guidelines to better address this threat. In short, under the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) and the Commerce Control List (CCL), export controls related to national security can carry various designations, including “NS” (National Security), “MT” (Missile Technology), “RS” (Regional Stability), “ CB” (Proliferation of Chemical and Biological Weapons), “AT” (Anti-Terrorism), or “NP” (Nuclear Nonproliferation). 83  The EAR also separately controls exports to military end-users and certain foreign entities whose activities are contrary to national security policy interests. 84  In addition, sanctions and embargoes ordered pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act control the export of goods and services to certain countries and foreign entities to protect national security. 85  However, §2M5.1 refers specifically to “national security controls,” which may cause sentencing courts to erroneously conclude that only goods controlled for “NS” reasons under the EAR and the CCL qualify in assessing both the base offense level and the applicability of a departure. The Strike Force recommends amending §2M5.1 to clarify that the 

Sent’g Comm’n (Oct. 16, 2022),  https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-

comment/20221017/dhs.pdf ; Letter from Kenneth Blanco, Assistant Attorney General, and Zachary Bolitho, 

Counsel to the Deputy Attorney General, to the Honorable William H. Pryor Jr., Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (July 31, 2017),  https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/20170731/DOJ.pdf ; See 

Letter from Sarah R. Saldaña, Dir., U.S. Immigr. and Customs Enf’t, to Chief Judge Patti B. Saris, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (Jan. 15, 2016),  https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-

comment/20160321/DHS.pdf . 

> 80

U.S. D EP ’ T . OF JUSTICE , Justice and Commerce Departments Announce Creation of Disruptive Technology Strike Force , (Feb. 16, 2023),  https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-and-commerce-departments-announce-creation-

disruptive-technology-strike-force . 

> 81

Id.  

> 82

Id.  

> 83

BUREAU OF I NDUSTRY AND SECURITY , D EP ’ T OF COMMERCE , U NOFFICIAL E LECTRONIC E XPORT A DMINISTRATION REGULATION F ILES , https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-administration-regulations-ear  (last 

visited July 7, 2023); B UREAU OF I NDUSTRY AND SECURITY , D EP ’ T OF COMMERCE , SUPPLEMENT N O. 4 TO PART 774 – COMMERCE CONTROL L IST O RDER OF REVIEW , https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/regulations-

docs/13-commerce-control-list-index/file  (last visited July 7, 2023).  

> 84

Id .; B UREAU OF I NDUSTRY AND SECURITY , D EP ’ T OF COMMERCE , SUPPLEMENT N O. 7 TO PART 774 – ‘M ILITARY E ND -U SER ’ (MEU) L IST , https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/regulations-docs/13-commerce-control-list-

index/file  (last visited July 12, 2023).  

> 85

United States v. McKeeve , 131 F.3d 1, 14 (1st Cir.1997) (holding that export of computer equipment to Libya, which was subject to an embargo, was evasion of national security controls). 17 

provision applies to all “controls related to national security,” and revising the accompanying application note to ensure that sanctions, embargoes, anti-terrorism, missile technology, regional stability, proliferation of chemical and biological weapons, nuclear nonproliferation, and military and WMD end-user and entity-specific controls are included. 

* * *

We appreciate the opportunity to provide the Commission with our views, comments, and suggestions, and we look forward to working with the Commission on all of the issues in the coming amendment year. 

Sincerely, 

________________________________ 

Jonathan J. Wroblewski 

Director, Office of Policy and Legislation 

Criminal Division 

U.S. Department of Justice 

ex-officio Member, U.S. Sentencing Commission 

cc: Commissioners 

Kenneth Cohen, Staff Director 

Kathleen Grilli, General Counsel 1

U.S. Department of Justice 

National Security Division 

U.S. Department of Commerce 

Bureau of Industry and Security  

> Office of the Assistant Attorney General Washington, D.C. 20530 Office of the Assistant Secretary for Export Enforcement

August 1, 2023 The Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair United States Sentencing Commission One Columbus Circle, NE Suite 2-500, South Lobby Washington, DC 20002-8002 Dear Judge Reeves: We write in support of the U.S. Department of Justice’s (DOJ) proposed amendment to §2M5.1 of the federal Sentencing Guidelines and accompanying application note, which recommends that §2M5.1 be clarified so that it unambiguously applies to all controls related to national security. On February 16, 2023, DOJ and the Department of Commerce launched the Disruptive Technology Strike Force—which the undersigned lead—to counter efforts by nation-state adversaries who engage in unlawful conduct in their efforts to acquire sensitive technologies such as those related to supercomputing, artificial intelligence, and advanced manufacturing equipment. In the wrong hands, these types of sensitive technologies pose profound risks to national security that are further compounded when such technology is intended to enhance adversaries’ military capabilities or support mass surveillance programs that enable human rights abuses. The Strike Force brings together federal prosecutors and agents from across the country to target illicit actors, strengthen supply chains, and, ultimately, protect critical technological assets. Enforcement actions, including criminal prosecutions, are paramount to this effort. Such enforcement actions serve to ensure that those who violate U.S. laws by willfully facilitating the transfer of emerging technologies to foreign adversaries are brought to justice. In addition, enforcement actions promote general deterrence against future unlawful conduct and raise the costs to foreign adversaries of pursuing sensitive technology in violation of U.S. law. Even as the transfer of disruptive technology to foreign adversaries presents a national security concern of the highest order, the seriousness of these violations has not been consistently recognized by courts applying the existing Guidelines. As discussed in DOJ’s 2annual report commenting on the operation of the Sentencing Guidelines, under §2M5.1, a Base Offense Level of 26 applies if “national security controls” or other types of controls—those relating to the proliferation of nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons or materials—were evaded. This current formulation risks an unduly narrow reading of the phrase “national security controls” to apply only where there was the unlawful export of items bearing the “NS” (for National Security) designation under the Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Beyond those controls bearing the NS designation, there exists a broader array of export controls under the EAR for which the underlying basis is plainly related to national security, including controls for missile technology, regional stability, and anti-terrorism. Although they may not bear the NS designation, which is a term of art under the EAR, each of these inherently implicates critical national security concerns. Along with these specific control designations, the Government also takes additional steps to protect national security by restricting the flow of goods, money, and services where necessary. The EAR, for example, restricts exports to certain military end-users and certain foreign entities where the Government has determined that their receipt of certain exports presents an unacceptable security risk. In addition, sanctions and country embargoes imposed pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act are grounded in the need to protect the national security of the United States by providing additional controls on the export of goods and services to certain countries. We strongly encourage the Commission to ensure that the language of §2M5.1 unambiguously encompasses the full spectrum of national security-related controls, including those that could apply to the transfer of goods and services. Clarifying the broad application of §2M5.1 would reinforce the conclusion reached by multiple courts that §2M5.1’s reference to “national security controls” encompasses the broader definition of “national security” and is not a limitation tied to the specific NS designation under the EAR. See, e.g. , United States v. Hanna , 661 F.3d 271, 293 (6th Cir. 2011) (applying §2M5.1(a)(1) to a violation of Iraq embargo because “in Executive Orders like the Iraq embargo, the President determines that a particular country poses a ‘threat to the national security’ of the country”); United States v. Elashyi , 554 F.3d 480, 508 (5th Cir. 2008) (applying § 2M5.1(a)(1) to export violations involving Libya and Syria because “[t]he President, exercising the power vested in him by Congress, determined that it was a threat to national security to allow the unlicensed and unauthorized sale of certain goods, including computers, to anyone in those countries”); United States v. McKeeve , 131 F.3d 1, 14 (1st Cir. 1997) (reasoning that, because “[t]he embargo is an exercise of executive power authorized by IEEPA to deal with any unusual and extraordinary threat . . . to the national security,” it “is intended as a national security control” (internal citation and quotation marks omitted); United States v. Shetterly , 971 F.2d 67, 76 (7th Cir. 1992) (noting that the higher base offense level under §2M5.1 applied because “[o]ne of the bases of [export controls] is to protect national security”). Notwithstanding this weight of the case law, however, at least one court recently interpreted §2M5.1’s reference to “national security controls” to apply only where an offense involves those items designated NS pursuant to the EAR. In a 2019 sentencing decision in the Middle District of Pennsylvania, the court granted the defendant’s request to apply a base level offense of 14 pursuant to §2M5.1 because the items were not designated NS under the EAR. See 

Order, ECF No. 61, United States v. Komoroski , 3:CR-17-156 (M.D. Penn. Dec. 11, 2019) August 1, 2023 

Kathleen Cooper Grilli, General Counsel 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle NE, Suite 2-500 

Washington, DC 20002-8002 

Dear Ms. Cooper Grilli, 

I am writing to request the assistance of the United States Sentencing Commission (Commission) to consider including language in the Commission’s 2024 Guidelines Manual to add a 2-point sentencing enhancement for those cases involving theft from the National Archives and Record Administration (NARA). By way of background, I have included an assessment (see attachment) of this matter conducted by my staff during 2019 after a federal judge expressed concerns about gaps in the sentencing guidelines that prevent 2-point sentencing enhancement for thefts of NARA’s holdings. Increased sentences would offer additional accountability and deterrence against theft from NARA's facilities nationwide. 

Consistent with other provisions in the sentencing guidelines, thefts of historically significant federal records entrusted to NARA should also get the 2-point sentencing enhancement that thefts of cultural heritage resources and museums do. Thank you in advance for your assistance with this important matter. We believe that enhancing the penalties for theft from NARA will serve to better protect historically significant and irreplaceable federal records. 

Best regards, 

Dr. Brett M. Baker 

Inspector General 

Attachment: 

NARA-C-19-0203-A Limited Assessment of the United States Sentencing Commission's Sentencing Guidelines Regarding Theft of NARA's Holdings. FEDERAL DEFENDER SENTENCING GUIDELINES COMMITTEE 

801 I Street, 3rd Floor Sacramento, California 95814 Chair: Heather Williams Phone: 916.498.5700 August 1, 2023 Honorable Carlton W. Reeves Chair United States Sentencing Commission One Columbus Circle, N.E. Suite 2-500, South Lobby Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 

Re: Defender Comment on the 2023–2024 Proposed Priorities 

Dear Judge Reeves: The Federal Public and Community Defenders are pleased to provide our comments on the Commission’s 2023–2024 proposed priorities. 1 We appreciated working with the Commission last year, were encouraged by our July meeting, and hope the Commission will continue and expand its commitment to “operate in a deliberative, empirically based, and inclusive manner” this year. 2Indeed, operating inclusively is particularly important this year, as the Commission’s proposed priorities list could have a significant, far-reaching impact on federal sentencing. Priorities like simplifying the guidelines (Priority 3) and addressing the commentary’s validity and enforceability (Priority 4) target the foundations of our sentencing guidelines system, having the potential to change the way the system operates. Other priorities, like continued career offender guideline review (Priority 5) and potential amendments to youthful offense treatment (Priority 6) could ameliorate longstanding racial inequities and result in fairer sentences better reflecting the advancement of scientific, psychological, and sociological knowledge. And Priorities 1 (assessing the Bureau of Prisons (BOP)) and 2 (promoting 1 See USSC Proposed Priorities for Amendment Cycle, 88 Fed. Reg. 39907-01 (June 20, 2023) (“USSC Proposed Priorities”), https://tinyurl.com/2hu7cv83.  

> 2Remarks of Carlton W. Reeves, Chair of the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Washington, D.C., at 4 (Oct. 28, 2022), https://tinyurl.com/92746mhp.

Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 2 alternatives to incarceration (ATI) and diversion programs) could impact how much time our clients serve in prison—and how they spend that time. Defender involvement and insight on these priorities, related research, and proposed amendments are critical. 3Below are our comments on the Commission’s proposed priorities. We also encourage the Commission to revisit our May 24, 2023 Annual Letter and reconsider prioritizing the issues we raised there. 4 

> 3

As mentioned, our Commission Liaison Subcommittee appreciated the opportunity to meet with the Commission last month. Working with the Commission to identify ways to increase Defender involvement during this, and future, amendment cycles is a long-time goal. 4 See Letter from Michael Caruso, Chair, Fed. Defenders Sent’g Guidelines Comm. to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n (May 24, 2023) (“Defenders’ 2023–2024 Annual Letter”). Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 3 

Table of Contents 

I. Proposed Priority No. 1: Bureau of Prisons ................................................. 4

II. Proposed Priority No. 2: Promotion of ATI and Diversion Programs ......... 6

III. Proposed Priority No. 3: Simplification of the Guidelines .......................... 7

IV. Proposed Priority No. 5: Career Offender .................................................... 8

A. Updating the data analyses and statutory recommendations set forth in the Commission’s 2016 Career Offender Report. ............... 8

B. Devising and conducting workshops to discuss the career offender guideline’s scope and impact, including discussing possible alternative approaches to the “categorical approach.” .................. 10 

C. Possible consideration of other appropriate amendments. ........... 12 

V. Proposed Priority No. 6: Offenses Committed by Youths ......................... 12 

VI. Proposed Priority No. 9: Other Issues………………………………………. 14 

Technical Amendment Correcting §2D1.1(a)(1) and (a)(3) ........... 14 

Reform the Drug Trafficking Guidelines ....................................... 16 

Prohibit Acquitted Conduct............................................................ 17 

D. Mens Rea Reform ............................................................................ 18 Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 4 

I. Proposed Priority No. 1: Bureau of Prisons 

Defenders are pleased the Commission proposed prioritizing an assessment of whether BOP practices effectively meet the purposes of sentencing and is considering recommendations and amendments to ensure individuals sentenced to prison serve no more BOP time than necessary. 5 The Defenders have long litigated and advocated for greater availability of community corrections and against sentence calculation and programming rules that extend sentences. The relevant BOP history and the Commission’s statutory directive are set out in Stephen R. Sady’s October 2022 Federal Sentencing Reporter article, attached to this letter. 6 The Commission should consider and adopt each of the article’s proposed recommendations; each is already authorized by statute. BOP’s failure to fully implement congressionally approved measures has inevitably resulted in over-incarceration: greater prison time than needed to accomplish the goals of federal sentencing. The specific recommendations include greater access to and availability of community corrections (reentry centers and home confinement), permitting full calculation of time in pretrial custody for immigration detention and concurrent sentences, and full eligibility for mitigating programs such as the residential drug abuse program. BOP’s failure to fully utilize ameliorative statutes results in wasted and expensive time behind bars and limitations on the reach of rehabilitative programs. The Commission should act decisively to counteract the skewing of guidelines sentences toward longer and harsher prison time by using its resources and expertise to recommend execution of sentences with full implementation of available ameliorative statutes. 

In addition, the Commission should explore possible amendments to ensure that prison conditions and BOP mismanagement are considered on the front 5 See USSC Proposed Priorities, at 39907. 6 See Stephen R. Sady, Advice to New Commissioners: The U.S. Sentencing Commission Should Address the Failure of the Bureau of Prisons to Adequately Implement Statutes that Reduce Prison Time , 35 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 12 (2022). Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 5 end. 7 From overcrowded, understaffed, and crumbling facilities 8 to insufficient medical care 9 and instances of sexual and physical abuse, 10 7 For instance, the Commission could lower the ranges on the sentencing table, amend §5G1.3 to better encourage judges to account for all time in custody, or create a downward departure to account for the conditions under which a sentence to BOP custody would be served. 8 See, e.g. , Fed. Bureau of Prisons, Federal Bureau of Prisons Factsheet (May 12, 2023), https://tinyurl.com/2p93eut9 (reporting BOP’s population increased in FY 2021 and BOP “continues to experience substantial crowding in medium and high security facilities”); Glenn Thrush, Short on Staff, Prisons Enlist Teachers and Case Managers as Guards , N.Y. Times (May 1, 2023), https://tinyurl.com/52njy3h8 (reporting a “staffing crisis” in many federal prisons and that, as of March 2023, 21 percent of Congressionally-funded correctional officer positions remain unfilled); Dep’t of Justice Office of Inspector Gen., The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Efforts to Maintain and Construct Institutions 5, 26 (May 3, 2023), https://tinyurl.com/227b39zb (recognizing BOP facilities are aging and deteriorating, and all 123 institutions require maintenance, with three in critical stages of disrepair). 9 See, e.g. , Statement of Heather E. Williams, Before the U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Washington D.C. at 4, n.11 (Feb. 24, 2023) (collecting Inspector General reports of BOP’s catastrophic response to the COVID-19 Pandemic); U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of the Inspector Gen., Audit of the Federal Bureau of Prisons Comprehensive Medical Services Contracts Awarded to the University of Massachusetts Medical School i (2022), https://tinyurl.com/mr32k98f (“BOP did not have a reliable, consistent process in place to evaluate timeliness or quality of inmate healthcare”); U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of the Inspector Gen., Review of the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Management of Its Female Inmate Population i–ii (2018), https://bityl.co/GxND (identifying failure to provide appropriate care to women in custody); U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of the Inspector Gen., Review of the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Use of Restrictive Housing for Inmates with Mental Illness i–ii (2017), https://bityl.co/GxN9 (identifying BOP’s failure to provide adequate treatment for incarcerated people with mental illness); U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 

Department of Justice Efforts to Ensure that Restrictive Housing in Federal Detention Facilities is Used Rarely, Applied Fairly, and Subject to Reasonable Constraints, and to Implement Other Legal Requirements and Policy Recommendations 6 (2023), https://bit.ly/3S99999 (finding that “restrictive housing placements have increased by 29% since . . . 2016. . . .”). 10 See, e.g. , Williams Statement, at 2–6 (describing reported abuse in BOP); Washington Lawyers’ Comm. for Civil Rights & Urban Affs., Cruel and Usual: An Investigation into Prison Abuse at USP Thomson 3 (2023), https://tinyurl.com/3rv5ybux (exposing “extreme physical and psychological abuse” and “abusive and obstructive staff behavior” at USP Thomson and recognizing “similar issues are pervasive in the other [BOP] facilities”). See also Staff Rep. S. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 6 evidence of BOP mismanagement is plentiful. This Commission—and sentencing judges—cannot identify a sentence that is “sufficient but not greater than necessary” without knowing the conditions under which the individual’s time will be served. 11 Defender involvement in this priority is essential. We represent the vast majority of individuals who serve BOP time. Among Defender ranks are attorneys with expertise in BOP computation, its administrative policies and procedures, and BOP-related litigation. We are eager to share our insights and our clients’ experiences with the Commission as it assesses BOP’s effectiveness, identifies areas needing improvement, and develops recommendations and amendments. 

II. Proposed Priority No. 2: Promotion of ATI and Diversion Programs 

Defenders appreciate the Commission’s proposal to promote alternative sentences by increasing access to information pertaining to ATI and diversion programs. 12 As we explained last year, 13 alternative sentences are far too rare—in Fiscal Year 2022, less than 7 percent of sentences were to probation or fine only. 14 Yet “[t]he case for use of community punishments in a rational Permanent Subcomm. on Investigations of the Comm. on Homeland Sec. & Gov’t Affs., Sexual Abuse of Female Inmates in Federal Prisons at 1 & Ex. 1 (2022), https://bityl.co/H9sF; U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Report and Recommendations Concerning the Department of Justice’s Response to Sexual Misconduct by Employees of the Federal Bureau of Prisons 4 (2022), https://bityl.co/GxJW. 11 See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). Indeed, while imprisonment conditions are relevant to all purposes of sentencing, § 3553(a)(2)(D) explicitly requires sentencing courts identify the need for the sentence imposed to provide the convicted person “with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.” 12 See USSC Proposed Priorities, at 39907. 13 See Letter from Michael Caruso, Chair, Fed. Defenders Sent’g Guidelines Comm. to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n at 18 (Oct. 17, 2022). 14 See USSC, FY 2022 Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics , fig. 6 (2023), https://tinyurl.com/5n6p6y3y. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 7 society is a no-brainer.” 15 Community-based corrections are more effective than prison at rehabilitation and reducing recidivism. 16 Defenders remain eager to work with the Commission on this priority, including any workshop, seminar, or assessment development and presentation related to these important programs. We also ask the Commission to consider amending the guidelines to encourage alternative sentences for anyone demonstrating presentence rehabilitation, regardless of their ATI or diversionary program participation. 17 

III. Proposed Priority No. 3: Simplification of the Guidelines 

Defenders support any efforts to make the guidelines fairer and better aligned to our advisory guideline scheme, including those simplifying guidelines applications. A great place to start is amending Chapter 5 to better reflect modern, post-Booker sentencing practices. For instance, the tension between Chapter 5’s restrictive policy statements and the sentencing court’s expansive duty under § 3553(a) to consider our client’s history and characteristics causes confusion about how the sentence should account for personal mitigation. 18 And, as noted in our Annual Letter, some of Chapter 15 Michael Tonry, Community Punishments , in 4 Reforming Criminal Justice: Punishment, Incarceration, and Release 187 (2017), https://bityl.co/HTae. 16 See Federal Public and Community Defenders Comment on Alternatives-to-Incarceration Programs (Proposal 10), at 1–2 & accompanying notes (Mar. 14, 2023). 17 See id. at 3–5. 18 See, e.g. , Letter from Hon. Robert Holmes Bell, U.S. District Court for the Western District of Michigan, to the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, at 1–2 (Mar. 1, 2010) (noting that Chapter 5H has been “troubling” from its inception as it conflicts with § 3553(a) and recounting a pre-Booker sentencing over which he presided and experienced “difficulties . . . attempting to bring the factor found in §5H1.11 in line with [the individual’s] ‘history and characteristics’”); cf. United States v. Eversole ,487 F.3d 1024, 1036 (6th Cir. 2007) (Merritt, J., dissenting) (“The sentencing courts should forget about the Guidelines when they conflict with the clear statutory rules. It is clear that the statutory rule limiting punishment to a sentence ‘not greater than necessary,’ combined with the language of rehabilitation contemplating ‘medical care or other correctional treatment’ has been cast aside and not even considered in this case.”). Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 8 5’s policy statements conflict with one another 19 and with policies contained elsewhere in the guidelines. 20 This further complicates and confuses guidelines application. Defenders would potentially also support other simplification endeavors better promoting sentences “sufficient, but not greater than necessary.” 21 We look forward to working with the Commission to identify guideline system areas needing improvement and ways to improve them. 

IV. Proposed Priority No. 5: Career Offender 

In its proposed priorities, the Commission lists three potential areas of “[c]ontinued examination of the career offender guidelines,” including: (1) updating the Commission’s 2016 report to Congress, (2) spearheading workshops and discussions on the career offender guideline and possible alternatives to the categorical approach, and (3) consideration of appropriate amendments. 22 We commend the Commission for charting a cautious, thoughtful, inclusive, and data-driven approach to any further career offender guideline amendments, and address each of these three areas below. 

A. Updating the data analyses and statutory recommendations set forth in the Commission’s 2016 Career Offender Report. 

The 2016 Career Offender Report is broadly cited for: (a) concluding that those in a drug-trafficking-only pathway to career offender status have a significantly lower recidivism rate than other career offenders, and (b) recommending Congress amend 28 U.S.C. § 994(h) to exclude these 19 See Defenders’ 2023–2024 Annual Letter, at 20 n.91 (observing that a disadvantaged upbringing is “not relevant” in determining whether a departure is warranted, §5H1.12, but mental and emotional conditions—which could be related to a disadvantaged childhood—“may be relevant,” §5H1.3). 20 See id. at 18 n.80 (addressing the disconnect between the family circumstances policy statement, §5H1.6, and the Commission’s recently adopted policy statement on reductions in sentence, §1B1.13). 21 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). 22 See USSC Proposed Priorities, at 39907. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 9 individuals. 23 We welcome any narrowing of the directive. But years of data demonstrate the career offender guideline is overly punitive, lacks a principled basis, and exacerbates racial disparity in federal sentencing— whether triggered by “controlled substance offenses” or “crimes of violence.” 24 In § II.B of Defenders’ Comment on the Commission’s 2023 guideline amendment Proposals 4B and 6, we encouraged the Commission to update its 2016 Report by: (1) articulating the justification for the career offender guideline, (2) identifying the category of individuals, if any, for which a near-maximum career-offender sentence would be the least punishment necessary under the articulated justification, and (3) striving toward a guideline that captures only individuals in the identified category. 25 If there is no principled justification for imposing near-maximum sentences based on criteria the career offender directive identifies, the Commission should say so. 26 We are eager to discuss these and other suggestions with the Commission. One can read the 2016 Report’s emphasis on relief for those in the drug-trafficking-only pathway to suggest that data support near-maximum career-offender sentences for those in the mixed and violent-only pathways. 27 The 23 See USSC, Report to Congress: Career Offender Enhancements 25–45 (2016) (“ Career Offender Report ”), https://tinyurl.com/bdz8cfdb. 24 See Statement of Juval O. Scott Before the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Washington, D.C., at 1, 3–12 (Mar. 8, 2023) (“J. Scott Statement”). 25 See Federal Public and Community Defenders Comment on Circuit Conflict re: Controlled Substance Offense (Proposal 4B) and Proposals to Amend Career Offender Guideline (Proposal 6), at 4–10 (Mar. 14, 2023) (“Defenders’ 2023 Career Offender Comment”). 26 See id. at 10. 27 See Career Offender Report , at 41 (reporting “drug trafficking only offenders” had the “lowest rate of recidivism,” and explaining how this supports “the Commission’s conclusion that they should not be subjected to the same recidivist enhancements as the other career offenders”). Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 10 Commission can take steps to examine this assumption. Two specific points bear repeating here. 

First , for those convicted of crimes of violence, the Commission can compare the recidivism rates between those assigned career offender status with those not assigned such status. 28 As our recent Comment noted, the Commission’s 2022 report on recidivism of persons committing violent offenses reported that, as a group, those placed in CHC VI based on their career-offender or armed-career-criminal status had a 65 percent recidivism rate—lower than the CHC III group’s 66.3 percent rate. 29 

Second , given the broad academic consensus that longer sentences do not 

serve as either a specific or general deterrent, the Commission can study how incarceration interacts with crime-prevention goals. 30 The Commission’s 2022 report concluding incarceration sentences of longer than five years have a preventative effect is an outlier conclusion in the academic literature. 31 We encourage the Commission to collaborate with other experts to explore a more comprehensive understanding of the interactions between incarceration and crime prevention. 

B. Devising and conducting workshops to discuss the career offender guideline’s scope and impact, including discussing possible alternative approaches to the “categorical approach.” 

Defenders look forward to consulting with the Commission as it devises workshops to discuss the career offender guideline’s scope and impact. No 28 See Defenders’ 2023 Career Offender Comment, at 7–8. 29 See id. at 8 & n.15 (citing, inter alia , USSC, Recidivism of Federal Violent Offenders Released in 2010 29 fig. 14 (2022), https://tinyurl.com/2mwju7xt). 30 See Statement of Michael Carter Before the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Washington, D.C., at 13–14 (Mar. 7, 2023); Defenders’ 2023 Career Offender Comment, at 9–10 & accompanying notes. 31 See USSC, Length of Incarceration and Recidivism (2022); Tina Woehr & Allison Bruning, Limitations of the Commission’s ‘Length of Incarceration and Recidivism’ Report , 35 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 43, 43–46 (2022), https://bit.ly/3ZEBo2y; see also J. Scott Statement & accompanying notes. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 11 such discussion would be complete without hearing from those most directly affected by the guideline: 

 individuals sentenced under the guideline, their families and community members, and their attorneys, 

 jurists who have thought deeply about this guideline who could provide insight into the 20 percent judicial compliance rate, 32 and 

 criminologists who could help tease out what, if any, principled penological purpose this guideline serves. As for workshops discussing possible alternative approaches to the Supreme Court’s categorical approach, such workshops ideally would permit federal judges, attorneys, and probation officers to discuss frankly, in a problem-solving environment, why the categorical approach stirs controversy and what alternatives would look like. Workshops should include state court practitioners to discuss why much of the presentence report’s information— information derived from arrest reports, court records, and other documents—is unreliable for imposing draconian sentencing enhancements. 33 As we suggest in our Comment, the categorical approach may, like democracy, be the worst system except for all the other systems. 34 Frank discussions may uncover solutions other than abandoning the approach the Supreme Court has long mandated for statutory criminal enhancements and immigration matters. Perhaps, for example, probation officers could be relieved of the obligation to perform this analysis. The Commission could devise and provide additional training and resources for judges and attorneys. We do not pretend to know the answers but are eager to help the Commission find solutions. 32 See USSC, Quick Facts: Career Offenders (July 2023), https://tinyurl.com/mcwwfwf2 (reporting 20.2 percent of sentences within range). 33 See, e.g., Transcript of Public Hearing Before the U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Washington, D.C., at 106–07 (Mar. 8, 2023) (Susan Lin). 34 See Defenders’ 2023 Career Offender Comment, at 11; see also J. Scott Statement, at 3–12. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 12 

C. Possible consideration of other appropriate amendments. 

As we expressed, the career offender guideline should be contracted, not further expanded, given its role in our federal criminal legal system as an unjustified driver of mass incarceration and racial disparity. 35 Again, Defenders stand ready to explore with the Commission avenues to narrow the guideline consistent with § 994(h) 36 and explore what it can recommend to Congress to achieve real reform. 

V. Proposed Priority No. 6: Offenses Committed by Youths 

Defenders commend the Commission for considering amendments to the guidelines’ treatment of youth-committed offenses. 37 Reforming the guidelines’ treatment of both current and prior youth-committed offenses is critical to reflect significant advancements in human knowledge and to avoid unwarranted disparities. Research on brain development confirms the guidelines’ treatment of youth offenses is outdated and unfair. Years ago, this Commission recognized the 35 See Defenders’ 2023 Career Offender Comment, at 2–4. - 

> 36

See, e.g., id . at 22–26; Statement of Michael Caruso Before the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Washington D.C., at 22–23, 25–28 (Mar. 7, 2023) (proposing contracting the definition of “controlled substance offense” to those offenses enumerated in 28 U.S.C. § 994(h)); Letter from Natasha Sen & Patrick Nash, Practitioner’s Advisory Group, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, at 22 & n.2 (Mar. 14, 2023); Letter from Natasha Sen & Patrick Nash, Practitioner’s Advisory Group, to the Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, at 2 (Sept. 23, 2023) (recommending the Commission conform the “career offender” definitions to the First Step Act’s definitions of “serious drug felony” and “serious violent felony”). 37 The Guidelines Manual does not define “youth.” However, in its 2017 report on youth-committed offenses, the Commission defined youth as “25 years old or younger at the time of sentencing.” In adopting this definition, the Commission’s decision was informed by “recent case law and neuroscience research in which there is a growing recognition that people may not gain full reasoning skills and abilities until they reach age 25 on average.” USSC, Youthful Offenders in the Federal System 

5 (2017) (“ Youth Offense Report ”), https://tinyurl.com/5n8v62ah. For this letter, and consistent with the research, “offenses committed by youths” refer to offenses committed by people in mid-20s or younger. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 13 available research indicates youths are simply different than adults. 38 In fact, decades of developmental neuroscience and behavioral psychology research evinces young people are less culpable than older people whose brains and character traits are more fully formed. Neuroscientific studies reveal “the areas of the brain that govern impulse control, planning, and foresight of consequences mature slowly over the course of adolescence and into early adulthood, while the arousal of the limbic system around puberty increases sensation seeking in early adolescence.” 39 Consistent with these findings, “[a] large body of behavioral research confirms that adolescents are more impulsive, risk-seeking, subject to peer influence, and inclined to focus on immediate consequences of their choices than are adults.” 40 Strong policy reasons exist to change the guidelines’ treatment of youth-committed offenses as well. As we explained in previous letters, treating youthful offenses—particularly those committed by people younger than age 18—like adult offenses results in numerous unwarranted disparities and perpetuates racial and ethnic inequities. 41 38 See Youth Offense Report , at 5–7 (summarizing case law and neuroscience research). 39 Elizabeth S. Scott, “ Children are Different”: Constitutional Values and Justice Policy , 11 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 71, 87 (2013); Laurence Steinberg, Adolescent Brain Science and Juvenile Justice Policymaking , 23 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 410, 414–15 (2017) (describing brain imaging studies evidencing immaturity in the young person’s brain regions critical to executive function and heightened responsiveness in the socioemotional incentive-processing system, which taxes the capacities for self-regulation) ; see also Graham v. Florida , 560 U.S. 48, 68 (2010) (“[P]arts of the brain involved in behavior control continue to mature through late adolescence.”).  

> 40

Scott, supra note 39, at 87; see also Steinberg, supra note 39, at 413–14 (discussing behavioral studies revealing that compared to adults, youth are more impulsive, more likely to engage in sensation-seeking, more likely to succumb to peer pressure, and more likely to consider immediate gratification than the future consequences of their actions); Elizabeth Cauffman et al., How Developmental Science Influences Juvenile Justice Reform , 8 UC Irvine L. Rev. 21, 28–29 (2018) (same); Miller v. Alabama , 567 U.S. 460, 471 (2012) (recognizing three behavioral “gaps” between adolescents and adults that illustrate the reduced culpability of adolescents who commit crime). 41 See, e.g. , Letter from Michael Caruso, Chair, Fed. Sent’g Guidelines Comm., to Hon. Carlton W. Reeves, Chair, U.S. Sent’g Guidelines Comm’n at 21–22 & accompanying notes (Sept. 14, 2022); Letter from Marjorie Meyers, Chair, Fed. Def. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 14 The Commission should start with amending §4A1.2(d). Defenders have repeatedly requested that the Commission amend the criminal history rules to exclude all offenses committed prior to age 18 from the criminal history score. 42 The Commission might even consider based on the recognized research whether prior convictions committed by persons ages 18 to mid-20s also deserve amended treatment. In addition to amending the guidelines’ treatment of prior youth-committed offenses, the Commission should reconsider its treatment of instant offenses committed by youths. 43 The guidelines should account for recognized brain development research and the Commission should encourage courts to consider this research when calculating the guidelines and imposing appropriate sentences for offenses committed by people in their mid-20s or younger. 

VI. Proposed Priority No. 9: Other Issues the Commission Should Prioritize 

Technical Amendment Correcting §2D1.1(a)(1) and (a)(3). 

The Commission should add to this cycle’s priorities a technical amendment to §§2D1.1(a)(1) and (3) to correct a longstanding application problem, the impact of which will be exacerbated by the Commission’s 2023 §2D1.1 Sent’g Guidelines Comm., to the Hon. William H. Pryor, Jr., Acting Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n 2–3, 20–34 (Feb. 20, 2017); see also United States Commission on Civil Rights, Beyond Suspensions: Examining School Discipline Policies and Connections to the School-to-Prison Pipeline for Students of Color with Disabilities ,48 (2019), https://tinyurl.com/fd6spcwb (discussing data showing Black and multiracial students with disabilities were overrepresented in school-related arrests and referrals to law enforcement in two different academic years); American Civil Liberties Union, School-to-Prison Pipeline Infographic (2016), https://tinyurl.com/3jwn3ucu (noting “[z]ero-tolerance” policies that “criminalize minor infractions of school rules” have “resulted in Black students facing disproportionately harsher punishment than white students in public schools”). 42 See, e.g. , Letter from Marjorie Meyers, Chair, Fed. Def. Sent’g Guidelines Comm., to the Hon. William H. Pryor, Jr., Acting Chair, U.S. Sent’g Comm’n 2–3, 20–34 (Feb. 20, 2017); Defenders’ 2022–2023 Annual Letter at 20–22; Defenders’ 2023–2024 Annual Letter. At a bare minimum the Commission should revise Chapter 4 to exclude juvenile adjudications from the criminal history score. 43 See generally §5H1.1. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 15 Amendment. 44 As amended, §2D1.1(a)(1)(B) is likely to be interpreted to recommend a guideline sentence of life in cases where the statutory minimum sentence is not life, but twenty years. 45 We understand §2D1.1(a)(1) and (3) base offense levels are intended to “apply only in the case of a conviction under circumstances specified in the statutes cited.” 46 Thus, for example, §2D1.1(a)(1) should recommend a life sentence only for an individual convicted of distribution resulting in death or serious-bodily injury, where the government filed a § 851 information, and the court sustained it. This understanding comports with the language of these guidelines and their amendment history and purpose. 47 But courts have long applied those elevated base offense levels regardless of whether the offense of conviction established the death- or serious-bodily-injury resulting element, and even where the government declined to seek the statutorily specified § 851 enhancement. 48 That is to say, courts apply §2D1.1(a)(1) base offense level 43 (which calls for a guideline life sentence for all criminal history categories) even in cases where the “circumstances specified in the statutes cited” are not met. This is a longstanding problem impacting a small number of individuals—but that impact is severe. 49 44 See USSC Notice of Submission to Congress of amendments to the sentencing guidelines effective November 1, 2023, 88 Fed Reg. 28254-01, 28263 (May 3, 2023), https://tinyurl.com/3fmtwhdk (2023 Adopted Amendments). 45 See id. ; Federal Public and Community Defenders Comment on First Step Act—Drug Offenses (Proposal 2), at 1–2 (Mar. 14, 2023) (Defenders’ 2023 Comment on FSA—Drug Offenses); Statement of Michael Caruso, Before the U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Washington D.C. at 9–14 (Mar. 7, 2023) (“Caruso Statement on FSA—Drug Offenses”). 46 USSC App. C, Amend. 123, Reason for Amendment (Nov. 1, 1989); see also 

USSC App. C, Amend. 727, Reason for Amendment (Nov. 1, 2009). 47 See Caruso Statement on FSA—Drug Offenses, at 12. 48 See, e.g., United States v. Johnson , 706 F.3d 728, 732–33 (6th Cir. 2023); see also Caruso Statement on FSA—Drug Offenses, at 12–13 (explaining that, of the 107 individuals assigned enhanced base offense levels under §2D1.1(a)(1) or (a)(3) in the last five years, only 30 were subject to § 851 informations). 49 See Caruso Statement on FSA—Drug Offenses, at 12–13. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 16 The 2023 §2D.1.1 Amendment will exacerbate this problem because it incorporates an anomaly from the First Step Act setting a lower bar to trigger a mandatory-life sentence for those convicted of trafficking only a detectable amount of Schedule I and II controlled substances, than for those convicted of a mandatory-minimum-triggering quantity. 50 In clear terms: those convicted of the least drug amount will more easily be subject to a mandatory-life sentence than those convicted of mandatory minimum amounts. The Department of Justice recognizes “Sections 841(b)(1)(C) and 960(b)(3) [now] prescribe a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment upon a lesser showing than that required under Section 841(b)(1)(A), 841(b)(1)(B), 960(b)(1), and 960(b)(2).” 51 And “to promote consistency in sentencing under Sections 841(b)(1) and 960(b), the Department” has thus directed prosecutors, “as a matter of policy not to seek a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment under Section 841(b)(1)(C) or 960(b)(3) unless a defendant’s prior conviction meets the statutory definition of a ‘serious drug felony’ or ‘serious violent felony.’” 52 Simply put, the Department will not seek a mandatory life sentence for § 841(b)(1)(C) offenses if a similarly-situated individual would not be eligible for that sentence if convicted of §§ 841(b)(1)(A) or (B). But, as amended, §2D1.1(a)(1)(B) will still recommend a life sentence for these individuals. 

Reform the Drug Trafficking Guidelines. 

Defenders strongly encourage the Commission to reconsider prioritizing reforms to §2D1.1, as set forth in our Annual Letter. 53 For the reasons articulated there, section §2D1.1 should be delinked from the statutory mandatory minimums and should focus instead on role-based culpability. At a bare minimum, the Commission should lower the guidelines for methamphetamine (actual) and “Ice” to eliminate the irrational purity-based distinctions in methamphetamine offense levels. 50 See 2023 Adopted Amendments, at 28263. 51 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, First Step Act Annual Report 50 (Apr. 2022), https://tinyurl.com/22b4hm6a. 52 Id.   

> 53 See Defenders 2023–2024 Annual Letter, at 3–13.

Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 17 

Prohibit Acquitted Conduct. 

The right to trial by jury has deep-rooted, historical foundations. In Apprendi v. New Jersey , the Supreme Court recognized: “To guard against a spirit of oppression and tyranny on the part of rulers,” and “as the great bulwark of our civil and political liberties,” trial by jury has been understood to require that “ the truth of every accusation , whether preferred in the shape of indictment, information, or appeal, should afterwards be confirmed by the unanimous suffrage of twelve of [the defendant’s] equals and neighbours.” 54 Using acquitted conduct to increase the sentencing guidelines range under §1B1.3 (“acquitted conduct sentencing”) is antithetical to this important principle. The Commission considered eliminating or limiting acquitted conduct sentencing at least four times in the past, dating back over thirty years. 55 Regretfully, it has not yet done so. But this Commission can remedy the injustice of acquitted conduct sentencing now. One month ago, when the Supreme Court denied certiorari in McClinton v. United States , Justices Sotomayor, Kavanaugh, Gorsuch, and Barrett explained their denial should not be misinterpreted to signal the Court’s lack of concern over the “important questions” raised by acquitted conduct sentencing. 56 Instead, these Justices denied certiorari precisely because this Commission committed itself to resolving questions around acquitted conduct 54 530 U.S. 466, 477 (2000) (alteration in original) (first quoting 2 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States 540–41 (4th ed. 1873); and then quoting 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 343 (1769)). 55 See 88 Fed. Reg. 7180 , 7224–7225 (2023); 62 Fed. Reg. 152, 161–62 (1997); 58 Fed. Reg. 67,522, 67,541 (1993); 57 Fed. Reg. 62,832, 62,832, 62,848 (1992). 56 McClinton v. United States , 600 U.S. ----, 143 S. Ct. 2400, 2401 (2023) (Sotomayor, J., statement respecting denial of cert.) (“As many jurists have noted, the use of acquitted conduct to increase a [person’s] Sentencing Guidelines range and sentence raises important questions that go to the fairness and perceived fairness of the criminal justice system.”); id. at 2403 (Kavanaugh, J., joined by Gorsuch and Barrett, JJ., statement respecting denial of cert.) (“The use of acquitted conduct to alter a [person’s] Sentencing Guidelines range raises important questions.”). Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 18 sentencing “in the coming year.” 57 Defenders hope to see acquitted conduct sentencing on the Commission’s final priority list and remain eager to work with the Commission to eliminate or restrict acquitted conduct sentencing during the upcoming amendment cycle. 

D. Mens Rea Reform. 

This year the Commission should also prioritize mens rea reform throughout the Guideline Manual: it should remove strict liability or negligence enhancements and heighten the mental intent required under the relevant conduct provision for jointly undertaken criminal activity. 58 At a minimum, the Commission should finish what it started earlier this year by reforming §2K2.1(b)(4). While Defenders were disappointed by the newly added privately manufactured firearms (PMFs) enhancement, we were pleased to at least see the Commission recognize the importance of mens rea 

in that enhancement. 59 But the reasons for adding a mens rea requirement to that enhancement apply equally to stolen firearms and firearms with an altered or obliterated serial number. 60 Indeed, in its Reason for Amendment ,the Commission indicated it added PMFs to §2K2.1(b)(4) because “there is no meaningful distinction between a firearm with an obliterated serial number . . . and a firearm not marked with a serial number.” 61 Recognizing this, the Commission should add a knowledge or willful blindness requirement to the rest of §2K2.1(b)(4). 57 Id. at 2403 (Sotomayor, J., statement respecting denial of cert.); see also id. 

(Kavanaugh, J., joined by Gorsuch and Barrett, JJ., statement respecting denial of cert.) (“[T]he Sentencing Commission is currently considering the issue [of the use of acquitted conduct to raise the guideline range]. It is appropriate for this Court to wait for the Sentencing Commission’s determination before the Court decides whether to grant certiorari in a case involving the use of acquitted conduct.”). 58 See Defenders’ 2022–2023 Annual Letter, at 9–12. 59 See 2023 Adopted Amendments, at 28267 (“[S]ubsection (b)(4)(B)(ii) only applies if the defendant knew or had reason to believe that the firearm involved in the offense was not otherwise marked with a serial number . . . or was willfully blind to or consciously avoided knowledge of such fact.”). 60 See Defenders’ 2023–2024 Annual Letter, at 27. 61 2023 Adopted Amendments, at 28269. Hon. Carlton W. Reeves August 1, 2023 Page 19 

* * * *As always, the Defenders appreciate the Commission considering our viewpoints, experience, and unique knowledge, and look forward to working with the Commission this year. Very truly yours, 

Heather Williams Federal Public Defender Chair, Federal Defender Sentencing Guidelines Committee Attachment cc (w/ attach.): Hon. Luis Felipe Restrepo, Vice Chair Hon. Laura E. Mate, Vice Chair Hon. Claire Murray, Vice Chair Hon. Claria Horn Boom, Commissioner Hon. John Gleeson, Commissioner Hon. Candice C. Wong, Commissioner Patricia K. Cushwa, Commissioner Ex Officio 

Jonathan J. Wroblewski, Commissioner Ex Officio 

Kenneth P. Cohen, Staff Director Kathleen C. Grilli, General Counsel Advice to New Commissioners: The U.S. Sentencing Commission Should Address the Failure of the Bureau of Prisons to Adequately Implement Statutes That Reduce Prison Time I. Introduction 

As the U.S. Sentencing Commission revives after years without a quorum, a top priority should be addressing a statutory duty that has been neglected since the Com-mission’s inception: the mandatory obligation, under 28 U.S.C. § 994(g), to “make recommendations concerning any change or expansion in the nature or capacity of [cor-rectional] facilities and services that might become neces-sary as a result of the guidelines promulgated.” In 1987, when the Federal Sentencing Guidelines came into effect, there were fewer than 50,000 prisoners in the federal sys-tem; since then, that number has tripled to more than 150,000 federal prisoners. Although Congress has repeat-edly provided options and directives that would reduce the time defendants spend in prison, the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) has failed to implement the full scope of the available authority, resulting in expensive and pointless overincarceration. The newly constituted Commission’s role in making recommendations to the BOP is informed by history: the thirty-five years since the effective date of the Sen-tencing Reform Act. Congress “intended that the Commission make recommendations as to any changes in th[e correctional system’s] capacity that it believes to be necessary in light of its sentencing guidelines.” 1 Nevertheless, to date, the Commission has done little to exercise its recommendation mandate, despite the need to balance the greater length of guidelines sentences with full availability of ameliora-tive programming. With a new BOP Director coming aboard, now is the time to exercise that authority. The Commission should prioritize making recommendations based on the practical realities of how the BOP carries out its responsibilities. A decade ago, the Government Accountability Office and the Federal Public and Community Defenders provided infor-mation regarding a wide range of simple and fair reforms that could be implemented without new legislation to close the huge gap between what sentencing statutes allow and how the BOP carries out its authority, 2 yet little change resulted. Many of those same simple reforms remain available today, with additional ameliorative statutes now in play. This Article looks first to the history that demonstrates the urgent need for the Commission to act now to provide specific programmatic advice to the BOP. Setting out the statutory bases and history of implementation under each ameliorative statute, it then offers thirteen specific recom-mendations that the Commission should make to the BOP, regarding six ameliorative programs: community correc-tions, the Residential Drug Abuse Program (RDAP), sen-tence computation rules, consecutive/concurrent sentencing rules, boot camp, and earned time credits. Each of the suggested recommendations calls for simple administrative fixes, without any new legislation, and each recommendation could conserve millions in taxpayer dol-lars and permit men and women to return to their families days, weeks, and months earlier. The key recommendations can be summarized as follows: 

 Increase the availability of community corrections commensurate with repeated statutory directives for greater use of residential reentry centers and home confinement (18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)). 

 Expand eligibility and availability of sentence reductions under RDAP by (1) allowing individuals with detainers to both participate in the program and receive sentence reductions, (2) maximizing the length of sentence reductions and community cor-rections for those who successfully complete the residential program, and (3) eliminating mere fire-arm possession as a disqualification for sentence reductions (18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)). 

 Eliminate three sentence computation rules that create longer sentences: (1) pretrial custody credit should include time in immigration detention (18 U.S.C. § 3585(b)); (2) state concurrent sentences should receive either pretrial custody credit or nunc pro tunc designation to avoid creating de facto con-secutive sentences (18 U.S.C. §§ 3584(a) and 3585(b)); and (3) good time credits should be awarded for time in state custody on partially concurrent sentences (18 U.S.C. §§ 3585(b), 3584(a), and 3624(b)).       

> 1 2 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 •O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2

Federal Sentencing Reporter , Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 12–23, ISSN 1053-9867, electronic ISSN 1533-8363. 

© 2022 Vera Institute of Justice. All rights reserved. Please direct requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press’s Reprints and Permissions web page, https://www.ucpress.edu/journals/reprints-permissions. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1525/fsr.2022.35.1.12. 

STEPHEN R. SADY 

> Chief Deputy Federal Public Defender, District of Oregon

 Implement broader statutory and guideline stan-dards to file compassionate release motions any time extraordinary and compelling reasons exist, leaving to the sentencing judge the decision whether the sentence reduction should be granted (18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i)). 

 Revive the boot camp program to provide nonviolent offenders sentence reductions and expanded com-munity corrections (18 U.S.C. § 4046(a) and 28 C.F.R. § 524.31(b)). 

 Fully implement the First Step Act’s earned time credit program (18 U.S.C. §§ 3632(d) and 3624(g)). 

> II. The Need for Commission Action and the Existing Statutory Bases for Reform A. In the Absence of the Sentencing Commission Exercising Its Statutory Obligation to Make Recommendations Regarding Correctional Resources and Programs, Individuals Have Served More Time Than Necessary in Prison

The Commission has defined itself, for the most part, by developing the Sentencing Table’s offense levels and criminal history categories, amending the guidelines, and studying the effects of guidelines and sentencing statutes. Although these front-end functions guide the sentences imposed, the execution of sentences—back-end policies and practices—has largely been ignored. But Congress understood connection between the sen-tences imposed and how those sentences are carried out. It directed that the Commission “shall make recom-mendations concerning any change or expansion in the nature or capacity of [penal, correctional, and other] facilities and services that might become necessary as a result of the guidelines promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.” 3The Commission’s statutory role in providing recom-mendations is essential. Prisoners themselves are virtually voiceless regarding their conditions of confinement. Advocacy groups’ suggestions can be administratively shrugged off. Litigation carried out by the few attorneys with the expertise to make their way through the procedural quagmire of administrative law face the limitless resources of a multi billion-dollar agency that takes advantage of every procedural obstacle. The Commission has unique power to offer insight and influence, given its institutional expertise and statutorily conferred authority. As the United States has achieved notoriety for its rates of incarceration, 4 the Commission has occasionally taken steps to offset overly punitive sentencing, such as its work against the discriminatory and irrational 100:1 crack to powder cocaine ratio and the general reduction of Drug Quantity Table offense levels in Amendment 782. But on back-end resources and programs, the Commission has been mostly silent. Meanwhile, federal prisoners’ sentences are de facto increased by the BOP’s weak or nonexistent implementation of ameliorative statutes. For example, the Commission developed the Sentenc-ing Table’s months in prison assuming, based on 18 U.S.C. § 3624(b), that individuals would receive good time credits at the rate of fifty-four days per year, or 15 % of the sentence imposed. 5 In implementing the same statute, however, the BOP provided only forty-seven days for every year of the term of imprisonment, or 12.8 % good time credits, by granting credit based on the time actually served rather than the sentence imposed. 6 Despite years of controversy over good time credits, the Commission did nothing to either adjust its own sentencing tables or recommend that the BOP implement the good time credit statute consis-tently with the Commission’s calibration. Finally, in the First Step Act of 2018, Congress clarified that the Com-mission’s means of calculating good time credit was correct. 7 But in the meantime, for thirty-one years, well-behaved prisoners have been over-serving time in prison by days, weeks, and months—with millions of taxpayer dollars wasted. 8In deciding whether to act on its congressional power to make recommendations to the BOP, the reanimated Commission may ask itself: Why would the BOP be stinting in providing inmates with sentence reductions, community corrections, credit for time served, and good time credit authorized by statute? After years of litigating against the BOP, I cannot provide the “why,” but I can attest to the existence of a deeply entrenched institutional bias that— despite overcrowded prisons and dangerous staff-to-inmate ratios—always bends toward greater prison time. The his-tory of each recommendation demonstrates the BOP’s institutional resistance to ameliorative reform and the need for Commission advocacy. 

> B. Each Recommendation Has the Potential to Reduce Unnecessary Prison Time Through Administrative Action Based on Existing Statutory Language

Since the effective date of the guidelines era, the problem of overincarceration has been well known but ineffec-tively addressed. Even the Department of Justice, in a 1994 study that led to the RDAP and boot camp pro-grams, recognized that sentences for nonviolent offen-ders were too long, and even longer for noncitizens. 9 Yet, while ameliorative statutes exist, the history of each back-end program discussed in this Article—from community corrections, to sentence reductions and sentence calcu-lations, to compassionate release—illustrates the same pattern of unnecessary prison time served due to BOP inaction or stinting implementation. Thus, each of the suggested recommendations the Commission should make to the BOP originates in the statutes enacted as part of the Sentencing Reform Act or by later amendments, and each can be administratively implemented to reduce prison time without the need for any new legislation.         

> F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1•O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 1 3 III. Suggested Sentencing Commission Recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons A.The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend Greater Use of Community Corrections Under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)

When Congress abolished parole in the Sentencing Reform Act, the statute left in place a mechanism for “prerelease custody,” also known as “community corrections”—placing federal prisoners in the community for a period of adjust-ment near the end of their terms of imprisonment and before the commencement of their terms of supervised release. Persons in community corrections—residential reentry centers and home confinement—continue to be in the custody of the BOP serving their terms of imprison-ment. The determination of transfer to community cor-rections is based on the same individualized factors listed in 18 U.S.C. § 3621(b) that guide institutional placement. Congress has consistently placed increasing emphasis on the importance of community corrections to promote rehabili-tation, to bring down prison populations, and to save tax-payer money on incarceration ($120.59 per prisoner per day for federal prison, $97.44 for residential reentry centers, $55.00 for home confinement). 10 But the BOP has not fol-lowed the congressional lead on greater access to residential reentry centers, even cutting back in recent years on their limited availability. The Commission should recommend expansion of residential reentry centers and home confine-ment and the adoption of rules maximizing their use. 

Recommendation 1. The BOP should expand its capac-ity for community corrections by providing more fund-ing for existing resources and contracting with more reentry centers to house individuals closer to their per-manent residences. 

The Sentencing Reform Act originally said very little about what constituted pre-release custody, but it required that the BOP “shall”—to the extent practical—assure that “a prisoner serving a term of imprisonment spends a rea-sonable part, not to exceed six months, of the last 10 per centum of the term to be served under conditions that will afford the prisoner a reasonable opportunity to adjust to and prepare for his re-entry.” 11 In 1990, Congress added home confinement as an authorized component of pre-release custody. 12 And for almost twenty years, community corrections received little congressional attention. Since then, Congress has consistently ramped up the expected use of community corrections. In April 2008, with strong bipartisan support, Congress passed the Second Chance Act, which doubled the permissible time for pre-release custody to community corrections from six months to one year. 13 The new one-year maximum includes both placement in a residential reentry center and home con-finement of up to six months or 10 % of the sentence, whichever is less. 14 In a separate section of the Second Chance Act, Con-gress created a “Federal prisoner reentry initiative,” con-firming its goal to expand the use of community corrections. 15 The initiative directed the Attorney General and the BOP, subject to available appropriations, to use “the maximum allowable period in a community confinement facility” as an incentive for participation in programming. 16 The initiative also directed the Attorney General “to modify the procedures and policies” to improve transition to the community. 17 Following the Second Chance Act, Congress continued to encourage expanded use of community corrections. In the First Step Act, Congress amended § 3621(b) to require that the BOP place defendants in facilities, which include residential reentry centers, “as close as practicable to the prisoner’s primary residence,” 18 and amended § 3624(c)(2) to direct that the BOP “shall, to the extent practicable, place prisoners with lower risk levels and lower needs on home confinement for the maximum amount of time permitted under this paragraph.” 19 Most directly, Congress stated, “The Director of the Bureau of Prisons shall ensure there is sufficient prerelease custody capacity to accommodate all eligible prisoners.” 20 Then, in response to the nationwide coronavirus pandemic, Congress passed the CARES Act, which expanded the potential time a prisoner may spend on home confinement during the emergency. 21 Despite Congress’s authorization of more and longer use of community corrections, the BOP has cut back on contracts and defunded reentry centers. As documented in submis-sions to the BOP and to Congress, the BOP’s practices have shrunk the ability to provide community corrections by 

 failing to renew contracts with reentry centers and doing so without consulting the chief judge of the judicial district affected; 

 decreasing the number of reentry beds and signifi-cantly reducing the minimum number of beds for which it will guarantee payment; and 

 decreasing the amount of pre-release time, with the average length “likely to decline to about 120–125 days.” 22 As a consequence, many people are left without adequate reentry services. In Oregon, after the Lane County Sheriff ended its contract with the BOP to provide reentry services, the BOP withdrew its solicitation for a new reentry center, eliminating beds for men and women coming home to central Oregon. Similarly, the BOP cut the number of beds under contract at Portland’s Northwest Regional Reentry Center in its last contract revision, from 120 beds to 76 beds, reducing services by more than a third. Oregon is just one example of the nationwide failure to provide local resources for the critical task of transitioning citizens from prisons to our communities. 23 The BOP’s reduced support of community corrections runs exactly opposite to congressional policies expanding the availability of rehabilitative resources that return indi-viduals to their families and communities sooner. The Commission should strongly recommend increased use of community corrections as individuals complete their terms of imprisonment.       

> 1 4 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 •O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2

Recommendation 2. The BOP should promulgate a reg-ulation guiding community corrections placement pur-suant to 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(6) that includes: (a) the presumptive maximum use of pre-release community corrections; (b) earlier placement in reentry centers fol-lowed by home confinement if, in the absence of the CARES Act emergency, home confinement is limited to six months; and (c) clear directives to eliminate the informal six-month-or-less norm for community corrections. 

In the Second Chance Act, when Congress expanded community corrections authority from six months to one year, it also directed the BOP to promulgate regulations within ninety days regarding the “sufficient duration” of community placements: The Director of the Bureau of Prisons shall issue reg-ulations not later than 90 days after enactment, which shall ensure that placement in a community correctional facility is (A) conducted in a manner consistent with § 3621(b) of this title; (B) determined on an individual basis; and (C) of sufficient duration to provide the greatest like-lihood of successful reintegration into the community. 24 On October 21, 2008, “well past” the ninety-day dead-line, the BOP issued an interim rule that did little more than repeat the statutory language. 25 The actual practice on the ground remained unchanged, as informal rules maintained the pre–Second Chance Act six-month limit on community corrections absent exceptional circum-stances. 26 In any event, the interim rule was deemed invalid because the BOP did not provide notice-and-comment required by the Administrative Procedure Act. 27 Over a decade after the mandatory ninety-day deadline, the BOP still has not promulgated a valid final regulation as required by 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(6). Although advocacy groups criticized the BOP’s proposed interim rule for its failure to provide greater access to community correc-tions, 28 little has changed. The Commission should recommend that the BOP adopt the main themes of the 2011 comments on its interim rule. First, the individualized decision regarding transfer to community corrections should begin with a presumption of the maximum available community corrections, with con-siderations for delay informed by the individual designation considerations in § 3621(b). Second, in the absence of the pandemic emergency, the time in community corrections should contemplate stacking the residential reentry com-ponent on available home confinement to reach the maxi-mum available pre-release custody. Third, the rule should explicitly reject the pre–Second Chance Act six-month limit to community corrections. 

> B. The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend Greater Use of Sentence Reductions and Community Corrections Under the Residential Drug Abuse Program Authorized by 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)

In 1990, Congress mandated the creation of BOP programs to address prisoners’ needs for substance abuse treatment, which included in-prison residential treatment: RDAP. 29 But few prisoners enrolled in the rigorous residential pro-gram. In 1994, Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)(2)(B) to incentivize participation in RDAP by offering a sentence reduction of up to one year for nonviolent offenders. 30 Congress explicitly recognized reduction of prison over-crowding as a benefit of the program: “To the greatest extent possible, BOP shall prioritize the participation of nonviolent offenders in [RDAP] in a way that maximizes the benefit of sentence reduction opportunities for reducing the inmate population.” 31 The Commission has found RDAP effective at reducing recidivism. 32 But the BOP has systematically underutilized the statutory authority to reduce sentences in three basic ways: (1) by failing to allow prisoners with detainers to participate; (2) by only allowing participation at the end of the sentence, resulting in shorter sentence reductions; and (3) by disqualifying individuals with mere gun possession from early release. 

Recommendation 3. The BOP should allow all statu-torily eligible prisoners, including those with detainers, to participate in RDAP and receive the § 3621(e) sen-tence reduction. 

Beginning in 1997, Congress required the BOP to provide residential treatment to “all eligible prisoners.” 33 Congress defined the term “eligible prisoner” with only two criteria: a documented substance abuse problem and a willingness to participate in residential treatment. 34 The statute also defined “residential substance abuse treatment” as in-prison individual and group treatment, set apart from the general prison population, lasting at least six months. 35 The statutory early release incentive is available to a subset of eligible prisoners: those with nonviolent offenses who successfully complete the residential program. 36 As first implemented, the BOP permitted all “eligible prisoners” to participate in RDAP and to receive the early release incentive if they met the statutory nonviolent offense criteria, regardless of detainers. 37 Since then, however, the BOP has administratively disqualified indivi-duals with detainers—either for an immigration hold or due to a pending state case—from participating in RDAP and receiving the available sentence reduction, despite the mandatory statutory language regarding participation. 38 How did this happen? Although the statute clearly defines residential treatment as in-prison treatment, the BOP added a new community-based component, to be completed during pre-release custody. This effectively excluded from RDAP participation anyone ineligible for community corrections—those with immigration holds or         

> F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1•O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 1 5

state detainers. The BOP based its new requirement on a misconstrued comment from the American Psychiatric Association (APA) that favored more than one monthly session during the transitional component of RDAP—the time in BOP custody between residential treatment and release. 39 Although the APA corrected the BOP’s erroneous understanding of its comment, explaining that all eligible prisoners should benefit from RDAP, regardless of detai-ners, 40 the BOP’s regulation continues to exclude thou-sands of prisoners with detainers from eligibility for the sentence reduction by adding a third requirement for sen-tence reduction eligibility found nowhere in the statute: the ability to participate in community corrections. 41 For citi-zens of other countries, the disqualification not only pre-cludes participation in a beneficial treatment program, but prevents them from receiving sentence reductions available to similarly situated U.S. citizens whose sentences can be reduced by up to a year. The BOP had an institutional incentive to adopt this narrower and statutorily suspect definition of “all eligible prisoners.” After originally reporting shortfalls in RDAP availability, the BOP simply redefined “eligible prisoners” to exclude those who could not be transferred to commu-nity corrections because of detainers. 42 Thus, the BOP administratively cut, with no statutory basis, the 33.6 % of the 56,926 defendants sentenced in 2021 who were not U.S. citizens, plus those with state detainers, from the ability to even participate in RDAP. 43 The Commission should strongly recommend that all eligible prisoners be able to participate in RDAP and to receive the sentence reduction incentive for successful completion of the in-prison residential and transitional components, if statutorily eligible, regardless of detainers. The Commission’s recommendation not only would address overincarceration and rehabilitation but would carry out the statutory duty to avoid unwarranted dispari-ties, especially disparities that frequently involve harsher treatment for racial minorities from other countries. 

Recommendation 4. The BOP should encourage maxi-mum sentence reductions and community corrections for successful completion of RDAP through earlier entry and greater availability of the program. 

The sentence reduction authorized by Congress for suc-cessful completion of RDAP is “up to one year.” But the BOP has consistently granted less than one year. The main reason for this insufficient utilization of statutory relief is that prisoners are not placed in RDAP until close to their projected release date. The lack of beds available in the program often results in a glut of need as sentences approach expiration. Failing to fully implement the § 3621(e) sentence reduction program is inconsistent with Congress’s aim for the program to “maximize[] . . . opportunities for reducing the inmate population.” 44 In Close v. Thomas , the Ninth Circuit commented that the BOP’s stinting administration of RDAP and the program’s “insufficient capacity” had “created a troubling situation that calls for a legislative or regulatory remedy.” 45 By delaying entry and having insufficient beds, the BOP not only shortens sentence reductions but also limits time in community corrections. Even before the First Step Act, BOP rules favored maximum community corrections for RDAP participants. 46 Under the First Step Act’s earned time credit program, RDAP is an evidence-based recidivism reduction program that authorizes even earlier community corrections. 47 And in-prison transitional programming is available when completion of the residential component results in additional time before community corrections placement or release. By following its own policies on community corrections, the BOP can increase the length of RDAP sentence reductions and decrease time behind prison walls. The regulatory fix is easy: expand the availability of this excellent program and do not delay entry. The Commission should recommend that the BOP fund sufficient beds for all eligible prisoners, that participants should be able to enter RDAP earlier in their terms of imprisonment, and that the BOP should improve the in-prison transition pro-gram after the residential component is completed. 

Recommendation 5. The BOP should not categorically disqualify nonviolent offenders from § 3621(e) sentence reductions based on the mere possession of firearms. 

The sentence reduction statute broadly authorizes sentence reductions to any “prisoner convicted of a nonviolent offense” who successfully completes RDAP. But the BOP has greatly narrowed eligibility by treating the mere pos-session of a firearm as a disqualification. 48 The BOP has had trouble administratively articulating a reason for this disqualification, and there is no empirically based justifi-cation for the disqualification. The initial litigation regarding gun possessors estab-lished that they are statutorily eligible nonviolent offenders within the meaning of § 3621(e). In May 1995, the BOP promulgated a regulation that defined the statutory term “nonviolent offense” as the converse of “crime of violence” as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). 49 At the same time, through a program statement, the BOP deemed individuals to be statutorily ineligible for a sentence reduction based on convictions involving the mere possession of a firearm, including being a felon in possession of a firearm (18 U.S.C. § 922(g)) or drug trafficking with a two-level specific offense characteristic for possession of a weapon. 50 The courts generally held that the program statement was inconsistent with the statute because, under the relevant statutes, gun possession and drug trafficking are nonviolent offenses. 51 After the first wave of litigation, the BOP conceded that gun possessors were statutorily eligible for sentence reductions but published an interim rule and accompa-nying program statement that modified the crime of vio-lence construct by substituting the Director’s discretion to disqualify § 922(g) offenders and drug offenders with       

> 1 6 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 •O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2

a gun enhancement. 52 Ultimately, the Supreme Court upheld the BOP’s discretionary authority to disqualify additional classes of statutorily eligible prisoners from the sentence reduction incentive. 53 But the lower courts, over years of litigation, found the interim rule invalid for vio-lation of notice-and-comment under § 553(b) of the Administrative Procedure Act, 54 and a later iteration of the same rule was deemed arbitrary and capricious under § 706(2)(A) because the BOP “failed to set forth a rationale for its decision[.]” 55 This litigation history explains why, from 1995 to 2012, 56 hundreds of gun-possessing defen-dants were deemed eligible through court orders and BOP Operations Memorandums that implemented Ninth Cir-cuit decisions. The BOP has generated empirical evidence that pris-oners who successfully complete RDAP have lower rates of recidivism. 57 The same appears to be true regarding pris-oners who were initially disqualified from the § 3621(e) sentence reduction solely on the basis of gun possession and then successfully completed RDAP. The BOP should change its rule to establish that mere gun possessors, who are nonviolent within the meaning of the statute, should be deemed categorically eligible for sentence reductions for successful completion of RDAP. 

> C. The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend That the BOP Eliminate Sentence Computation Rules That Increase Prison Time

The BOP administers sentences through the Sentence Computation Manual. 58 For years, the Manual has increased sentences by failing to count time in official detention, by creating de facto consecutive sentences, and by failing to provide good time credits for the concurrent portion of federal sentences served in state custody. The BOP’s practices, which appear to be inconsistent with the relevant statutes, are amenable to administrative cor-rection to reduce overincarceration and to administer sen-tences fairly. 

Recommendation 6. The BOP should provide pretrial custody credit for post-arrest time in immigration detention because it constitutes official detention under 18 U.S.C. § 3585(b). 

Congress specifically instructed that all pretrial time in “official detention” after the offense should be credited against the federal term of imprisonment, as long as the time is not credited against another sentence. 59 Defendants can spend days, weeks, and sometimes months in immi-gration custody before their first appearance in federal court. Although immigration detention involves the same lost liberty as other pretrial custody, 60 the Manual instructs sentence calculators to refuse to count that time as “official detention.” 61 The Ninth Circuit explicitly addressed the BOP program statement and found it to be inconsistent with the statute. 62 Nevertheless, the BOP continues to fol-low its Manual, creating dead time that prolongs incarcer-ation for citizens of other countries. Under the plain meaning of “official detention,” defen-dants should receive credit for time served in U.S. Immi-gration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) custody. Failure to provide credit perpetuates unwarranted disparity of simi-larly situated defendants. For example, a person who robs a bank, who is first held in state custody for thirty days before being released to federal custody when the state case is dismissed, will receive full credit for the thirty days spent in state custody against the federal bank-robbery sentence. But a citizen of another country who spends thirty days in ICE custody before being charged in federal court will not receive credit against any later federal sentence. The Com-mission should strongly recommend that the BOP delete Manual language on immigration custody and explicitly identify immigration custody as “official detention” for the purposes of computing pretrial custody credit. 

Recommendation 7. The BOP should eliminate de facto consecutive sentences under 18 U.S.C. § 3584(b). 

The BOP’s regional counsel once called the interaction between state and federal concurrent and consecutive sen-tences one of the “most confusing and least understood” areas of federal sentencing law. 63 The origin of that com-plexity is the BOP’s interpretation of the pretrial custody statute (§ 3585(b)) to treat a state concurrent sentence, even one explicitly imposed to run concurrently with the prior federal sentence, as “another sentence” that forecloses federal credit. The following scenario is not unusual: 

 A state arrest places a person in the state’s primary jurisdiction. 

 The federal prosecutor then files a writ of habeas corpus ad prosequendum to pursue a federal pros-ecution against the same person. 

 The federal judge imposes a sentence that is silent on whether the federal sentence should run con-currently or consecutively with the yet-to-be-imposed state sentence. 

 After the federal prosecution is complete, the person returns to state court, where the state judge orders the state sentence to run concurrently with the fed-eral sentence. In this scenario, under the BOP’s existing policies, all of the time in primary state custody is credited only against the state sentence, even while the defendant is physically in federal custody during the execution of the writ of habeas corpus ad prosequendum. And the federal sentence does not commence until the state sentence is fully satisfied. Thus, the BOP executes such sentences as de facto con-secutive, even though no judge ever ordered the sentence to run consecutively and the state judgment explicitly intends concurrency. This administrative decision increases time in custody by months and years. There are two simple solutions that would allow the sentences in the above scenario to be executed concur-rently, both as to pretrial credit and once the sentences are imposed. First, the BOP should administratively deem an         

> F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1•O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 1 7

expressly concurrent sentence as not “another sentence” within the meaning of § 3585(b). 64 Then, the pretrial cus-tody would be credited as any other sentence. Second, the BOP should not make the quintessential judicial decision of concurrency. Currently, once the federal sentence is imposed, the BOP conducts its own evaluation of whether the federal sentence should be allowed to commence while the individual remains in state custody serving the state sentence, through the discretionary nunc pro tunc (retro-active) designation of the state facility for service of the federal sentence. The constitutional problems with an executive-branch agency usurping the judicial role of deciding the concurrency questions are substantial. 65 And when the federal judgment is silent, respect for the state judge’s concurrency decision avoids defendants serving more time than any judge determined was necessary to accomplish the purposes of sentencing. The Commission should recommend that the BOP revise its sentence calculation procedures to avoid de facto creation of consecutive sentences. Instead, when the federal judgment is silent and the state judgment orders concur-rency, the BOP should execute the sentences to run con-currently by not treating the state sentence as “another sentence” for pretrial credit purposes or by requiring nunc pro tunc designation to the state facility. 

Recommendation 8. The BOP should provide good time credits on time adjusted to achieve concurrency under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(b). 

The BOP’s interpretation of § 3584(b) also creates problems when, after a state sentence has been imposed, the federal judge exercises authority under 18 U.S.C. § 3584(a) to run the sentence concurrently. Because the BOP treats the state judgment as “another sentence,” despite the federal judge’s concurrency order, the time in state custody prior to arriv-ing in federal court will not be credited under § 3585(b). From the multiple amendments to U.S.S.G. § 5G1.3, the general work-around, under the guidelines, has been for the federal sentencing judge to adjust the term of impris-onment down by the amount of time in state custody prior to the federal sentencing, with a notation in the judgment that the adjustment is to achieve concurrency due to the manner in which the BOP forecloses prior custody credits under § 3585(b). 66 This awkward way of achieving full concurrency rou-tinely creates unwarranted disparity because the BOP does not consider the credited time in state custody to be part of the federal sentence and refuses to award good time credits under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(b) to well-behaved prisoners for that time. This is different than how the BOP treats other types of pre-sentence custody credit. For time credited under 18 U.S.C. § 3585(b), the BOP awards good conduct time credit, even when that time is served in state custody. In response to litigation regarding the disparities caused by forcing the concurrent portion of a federal sentence—which can be months or years long—to be served day-for-day, the BOP asserted that sentencing judges may grant a further variance to provide the good time credits: “A defendant whose federal sentencing has been long delayed may seek a variance based on the lost opportunity for good conduct time credit, which the sentencing court has the discretion to grant.” 67 But variances are an inappropriate and inadequate way of achieving full concurrency including good time credits. Defendants would first need to be aware that they were not going to receive good time credits, then realize, despite no mention in the Guidelines Manual, that a variance should be requested, then depend on discretion rather than the BOP’s normal awarding of earned good time credits. And the wholesale loss of good time credits can create large unwarranted disparities by treating similarly situated defendants differently in terms of actual custody, particu-larly because the amount of time in state custody often depends on whether the individual exercised various pre-trial and trial rights. Thus, similarly situated defendants end up serving varying times of actual custody based on the failure to grant good time credits, even when the total sentence intended by the judge is identical, based on the arbitrary timing of sentencing. 68 The Commission should recommend that the BOP revise its sentence calculation rules to award good time credits earned during the concurrent part of an adjusted sentence. 

> D. The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend That the BOP Revise Its Rule on Compassionate Release Under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) and Submit Motions on Behalf of Eligible Prisoners, Leaving Solely to the Judge the Decision Whether the Motion Should Be Granted

The Sentencing Reform Act included the compassionate release statute that, as originally written, authorized the sentencing judge, only upon motion of the BOP, to reduce the term of imprisonment after considering the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), if “extraordinary and compelling reasons” warrant such a reduction. 69 Congress viewed § 3582(c) as a mechanism to fill the “substantial void in the sentencing system” left by the repeal of discretionary judi-cial review of sentences under old Rule 35(b) while provid-ing a “safety valve” otherwise unavailable. 70 “The approach taken keeps the sentencing power in the judiciary where it belongs, yet permits later review of sentences in particularly compelling situations.” 71 Congress expressly delegated to the Commission the task of describing and providing examples of “extraordinary and compelling reasons.” 72 Until 2007, however, the Commission failed to do so, leaving the BOP to create and apply its own criteria. The BOP’s policies created in that gap time were so restrictive that motions were rarely filed and many individuals died before the agency even decided whether to file. 73 Federal defenders and advocacy groups pointed out the numerous ways in which the BOP rules thwarted congressional intent, particularly because the BOP’s policies allowed it to assess other factors, besides the       

> 1 8 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 •O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2

existence of extraordinary and compelling reasons, and to refuse to exercise its motion-filing authority when it thought the motion should be denied (which was almost always). 74 The BOP’s implementation of compassionate release was recognized as a miserable failure, resulting in needless and expensive incarceration. 75 In 2016, the Commission expanded the definition of “extraordinary and compelling reasons” and “encouraged” the BOP in its gatekeeper role to bring motions for reduc-tion in sentence more frequently, whenever a person met the Commission’s criteria. 76 The Commission also noted that the BOP could find that extraordinary and compelling reasons existed beyond those explicitly identified by the Commission. 77 But the BOP’s rules, although updated, did not adopt all of the Commission’s standards and continued to include prejudging whether the motion should be granted, not simply whether extraordinary and compelling reasons existed. 78 Then the First Step Act changed everything by providing an avenue for defendant-initiated compassionate release motions. 79 As the Commission has recognized, the courts have developed a robust area of law construing “extraordinary and compelling reasons” in the absence of an applicable policy statement and have applied those standards during the coronavirus pandemic, resulting in thousands of reduced sentences. 80 But only 1 % of the compassionate release motions originated with the BOP, despite the First Step Act’s mechanisms encouraging such filings. 

Recommendation 9. The BOP should file compassionate release motions when it factually identifies potential extraordinary and compelling reasons, without prejud-ging the merits of the sentence reduction, and it should adopt Commission standards while expanding potential reasons for compassionate release. 

The Commission should recommend that the BOP administer its part of the compassionate release statute in three ways that assume its proper role while keeping sen-tencing discretion with the judge. First, the BOP should act quickly on reduction in sen-tence requests. The amended statute permits persons in prison to file their own motions directly with the sentencing court thirty days after having submitted a request to the warden. For cases of terminal illness, Congress specifically required even swifter action. The BOP must “notify the defendant’s attorney, partner, and family members that they may prepare and submit” a request for compassionate release on the defendant’s behalf within seventy-two hours of the diagnosis, and the BOP must process sentence reduction requests in those cases within fourteen days. 81 These provisions should result in the BOP making deci-sions whether or not to file sentence reduction motions without waiting for exhaustion of prisoners’ requests. Second, the BOP should eliminate the policies under which it prejudges the merits of a compassionate release motion instead of simply identifying the potential factual bases for extraordinary and compelling reasons. As the Commission and Congress recognize, whether a motion to reduce sentence should be granted is purely a judicial question. The BOP’s current rules—that require it to assess, for example, whether release would “minimize” the severity of the offense—usurp the judicial role in deciding whether a sentence reduction is warranted under the § 3553(a) factors. Third, the BOP should incorporate the Commission’s examples of “extraordinary and compelling reasons” into its program statement, consistently with Congress’s delega-tion of that authority to the Commission. And the BOP should expand its criteria to include additional factors favoring a finding of extraordinary and compelling reasons for compassionate release, such as the district court’s fail-ure to anticipate developments that take place after the first sentence that “produces unfairness to the defendant[.]” 82 

> E. The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend That the BOP Revive the Boot Camp Program, with Sentence Reduction and Expanded Community Corrections as Benefits for Completion

Both Congress and the Commission determined that, to avoid overincarceration of defendants with little criminal history, a sentence to thirty months or less could be served by six months of boot camp, a six-months sentence reduc-tion, and the remaining time in community corrections. 83 The boot camp program, also known as “shock incarceration,” provided not only substantially less time in prison but a disciplined environment for job training, education, substance abuse treatment, and counseling. 84 In 2004, with no prior notice, the BOP defunded the program, purportedly for fiscal reasons. 85 But the slapdash fiscal assessment included no accounting for the huge savings from decreased prison time or for the enormous difference in the lives of individuals with scant criminal history and convictions for low-level offenses who returned to their communities months and years earlier. The BOP should reinstitute this alternative to prison because of the reha-bilitative benefits, the reduction of incarceration rates, and the long-term fiscal savings. 86 

Recommendation 10. The BOP should reinstate the boot camp program in accordance with its congressional authorization and the implementing regulation, which include both a six-month sentence reduction and expansion of community corrections. 

The Commission promulgated a guideline addressing the boot camp program that is still on the books: U.S.S.G. § 5F1.7. This sentencing option, now illusory, should be available in the real world. The Commission should rec-ommend that the BOP reinstate the boot camp program for people with qualifying offenses who want to participate. By doing so, the BOP would reduce prison costs in the long run and prevent overincarceration. The program “has the benefit of returning very low risk offenders sooner to their families and their jobs,”         

> F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1•O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 1 9

contributing to “inmate family stability, which criminolog-ical research shows to be a key element in reducing juvenile delinquency and crime among future generations.” 87 The boot camp program was well received by almost all parti-cipants in the federal system. The Commission should recommend that the BOP both revive and expand the pro-gram, identifying eligible inmates upon designation and providing them the opportunity to participate immediately upon the commencement of their sentences, both to offer an incentive for good behavior and to allow earlier place-ment in residential reentry centers. 

> F. The Sentencing Commission Should Recommend That the BOP Fully Implement the First Step Act’s Earned Time Credit Program (18 U.S.C. § 3632)

A major innovation of the First Step Act was the new earned time credit program, which allowed eligible individuals in BOP custody to earn earlier transfer to pre-release custody or earlier supervised release by participation in “evidence-based recidivism reduction programming or productive activities.” 88 The groundbreaking aspect of the new pro-gram was its call for a new “risk and needs assessment system” to gauge each person’s recidivism risk and assign them to individualized recidivism-reducing programming based on their “specific criminogenic needs.” 89 By incen-tivizing programming, Congress aimed to promote public safety while reducing time behind bars. 90 The program’s anticipated cost savings from shorter sentences could then be “reinvested” into further recidivism reduction programming. 91 But the BOP’s rollout of the earned time credit system was not smooth: for years, the BOP delayed the imple-menting regulation and included restrictions that under-mined the program’s intent. 92 The risk assessment tool was also plagued by errors. 93 Fortunately, some early glitches have been corrected, and the regulations promulgated in January 2022 take a more expansive approach to awarding and applying credits. However, three areas should be the subject of Commission recommendations. 

Recommendation 11. The BOP should expand funding for the rehabilitative programs that result in lower PATTERN scores. 

PATTERN, the risk assessment tool adopted by the BOP to assess each individual’s risk of recidivism, is a key part of the earned time credit program. PATTERN uses both static and dynamic factors to score individuals into four cate-gories of recidivism risk: minimum, low, medium, and high. 94 Those categories are critical to earning time credits and receiving the intended benefits. Minimum- and low-risk individuals earn more credits for every thirty days of programming, and they receive the benefit of an actual sentence reduction when sufficient credits are accrued. 95 Medium- and high-risk individuals, by contrast, earn fewer credits, they can only receive earlier pre-release custody, not an actual sentence reduction, and there are additional bar-riers to obtaining that benefit. 96 As a result, it is critically important that individuals have a realistic opportunity to reduce their recidivism risk cate-gory while they are serving their sentences. In fact, Con-gress required that the risk assessment system be “dynamic,” such that scores “can reasonably be expected to change” on the basis of progress and regression in prison. 97 Thus, PATTERN scores go down when individuals com-plete rehabilitative, educational, and vocational program-ming. But prisoners can receive those score reductions only when programming is available—and, too often, the types of programs recognized as effective are either overcom-mitted or nonexistent in certain facilities. 98 Full imple-mentation of the First Step Act should include strong recommendations in favor of expanded availability of the types of programs that reduce recidivism. 99 

Recommendation 12. The BOP should promulgate rules for transferring individuals with medium- and high-risk scores to pre-release custody so long as they have maintained good institutional conduct and have pro-ductively engaged in available programming. 

By statute, individuals assessed as minimum- or low-risk under PATTERN can easily apply their credits to obtain earlier release or transfer to pre-release custody. 100 By contrast, those assessed as medium- or high-risk must satisfy additional criteria. Specifically, they must have shown a “demonstrated recidivism risk reduction,” and they must have a transfer petition approved by the warden after the determination that (aa) the prisoner would not be a danger to society if transferred to pre-release custody or supervised release; (bb) the prisoner has made a good faith effort to lower recidivism risk through participation in recidivism reduction programs or productive activities; and (cc) the prisoner is unlikely to recidivate. 101 At present, the BOP has no existing policy or regulation governing the exercise of this “warden exception.” Instead, the BOP has treated those with medium and high PAT-TERN scores as categorically ineligible for transfer to pre-release custody. In other words, only those prisoners who are both eligible to earn time credits based on their offense of conviction and assessed as minimum- or low-risk are currently receiving any benefit from the First Step Act’s programming incentive. That amounts to just one in five prisoners (20.49 %). 102 This is particularly problematic given that the PATTERN scoring system is not racially neutral. Well over half of African American men in custody (57 %) are scored as medium- or high-risk, compared to just one-third of white men (35 %). 103 But there are many prisoners who, despite scoring higher on PATTERN, have demonstrated through good prison conduct, completion of prison programming, and individualized evaluations that they do not constitute a sig-nificant risk in the community. The BOP should adopt a policy for exercising the warden discretion identified in       

> 2 0 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R •V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 •O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2

the statute that includes factors evidencing efforts to reduce recidivism risk, such as no disciplinary write-ups for the previous twelve months, responsible prison job perfor-mance, and completion of rehabilitative programs. 

Recommendation 13. The BOP should revoke its infor-mal rule that purports to categorically exclude persons with detainers and eighteen months or less remaining on their sentences from eligibility for sentence reductions based on earned time credits. 

On September 8, 2022, the BOP, in an informal inmate message, announced the categorical exclusion of two groups from sentence reductions based on earned time credits: (1) persons with eighteen months or less remaining on their sentences and (2) persons with detainers. 104 Both groups were statutorily eligible for sentence reductions before the BOP adopted the general disqualifications. These dramatic new restrictions, issued in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act’s notice-and-comment requirements, promote unwarranted sentencing disparity, undermine congressional policies, and probably violate the underlying provisions of the First Step Act. The Commis-sion should recommend that the informal rule be dropped. 

IV. Conclusion 

Congress instructed the Sentencing Commission to rec-ommend changes to the nature or capacity of the BOP. These recommendations should include that the BOP administratively change practices that are resulting in defendants spending too much time in prison, receiving less rehabilitative programming, and wasting millions in taxpayer dollars. Right now, sentenced persons are spend-ing more time in prison than is necessary to accomplish the legitimate goals of sentencing, often resulting in unwar-ranted sentencing disparities. Through greater funding of rehabilitative programs, which can lower the time in prison for some, the BOP’s long-term fiscal interests are served while assuring that statutory rehabilitative goals and methods are not shortchanged or abandoned. At this critical juncture, with both a newly constituted Commission and a newly installed BOP Director, the Commission should offer the BOP a full range of statutorily permitted recom-mendations that will ameliorate the overuse of prison and promote the greater use of community corrections. 

Notes  

> 1

S. Rep. No. 98–225, at 175 (1983). 2 Government Accountability Office, Bureau of Prisons: Eligibil-ity and Capacity Impact Use of Flexibilities to Reduce Inmates’ Time in Prison (Feb. 2012); Thomas W. Hillier III et al., Federal Public and Community Defenders, GAO Report Reveals Mul-tiple Ways to End the Waste of Millions on Unnecessary Over-incarceration (Apr. 4, 2012). 3 28 U.S.C. § 994(g). 4 “The United States has less than 5 percent of the world’s population, yet nearly 25 percent of its prisoners.” American Bar Association, ABA Ten Principles to Reduce Mass Incar-ceration (Aug. 2022) (adopted by the House of Delegates in Revised Resolution 604). 5 Recognizing that the statutory fifty-four days in 18 U.S.C. § 3624(b) is almost exactly 15% of 365, the Commission adjusted the ranges in the Sentencing Table for good time credit “that would be earned under the guidelines” by adding 15% to the baseline. U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Supplemen-tary Report on the Initial Sentencing Guidelines and Policy Statements 23 (1987). 6 Max Hellman, Barber v. Thomas: The Supreme Court’s Interpre-tation of the Federal Good Time Credits Statute is Undermining Sentencing Reform , 42 McGeorge L. Rev. 873, 879–80 (2011). 7 First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–391, § 102(b)(1)(B), 132 Stat. 5194, 5210–13 (Dec. 21, 2018); Staff of S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 115th Cong., S.3649, The First Step Act Section-by-Section Summary 3 (Nov. 15, 2018) (“Amends Section 3624 of title 18 of the U.S. Code to clarify congres-sional intent behind good time credit[.]”) (emphasis added). 8 “And if the only way to call attention to the human implications of this case is to speak in terms of economics, then it should be noted that the Court’s interpretation comes at a cost to the taxpayers of untold millions of dollars.” Barber v. Thomas, 560 U.S. 474, 494 (2010) (Kennedy, J., dissenting). 9 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, An Analysis of Non-Violent Drug Offen-ders with Minimal Criminal Histories 4 (Feb. 1994). 10 Annual Determination of Average Cost of Incarceration Fee, 86 Fed. Reg. 49060 (Sept. 2, 2021); Home Confinement Under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 36787 (Aug. 31, 2021). 11 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c) (1987). The statute also institutionalized cooperation with the probation office during this transition, now codified as 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(3): “The United States Probation System shall, to the extent practicable, offer assis-tance to a prisoner during such prerelease custody.” 12 Crime Control Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101–647, § 2902, 104 Stat. 4789, 4913; 18 U.S.C. 3624(c) (1990) (“The authority provided by this subsection may be used to place a prisoner in home confinement.”). 13 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c) (2008). 14 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(1) and (2) (2008). 15 34 U.S.C. § 60541. 16 34 U.S.C. § 60541(a)(2)(A). 17 34 U.S.C. § 60541(c)(2). 18 First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–391, § 601, 132 Stat. 5194, 5237 (2018); 18 U.S.C. § 3621(b) (2018). 19 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(2) (2018) (emphasis added). 20 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g)(11). 21 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, Pub. L. No. 116–136, § 12003(b)(2), 134 Stat. 281, 516 (2020). 22 Statement of David E. Patton, Before the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Oversight Hearing on “The Federal Bureau of Prisons and Implementation of the First Step Act,” at 10–11 and Exhibit B (Oct. 17, 2019) 23 Id. , Exhibit B at 4–6. 24 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(6) (2008) (emphasis added). 25 Sacora v. Thomas, 628 F.3d 1059, 1063 (9th Cir. 2010) (cit-ing Pre-Release Community Confinement, 73 Fed. Reg. 62440-01 (Oct. 21, 2008) (codified at 28 C.F.R. §§ 570. 20–.22)). 26 See Sacora , 628 F.3d at 1063–64 (describing the informal rules). 27 Id. at 1065 (“The district court granted the petition [for class of federal habeas petitioners] with respect to the BOP’s formal regulations, 28 C.F.R. §§ 570.20–.22, finding that the BOP’s failure to use notice-and-comment provisions in promulgating those regulations violated the [Administrative Procedure Act], and enjoined the BOP from considering inmates for placement in RRCs pursuant to those regulations.”). F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R • V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 • O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 2 1 28 See Pre-Release Community Confinement, 76 Fed. Reg. 58197-01 (Sept. 20, 2011). 29 Crime Control Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101–647, § 2903, 104 Stat. 4789, 4913 (codified at 18 U.S.C. § 3621(b)). 30 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103–322, § 32001, 108 Stat. 1796, 1897 (codified at 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)). 31 Conf. Rep. to Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2010, 155 Cong. Rec. H13631 03, at H13887 (daily ed. Dec. 8, 2009), Pub. L. 111–117, 123 Stat. 3034 (Dec. 16, 2009) 32 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Recidivism and Federal Bureau of Prisons Programs: Drug Program Participants Released in 2010 5 (May 2022). 33 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)(1)(C). 34 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)(5)(i) and (ii). 35 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)(5)(A). 36 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e)(2). 37 BOP Program Statement 5330.10, Drug Abuse Programs Manual, Inmate, Ch. 6 at 2 (May 25, 1995) (completion of applicable transitional services programs required for sen-tence reduction). 38 Drug Abuse Treatment Programs: Early Release Consider-ation, 61 Fed. Reg. 25121-01 (May 17, 1996); BOP Program Statement 5330.10, Change Notice, Ch. 6 at 7.3 (May 17, 1996). 39 Letter from Melvin Sabshin, M.D., Medical Director, American Psychiatric Association, to Kathleen Hawk, Director, Bureau of Prisons (July 18, 1995); Drug Treatment and Intensive Con-finement Center Programs: Early Release Consideration, 65 Fed. Reg. 80745-01, 80746 (Dec. 22, 2000) (“The comment by the American Psychiatric Association on the adequacy of transitional services became the basis for the second interim rule.”). 40 Letter from Steven M. Mirin, M.D., Medical Director, American Psychiatric Association, to Kathleen M. Hawk Sawyer, Direc-tor, Bureau of Prisons, at 2 (June 21, 2000). 41 BOP Program Statement 5330.11, Early Release Procedures Under 18 U.S.C. § 3621(e), § 2.5.1(b) (Mar. 16, 2009). 42 Drug Abuse Treatment Program: Subpart Revision and Clari-fication and Eligibility of D.C. Code Felony Offenders for Early Release Consideration, 74 Fed. Reg. 1893 (Jan. 14, 2009). The Commission itself adopted this statistical illusion in its description of RDAP in the May 2022 report on RDAP. 43 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Annual Report and Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics tbl.9 (2021); see Fed. Bureau of Prisons, Inmate Citizenship (Aug. 2022) (16% of the prison population are from other countries). 44 Conf. Rep. to Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2010, supra 

note 30. 45 653 F.3d 970, 976 (9th Cir. 2011). 46 28 C.F.R. § 550.54(a)(1)(ii) (Incentives for RDAP participation). 47 See 18 U.S.C. § 3632(d)(4)(A); 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g). 48 28 C.F.R. § 550.55(b)(5)(ii). 49 28 C.F.R. § 550.58 (May 1995). 50 BOP Program Statement No. 5162.02 (July 24, 1995). 51 The initial decisions from the Ninth Circuit held that gun pos-sessors were statutorily eligible. Downey v. Crabtree, 100 F.3d 662, 663 (9th Cir. 1996); Davis v. Crabtree, 109 F.3d 566, 569 (9th Cir. 1997). The Circuits came to conflicting conclu-sions, with the majority following the Ninth Circuit’s lead. 52 Jacks v. Crabtree, 114 F.3d 983, 985 n.2 (9th Cir. 1997) (“Here, the Bureau concedes that petitioners are eligible under section 3621(e)(2)(B), but argues that they are ineligi-ble under the Bureau’s regulation creating an additional eli-gibility requirement.”); BOP Program Statement No. 5330.10 Ch. 6 at 1 (Oct. 9, 1997); 62 Fed. Reg. 53690-01 (Oct. 15, 1997). 53 Lopez v. Davis, 531 U.S. 230, 244 (2001) 54 Paulsen v. Daniels, 413 F.3d 999, 1005–06 (9th Cir. 2005); Bohner v. Daniels, 243 F. Supp. 2d 1171, 1174–76 (D. Or. 2003). 55 Arrington v. Daniels, 516 F.3d 1106, 1114 (9th Cir. 2008). 56 Peck v. Thomas, 697 F.3d 767, 773 (9th Cir. 2012). 57 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, supra note 31. 58 BOP Program Statement 5880.28 (July 19, 1999). 59 18 U.S.C. § 3585(b). 60 Megan Shields Casturo, Comment, Civil Immigration Deten-tion: When Civil Detention Turns Carceral , 122 Penn. St. L. Rev. 825, 835 (2018) (“[I]mmigration detention facilities are notorious for their carceral conditions.”). 61 BOP Program Statement 5880.28, at 1–15A (Sept. 20, 1999). 62 Zavala v. Ives, 785 F.3d 367 (9th Cir. 2015). 63 Henry J. Sadowski, Interaction of Federal and State Sentences When the Federal Defendant Is Under State Primary Juris-diction 1 (Nov. 18, 2009). 64 Stephen R. Sady, State Sovereignty and Federal Sentencing: Why De Facto Consecutive Sentencing by the Bureau of Prisons Should Not Survive Bond v. United States , 27 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 56, 59 (Oct. 2014). 65 The concurrency decision “concerns a matter of discretion traditionally committed to the Judiciary,” and therefore, should not “be left to employees of the same Department of Justice that conducts the prosecution.” Setser v. United States, 566 U.S. 231, 236, 242 (2012) ( citing Oregon v. Ice, 555 U.S. 160, 168–69 (2009)). 66 U.S.S.G. §§ 5G1.3(b), (d); 5K2.23; see also U.S.S.G. § 5G1.3, Application Note 4(E) (“[A]void confusion with the [BOP]’s exclusive authority under” § 3585(b) by noting in the judg-ment that departure to achieve concurrency not be described as credit for time served). 67 Brief of Respondent, Schleining v. Thomas, 642 F.3d 1242 (9th Cir. 2011) (No. 10-35792), 2011 WL 991513, *30; 

accord Brief of Respondent, Lopez v. Terrell, 654 F.3d 176 (2d Cir. 2011) (No.10-2079), 2011 WL 680803, *8. In Lopez , the court reversed the district court based on deference to the BOP; in Schleining , the court noted the lack of BOP rules directly addressing the question. 68 In Witte v. United States , the Court noted § 5G1.3’s overall purpose of avoiding disproportionate sentencing by seeking to “approximate the total penalty that would have been imposed had the sentences for the different offenses been imposed at the same time (i.e., had all of the offenses been prosecuted in a single proceeding).” 515 U.S. 389, 404–05 (1995); see United States v. Wilson, 503 U.S. 329, 334 (1992) (no reason for pre-sentence detention credit “to depend on the timing of sentencing”). 69 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i) (1987). 70 Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1983, Hearing on S. 829 before the Subcomm. on Criminal Law of the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 98th Cong., at 491 (1983); Sen. Comm. on Judi-ciary, S. Rep. 98–225, 98th Cong., 1st Sess., at 121 (1983), 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3182, 3304. 71 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 3304. 72 28 U.S.C. § 994(t). 73 See generally Hum. Rts. Watch & Fams Against Mandatory Minimums, The Answer Is No: Too Little Compassionate Release in US Federal Prisons (Nov. 2012); Mary Price, A Case For Compassion , 21 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 170 (2009); Stephen Sady & Lynn Deffebach, Second Look Resentencing Under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c) As an Example of Bureau of Prisons Policies That Result in Overincarceration , 21 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 167 (2009). 74 See Comments on Docket No. BOP 1168, 28 CFR part 571, Compassionate Release, at 4 (Feb. 3, 2014) (“[T]he structure and legislative history of the sentence reduction authority, 18 2 2 F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R • V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 • O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A), leave little doubt that Congress intended that the Bureau’s role be limited to identifying pris-oners with extraordinary and compelling circumstances and of bringing their cases to the courts.”). 75 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Evaluation & Inspection Div., I-2013-006, The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Compassionate Release Pro-gram 11 (2013) (“The BOP does not properly manage the compassionate release program, resulting in inmates who may be eligible candidates for release not being considered.”). 76 U.S.S.G. § 1B1.13 (2016). 77 U.S.S.G. § 1B1.13, Application Note 1(D). 78 BOP Program Statement 5050.50, Compassionate Release/ Reduction in Sentences (Jan. 17, 2019). For example, Sec-tion 7 of the current program statement requires the BOP to consider the individual’s “personal history,” the individual’s age at the time of the offense, and “whether release would minimize the severity of the offense.” 79 First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–391, § 603(b), 132 Stat. 5194, 5239 (2018). 80 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Compassionate Release Data Report, Fiscal Year 2020 to 2021 (2022). 81 18 U.S.C. § 3582(d)(2)(A). For cases of a physical or mental disability, the amended statute includes requirements of family notification and assistance, but it does not require the same swift timeline. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(d)(2)(B). 82 Setser , 566 U.S. at 243. 83 18 U.S.C. § 4046; 28 C.F.R. § 524.31(b); U.S.S.G. § 5F1.7. 84 18 U.S.C. § 4046(b). 85 Serrato v. Clark, 486 F.3d 560, 569–70 (9th Cir. 2007). 86 See Miles D. Harer & Jody Klein-Saffran, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Prisons, Evaluation of Post-Release Success for the First 4 Classes Graduating from the Lewisburg Inten-sive Confinement Center 6–7 (1996) (the federal boot camp program had “demonstrated success regarding low rearrest rates” and resulted in “substantially lower” recidivism rates than similar state programs). 87 Id. at 2. 88 18 U.S.C. § 3632(d)(4). 89 18 U.S.C. § 3632(a). 90 H.R. Rep. No. 115–699, at 22 (2018) (recognizing that “the vast majority of federal prisoners will one day be released from BOP custody” and that it is in “the fiscal interest of the gov-ernment to reduce recidivism [and] in the public safety inter-est as well[.]” 91 Id.  

> 92

See Cazares v. Hendrix, 575 F. Supp. 3d 1289, 1299–1302 (D. Or. 2021) (granting partial habeas corpus relief based on the BOP’s failure to implement statutory language in a timely manner). 93 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, 2020 Review and Revalidation of the First Step Act Risk Assessment Tool 5– 7 (Jan. 2021). 94 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, 2021 Review and Revalidation of the First Step Act Risk Assessment Tool 28 (Dec. 2021). 95 See generally 18 U.S.C. § 3632(d)(4)(A); 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g). 96 Id.  

> 97

18 U.S.C. § 3631(b)(4)(C). 98 See First Step Act Independent Review Comm., Report of the Independent Review Committee Pursuant to the Require-ments of Title I Section 107(g) of the First Step Act (FSA) of 2018 (P.L. 115–391) 2–3 (Dec. 21, 2020) (finding insufficient program availability both during the pandemic and after an anticipated return to pre-pandemic levels). 99 Although PATTERN was validated by a small list of programs that existed before the First Step Act, the current version of PATTERN score reduction should also account for all types of rehabilitative programs now deemed eligible for earned time credit. 100 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g). 101 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g)(1)(D)(II). 102 U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of the Att’y Gen., First Step Act Annual Report 26 (Apr. 2022). 103 Id.  

> 104

Walter Palvo, Bureau of Prisons’ Interpretation of First Step Act Will Leave Thousands of Inmates Incarcerated , Forbes (Sept. 9, 2022). F E D E R A L S E N T E N C I N G R E P O R T E R • V O L . 3 5 , N O . 1 • O C T O B E R 2 0 2 2 2 3 PRACTITIONERS ADVISORY GROUP 

A Standing Advisory Group of the United States Sentencing Commission     

> Natasha Sen , Chair
> Patrick F. Nash , Vice Chair
> Circuit Representatives
> Sara E. Silva, First Circuit
> Susan Walsh , Second Circuit
> Susan Lin , Third Circuit
> Marshall H. Ellis , Fourth Circuit
> Marlo Cadeddu , Fifth Circuit
> Steve Nolder , Sixth Circuit
> Michelle L. Jacobs, Seventh Circuit
> John R. Murphy, Eighth Circuit
> Lynn E. Panagakos, Ninth Circuit
> Jeremy Delicino , Tenth Circuit
> Jon Sale , Eleventh Circuit
> Pleasant S. Brodnax ,III, D.C. Circuit
> Stacey D. Neumann , At -Large
> Deborah Roden , At -Large
> Leigh M. Skipper, At -Large

August 1, 2023 

Hon. Carlton W. Reeves 

Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

Thurgood Marshall Building 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2 -500, South Lobby 

Washington D.C. 20008 -8002 

RE: Comment on Possible Policy Priorities for the 2024 Amendment Cycle 

Dear Judge Reeves: 

In response to the Commission’s request for comment on its proposed priorities for the 

amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024, t he Practitioners Advisory Group (“PAG”) supp orts the 

Commission’s decision to take a different approach and review the effectiveness of current 

sentencing, penal and correctional practices in fulfilling the purposes of the Sentencing Reform 

Act, 28 U.S.C. § 991(b)(2). 

Among the list of proposed pri orities for review , the PAG asks the Commission to prioritiz e the 

following four areas : (1) reviewing the effectiveness of BOP practices in meeting the purposes 

of sentencing under 18 U.S.C. § 3 553(a)(2) (proposed priority 1); (2) promoting court -spons ored 

diversion and alternatives -to -incarceration programs (proposed priority 2); (3) examining the 

treatment of youthful offenders (proposed priority 6); and (4) comparing sentences imposed in 

cases disposed of via trial versus plea (proposed priority (10) (C)). 

In addition to the Commission’s list ed possible priorities, the PAG also asks the Commission to 

renew its consideration of how acquitted conduct is treated under the guidelines. In the term just 

ended, t he U.S. Supreme Court declined to take up the issue of acquitted conduct, in part, 

because “[t]he Sentencing Commission . . . has announced that it will resolve questions around 

acquitted -conduct sentencing in the coming year. If the Commission does not act expeditiously 

or c hooses not to act, however, this Court may need to take up the constitutional issues 

presented.” McClinton v. United States , 600 U.S. __ , 143 S.Ct. 2400, 24 03 (2023) ( Sotomayor ,2J.) (statement respecting denial of cert.); see also id . (noting that because “the Sentencing Commission is currently considering the issue[,] [i]t is appropriate for this Court to wait for the Sentencing Commission’s determination before the Court decides whether to grant certiorari in a case involving the use of acquitted conduct.”) (Kavanaugh, J., joined by Gorsuch and Barrett, JJ.) (statement respecting denial of cert.). The Supreme Court is waiting for the Commission to address this issue, and the PAG urges the Commission to do so. On behalf of our members, who work with the guidelines daily, we appreciate the opportunity to offer the PAG’s input regarding the Commission’s proposed priorities for the upcoming amendment cycle. Once the Commission settles upon its priorities, the PAG can provide substantive comments on those priorities. We look forward to further opportunities to discuss these priorities with the Commission and its staff. 

Respectfully submitted, ___ /s/Natasha Sen ___________ _____ /s/ Patrick F. Nash ________ 

Natasha Sen, Esq., Chair LAW OFFICE OF NATASHA SEN 

P.O. BOX 871 MIDDLEBURY , VERMONT 05753 (802) 825-6385 

Patrick F. Nash, Esq., Vice Chair NASH ▪ MARSHALL , PLLC 

129 WEST SHORT STREET 

LEXINGTON , KENTUCKY 40507 (859) 254-3232 PROBATION OFFICERS ADVISORY GROUP 

An Advisory Group of the United States Sentencing Commission                    

> Jill Bushaw, Chair ,8th Circuit
> Joshua Luria, Vice Chair, 11 th Circuit
> Circuit Representatives
> Laura M. Roffo, 1st Circuit Tandis Farrence, 2 nd Circuit Alex Posey, 3rd Circuit Barbara Carrigan, 4th Circuit Andrew Fountain, 5 th Circuit David Abraham, 6 th Circuit Rebecca Fowlie, 7 th Circuit
> Melinda Nusba um, 9th Circuit
> Daniel Maese, 10 th Circuit Renee Moses-Gregory, DC Circuit Amy Kord, FPPOA Ex-Officio Carrie E. Kent, PPSO Ex-Officio

August 1, 2023 

The Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

Thurgood Marshall Building 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2-500, South Lobby 

Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 

Dear Judge Reeves, 

The Probation Officers Advisory Group (POAG) submits the following comment pertaining to the United States Sentencing Commission’s request for comment regarding the 2023 Proposed Priorities. 

(1) Assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of Prisons are effective in 

meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2) and considering any 

appropriate responses including possible consideration of recommendations or amendments. 

Chapter 1 of the Guidelines Manual in The Basic Approach (Policy Statement) section discusses that one of the basic objectives of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 was honesty in sentencing. Specifically, Chapter 1 reflects “It sought to avoid the confusion and implicit deception that arose out of the pre-guidelines sentencing system which required the court to impose an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment and empowered the parole commission to determine how much of the sentence an offender actually would serve in prison. This practice usually resulted in a substantial reduction in the effective length of the sentence imposed, with defendants often serving only about one third of the sentence imposed by the court.” 

POAG believes that the sentencing computation process in relation to time credits under the First Step Act undermines, to some extent, this basic objective. As a result of sweeping changes to good time credit and the various ways in which it may be earned, courts now have less certainty as to the actual amount of time a defendant will serve. Where officers previously could readily provide the Court with estimates of good time credits available to defendants, this is no longer feasible as it is more dynamic and presently evolving, thus courts are not as informed of the actual amount of time will be served for the sentence imposed. Therefore, POAG would suggest any assessment of Bureau of Prison practices focus on the computation of time credit under the First Step Act given 2

that the certainty of the actual amount of time served has diminished and how that may impact the sentencing stage of the process. 

The First Step Act also expanded the criteria of the Federal Location Monitoring (FLM) Program, which consequently reduced the amount of time a defendant was incarcerated and increased the amount of time a defendant was on home detention. Therefore, POAG also suggests any assessment of Bureau of Prisons practices examine the expanded Federal Location Monitoring (FLM) program and whether changes to that program comport with the purposes of sentencing, namely, whether FLM achieves the same purpose of punishment intended by the sentence of incarceration that was imposed at the time of sentencing. 

(2) Promotion of court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs by 

expanding the availability of information and organic documents pertaining to existing 

programs (e.g., Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence Alternatives 

(CASA) Program, Special Options Services (SOS) Program) through the Commission’s 

website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, 

implementing, and assessing such programs. 

POAG notes that those charged in federal court who may be appropriate for formal diversion 

programs may be a small percentage, as the type of cases appropriate for diversion are often 

charged at the state level. Further, many of the diversion and alternative-to-incarceration cases are 

handled at the pretrial level, versus the post-conviction and sentencing level. Therefore, while 

several members of POAG have some familiarity with different programs offered in various 

districts, our overall level of familiarity is lacking as some programs are not administered by 

probation officers, or they occur prior to formal charges being filed or at the pretrial stage. 

Nonetheless, as noted in POAG’s October 17, 2022, submission regarding the 2023 proposed 

priorities, POAG supported the Commission’s study and research of diversionary programs, 

particularly as it addresses the goals of sentencing, potentially reduces the incarceration rate, and 

better focuses limited resources to more serious offenses. POAG supports the Commission’s 

review of the unifying principles of the existing diversion programs, as well as the providing 

information pertaining to the existing programs on the Commission’s website and during 

workshops and seminars. In addition, POAG supports the Commission’s study of the efficacy of 

such programs at reducing recidivism. 

(3) Examination of the Guidelines Manual, including exploration of ways to simplify the 

guidelines and possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

POAG continues its ongoing support to simplify the guidelines, which has been an identified factor in POAG’s response to prior proposed priorities and amendments. Simplification of the guidelines will assist the Court, the parties, probation officers, defendants, their families, victims, and the community to better understand the process of federal sentencing and their perception that the process is fair and just. The guidelines have become increasingly complicated to apply, which may result in non-uniform application in similar cases. Simplification is also an investment in efficiency. Such simplification is directly related to our commitment to judicial economy and being 3

good stewards of government resources, which will assist the court system in maintaining its workload with less available resources. 

POAG recognizes that simplification of the guidelines is not a simple process. If the Commission addresses simplification through revising specific guideline sections, POAG believes that the biggest impact includes focusing on the guidelines applied most frequently. According to the Commission, Use of Guidelines and Specific Offense Characteristics Guideline Calculation Based for the Fiscal Year 2022 report, USSG §2D1.1 (drug offenses) was applied in 29.7% of cases; USSG §2B1.1 (economic offenses) was applied in 8.1% of cases; USSG §3B1.1 (aggravating role) was applied in 4.2% of cases, and USSG §3B1.2 (minor role) was applied in 7.8% of cases. 

Specifically, regarding USSG §2B1.1, the determination of loss under subsection (b)(1) is becoming a vast guideline where “loss” is becoming more complex to determine accurately. This is especially important given the consequences of misapplication of the guidelines. Moreover, 

there are instances (such as the $500 multiplier in USSG §2B1.1, comment. (n.3(F)(i)), see United States v. Kirilyuk , 29 F.4th 1136 (9th Cir. 2022)) where courts have not applied loss based on the Commentary instructions as the loss definition is not incorporated into the guideline itself. This has resulted in disparities of sentences between circuits. 

Regarding role in the offense, under USSG §3B1.1, POAG has received suggestions to remove the option of a three-level increase, as the “cases falling in between (a) and (b)” is criteria that may not be applied consistently in similar cases. Further, for both aggravating and mitigating role adjustments, the timing of a defendant’s conviction may impact the application of these adjustments. A defendant who is convicted earlier in a larger multi-defendant case may not receive a proper role adjustment because the role of the “average participant” has not yet been ascertained. 

POAG believes the state of federal sentencing is becoming increasingly complicated, part of which is related to predicate offenses and application of the categorical approach. POAG has discussed this in greater detail in its response to Priority No. 5. 

Lastly, as to the application of criminal history points, POAG received suggestions that the 

Commission reevaluate applying three points under USSG §§4A1.1(a) and 4A1.2(e)(1) based on 

the defendant “being incarcerated during any part of such fifteen-year period.” POAG suggests 

that the guideline focus on when the sentence was imposed versus the date of release, which would 

be in furtherance of the goal of simplification of sentencing. However, more importantly, in some 

jurisdictions the state prison system assigns one correctional number to a defendant and one 

discharge date applies, regardless of the number of convictions. In those circumstances, the 

defendant receives one discharge date for several different sentences, which makes it difficult and 

sometimes impossible, to determine the discharge date for a specific case. As a result, convictions 

that would have been discharged prior to the fifteen-year time period are assessed with criminal 

history points, causing some defendants to qualify as a career offender based on prior convictions 

that would otherwise be deemed incredibly stale. See United States v. Jones , 662 F. App’x 486 

(8th Cir. 2016) (unpublished). 4

Based on the foregoing, POAG favors the Commission’s exploration of ways to simplify the guidelines and possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

(4) Continuation of its multiyear study of the Guidelines Manual to address case law 

concerning the validity and enforceability of guideline commentary. 

POAG believes it is prudent and necessary for the Guidelines Manual to address this matter. As discussed in the introduction to the Guidelines Manual, the objective of the manual was to conceive and design fairness in sentencing through honesty, avoidance of disparity, and proportionality. However, it is recognized that the sentencing process is dynamic. As set forth in Chapter 1 of the Guidelines Manual, in United States v. Booker , 543 U.S. 220 (2005), the Supreme Court reasoned that an advisory guideline system, while lacking the mandatory features that Congress enacted, retains other features that help to further congressional objectives, including providing certainty and fairness in meeting the purposes of sentencing, avoiding unwarranted sentencing disparities, and maintaining sufficient flexibility to permit individualized sentences when warranted. The Court further concluded that an advisory guideline system would “continue to move sentencing in Congress’ preferred direction, helping to avoid excessive sentencing disparities while maintaining flexibility sufficient to individualize sentences where necessary.” 

Part of the guidelines include a commentary section which serves numerous purposes. For example, the commentary provides interpretation of the guideline or direction as to its application. Commentary also can include departure considerations and background information as to what factors led to the composition of or reasoning for the guideline. Therefore, it is vital that the commentary for each offense guideline be relied upon by the court to achieve fairness in sentencing. If honesty and fairness are to be sought in sentencing, dismissal of the commentary in the Guidelines Manual will result in disparity and disproportionality for similarly situated offenders. 

POAG has held an ongoing dialogue amongst its circuit and district representatives. An update to §4B1.2, Definitions of Terms Used in §4B1.1, may be a simple and short-term solution. However, moving substantive information into the guideline itself is a piecemeal solution that will prolong the disparate consideration of the Commentary. Instead, POAG believes a prompt, long-term solution addressing case law concerning the validity and enforceability of guideline commentary is prudent and recommends inclusion of a directive that the commentary of each guideline is just as binding as the guideline language itself. Otherwise, future circuit decisions are expected, which may create greater disparity as each circuit determines its own unique interpretation of guideline commentary. 

(5) Continued examination of the career offender guidelines, including (A) updating the data 

analyses and statutory recommendations set forth in the Commission’s 2016 report to 

Congress, titled Career Offender Sentencing Enhancements; (B) devising and conducting 

workshops to discuss the scope and impact of the career offender guidelines, including 

discussion of possible alternative approaches to the “categorical approach” in determining 

whether an offense is a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance offense”; and (C) 

possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 5

POAG appreciates the Commission’s proposal to further explore the career offender guidelines. POAG has previously written extensively on issues relating to the career offender guidelines, the categorical approach, and the sentencing disparities and circuit splits that have resulted from this issue. We strongly encourage the Commission to explore a resolution in this area because it has caused the various courts around the country significant complications when applying the career offender guidelines at sentencing. 

With regard to subsection (A), POAG strongly encourages the Commission to continue its work to implement the recommendations set forth in its 2016 report to Congress titled Career Offender Sentencing Enhancements . This report recommends the revision of the career offender directive at 28 U.S.C. § 994 to focus on defendants who have committed at least one crime of violence and the adoption of a uniform definition of crime of violence. Our current concerns with the issue include the disparity in determining whether a predicate conviction qualifies as a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance offense.” We are in support of the Commission revisiting or redefining their focus in this report and to adopt a uniform definition of “crime of violence” and “controlled substance offense.” 

With regard to subsections (B) and (C), POAG believes that alternative approaches to the “categorical approach” in determining which offenses qualify as a “crime of violence” or “controlled substance” are needed and that the current approach simply does not work. There is a strong need to implement amendments based on an alternative approach to this issue. Specifically, POAG indicated in our March 2023 comment regarding the 2023 proposed amendments that the categorical approach has created ever-increasing difficulties for districts around the country. One of the primary issues POAG raised included the fact that application of the current USSG §4B1.2 definitions has created considerable consternation as practitioners work to keep up with the changes in interpretation and the pending litigation. As a result of these issues, the guideline definitions no longer function as originally designed. Application issues aside, the true impact of this issue is defendants are more or less severely punished not based upon their relative risk, but based upon the location of where they committed the offense and the structure of the underlying statute. Such unwanted sentencing disparities is the very issue that the guidelines sought to address. 

Also as mentioned above in Priority #3, which focuses on the examination of simplifying the guidelines and possible consideration of amendments, POAG feels very strongly that the career offender guideline is presently the most complicated aspect of federal sentencing. Resolution of this issue will provide for ease of application and reduce the amount of resources needed to apply this guideline 

(6) Examination of the treatment of youthful offenders under the Guidelines Manual, 

including possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

POAG supports the Commission’s continued examination of youthful offenders and the scoring of their criminal history under the Guidelines Manual. During February and July 2017, POAG 6

wrote extensively about concerns with the application of criminal history scoring as it relates to juvenile offenders. POAG still maintains a general consensus that juvenile offenders should be held accountable for past convictions. Accounting for past criminal behavior is important, especially if the offender has violent or repeat offenses. Nonetheless, the following are continued areas of concern. 

POAG notes that, particularly with juvenile offenses, there are significant variations in which each state handles the prosecution and the type of sentence imposed, including even a variation in the age standard for who is a juvenile offender. In the prosecution of these cases, the offense charged for a juvenile offender may differ from what the charge would be in one state versus another, and even as an adult offender, thereby potentially not truly capturing the gravity of the actual conduct. 

Another ongoing concern is the inability to obtain supporting documentation of the conviction. Probation officers across the nation, even in the age of digitized records, are still faced with unique difficulty in obtaining the necessary documents in order to properly score these types of convictions. In some instances, because it is a juvenile offender, the records may be sealed, destroyed, or require additional processes, such as a subpoena, to obtain the necessary information. The uniquely varied ability of juvenile records leads to disparity in how a juvenile offender’s criminal history is captured and eventually scored. 

Another recurring issue related to juvenile offenders pertains to the legal definition in each jurisdiction of the term “confinement.” Pursuant to USSG §4A1.2(d)(2)(A), two points are added under USSG §4A1.1(b) for each adult or juvenile sentence of confinement of at least sixty days if the defendant was released from such confinement within five years of his commencement of the instant offense. Currently, the guidelines do not provide guidance for what meets the definition of “confinement” thereby leaving the discretion up to the sentencing judge and the appellate court. 

Given the Commission’s goal to simplify the guidelines, POAG discussed a potential revision to USSG §4A1.2(d), providing one uniform standard point system for having a juvenile adjudication/conviction, similar to the structure under USSG §4A1.1. This simplified process would eliminate the need for a what could be an extensive search for juvenile records which could be an inefficient use of resources. 

(7) Implementation of any legislation warranting Commission action. 

POAG makes no comment or recommendation regarding this priority at this time. 

(8) Resolution of circuit conflicts as warranted, pursuant to the Commission’s authority 

under 28 U.S.C. § 991(b)(1)(B) and Braxton v. United States , 500 U.S. 344 (1991). 

POAG encourages the Commission to continue to resolve circuit conflicts whenever possible. 7

(9) Consideration of other miscellaneous issues coming to the Commission’s attention. 

POAG notes that certain sections of the Guidelines Manual need updated and amended in light of the First Step Act. For example, the First Step Act revised 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(C) by providing that the higher penalty for a “second or subsequent count of conviction” under section 924(c) is triggered only if the defendant has a prior section 924(c) conviction that has become final. As such, POAG recommends amending the illustrative example of a multiple count 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) scenario under USSG §5G1.2, comment. (n.4(B)(iii)), to comply with the statutory changes under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). 

POAG suggests that there is a disparity in application of USSG §4B1.5 (Repeat and Dangerous Sex Offender Against Minors), which was previously detailed in POAG’s July 22, 2016, submission. Additionally, POAG believes further clarification is needed regarding USSG §2D1.1(b)(13), pertaining to the misrepresentation of fentanyl or fentanyl analogues. The specific offense characteristic is one of a few without further guidance in the commentary. Reports from the field indicate there is a lack of consensus on when to apply this enhancement, while fentanyl and fentanyl analogue cases have been on the rise. POAG believes clarification regarding the mens rea requirement and whether explicit mismarketing is required for the enhancement to apply. Finally, POAG believes further guidance on USSG §3C1.2, Reckless Endangerment During Flight, is needed, particularly as it pertains to firearms offenses and defendants who discard firearms during flight. There has been a growing body of precedent pertaining to when the enhancement should be applied; however, the application is still somewhat inconsistently interpreted. 

(10) Further examination of federal sentencing practices on a variety of issues, possibly 

including: (A) the prevalence and nature of drug trafficking offenses involving 

methamphetamine; (B) drug trafficking offenses resulting in death or serious bodily injury; 

(C) comparison of sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus plea; (D) 

continuation of the Commission’s studies regarding recidivism; and (E) other areas of 

federal sentencing in need of additional research. 

With regard to subsection (A), POAG recommends the Commission further examine sentencing practices relating to the prevalence and nature of drug trafficking offenses involving methamphetamine. POAG would respectfully ask the Commission to consider whether the distinction between methamphetamine mixture and methamphetamine actual is still useful, relevant, or necessary. POAG has observed an increase in challenges to the rationale behind this distinction. Purity was once considered to be an indicator of a defendant’s culpability; however, POAG notes that methamphetamine is now at least 80% pure in the majority of cases in which it is tested; therefore, purity no longer appears to be an accurate measurement for culpability. 

POAG has taken note of a pattern in which judges in several jurisdictions are disagreeing with the 

guidelines’ treatment of methamphetamine mixture and methamphetamine actual and treating all 

methamphetamine as a mixture regardless of its purity. This pattern appears to be driven by the 

philosophy that methamphetamine (actual) guideline ranges are significantly above that which is 8

sufficiently punitive. For example, in United States v. Harry , 313 F. Supp. 3d 969, 973 (N.D. Iowa 

2018) (unpublished), the court observed that the amount of methamphetamine (actual) resulted in 

a sentencing range that was more than double what would have resulted if the offense had involved 

the same quantity of heroin. As such, the court reached the conclusion that “there is no empirical 

evidence supporting the need for a drastically increased sentence based solely on the purity of the 

methamphetamine at issue.” The Court in Harry cited another case in the 8th Circuit, United States 

v. Nawanna , 321 F. Supp. 3d 943 (N.D. Iowa 2018) (unpublished), which raised a policy 

disagreement with the 10-to-1 ratio in the treatment of actual methamphetamine as compared to 

methamphetamine mixture. POAG discussed the prevalence of this pattern and found that similar 

policy disagreements with the methamphetamine guideline have taken shape in other Circuits. 

Another concern is the disparity in sentencing between cases in which the methamphetamine is tested and those cases in which it is not. Defendants in cases which have lab reports indicating the purity of the methamphetamine tend to receive longer sentences due to the harsher punishment associated with pure methamphetamine, while those with no lab reports or fewer lab reports receive the benefit of having their sentence determined by the default assessment as methamphetamine (mixture). 

Additionally, as the Commission has sought feedback on the issue of simplifying the sentencing guidelines, POAG would submit to the Commission that the guidelines can be simplified by establishing a singular guideline for methamphetamine that would result in a guideline range that is sufficiently punitive and not excessive. POAG notes that methamphetamine offenses comprise 48.5% of all federal drug offenses and they have the longest average sentence of any drug type at 94 months. POAG recommends the Commission further examine the methamphetamine guidelines given both the prevalence of methamphetamine offenses and the disparity in sentencing trends across jurisdictions. 

Lastly, POAG recommends that the Commission provide further guidance regarding application of USSG §2D1.1(b)(5), which provides a two-level enhancement “if the offense involved the importation of amphetamine or methamphetamine or the manufacture of amphetamine or methamphetamine […]” There is a disparity in the application of this guideline in that some jurisdictions apply the enhancement in all cases involving pure methamphetamine, while other jurisdictions engage in additional fact-finding to establish a scienter requirement that the defendant have knowledge of the importation. 

(11) Additional issues identified during the comment period .

As noted in a prior submission detailed on August 10, 2018, POAG recommends the Commission consider further study and refinement of USSG §2G2.2. POAG has observed an increase in binding plea agreements for child pornography offenses that establish sentences below the guideline range. In Fiscal Year 2022, there were 64,142 child pornography cases reported to the United States Sentencing Commission. Of these cases, only 34.1% were sentenced within the guideline range. While POAG recognizes that many §2G2.2 specific offense characteristics are the result of a Congressional directive, nearly all §2G2.2 specific offense characteristics apply in 9

every case, which leads to a one-sized approach for every defendant that fails to individualize risk. POAG suggests the Commission consider updating the guideline to reflect changing trends and emerging technologies. 

POAG recommends the Commission consider an amendment to USSG §2P1.1 relating to escape offenses. Under this guideline, a defendant is eligible to receive a two-level or a four-level decrease if the defendant escaped from non-secure custody and did not commit any federal, state, or local offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year or more while away from the facility. A common scenario for this offense involves defendants arrested for new charges in escape status from a half-way house whose charge remains pending at the time of sentencing. POAG has observed application issues related to this guideline as there are different interpretations of what constitutes “committed.” If interpreted to require a conviction or guilty finding for the new offense, defendants with pending charges would be eligible for the reduction and would be treated similarly to defendants who committed no new law violations while on escape status. Therefore, POAG recommends this reduction should not apply when defendants are arrested for a new law violation, regardless of whether the new law violation remains pending. POAG recommends the adoption of similar language used in USSG §2K2.1, comment. (n.14(C)), defining “another felony offense,” “as any federal, state, or local offense…punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year, regardless of whether a criminal charge was brought, or a conviction obtained.” POAG believes such an amendment would appropriately account for the defendant’s conduct and eliminate the need to litigate this issue at sentencing. 

POAG also recommends the Commission consider creating a new category at USSG §4A1.2 for non-traditional sentences imposed by state courts which do not necessarily fall under the definitions of a “prior sentence,” “custody,” or a “diversionary disposition.” For example, sentences of probation before judgment or conditional discharge may be considered when computing criminal history in some jurisdictions while these same sentences may not be considered when computing criminal history in other jurisdictions. Probation officers must often rely on Circuit decisions in those jurisdictions to determine whether or not sentences meet the definition(s) under §4A1.2 when scoring criminal history. 

Additionally, POAG recommends the Commission consider reevaluating the loss table at USSG §2B3.1 (Robbery). Currently, the loss table at §2B3.1(b)(7) reflects a threshold of $20,000 or more before an increase in the offense level is to be applied. Many sentences under this guideline include bank and Hobbs Act robbery offenses wherein defendants receive no increase in the offense level 

because the loss is $20,000 or less. According to the United States Sentencing Commission’s 

Report on Use of Guidelines and Specific Offense Characteristics Guideline Calculation Based for 

the Fiscal Year 2022, 90.1% of offenses sentenced under this guideline involved loss amounts of 

$20,000 or less. As such, POAG recommends the Commission consider reducing the minimum 

loss amount. 

Finally, POAG recommends the Commission consider amending or deleting the criminal 

livelihood enhancement at USSG §4B1.3. POAG submits that the current guideline, as written, is 

difficult to determine and is rarely applied, causing application concerns and litigation in the cases 

in which it does apply. Instead, POAG recommends the Commission include a recidivism 

enhancement for defendants who engage in the predatory conduct of committing repeated frauds, 

which would account for the long-standing devastating harm these offenses can have on victims. 10 

In conclusion, POAG would like to sincerely thank the United States Sentencing Commission for the opportunity to provide feedback on behalf of the dedicated professionals who serve the court as United States Probation Officers. 

Respectfully, 

Probation Officers Advisory Group -1-

# VICTIMS ADVISORY GROUP 

> A Standing Advisory Group of the United States Sentencing Commission

August 1, 2023 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2 -500, South Lobby 

Washington, D.C. 20002 

RE: VAG ’s Comment on Proposed Priorities for Amendment Cycle ending May 1, 2024 

Dear Members of the Commission: 

The Victims Advisory Group (VAG) appreciates the opportunity to provide written suggestions 

to the Commission ’s proposed priorities for the 2023 -2024 amendment cycle. Pursuant to its 

duties outlined in §1 of the VAG’s Cha rter, the VAG offers the following to assist the 

Commission in determining its priorities. The VAG’s membership includes experts from across 

the country on victim issues. Many of the members directly work with victims either as 

advocates, attorneys with non -profit organizations, or private attorneys representing victims of 

crime. 

1. Assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of Prisons are effective in 

meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2) and considerin g

any appropriate responses including possible consideration of recommendations or 

amendments 

Without identifying which Bureau of Prison (BOP) practice the Commission is referencing, the 

VAG finds this proposal so vague that it is difficult to comment upon it. 

The VAG recognizes that there appear to be flaws with the B OP management of prisons as 

exemplified by the Commission’s concern about sexual assault of prisoners and the Bureau’s 

response to the COVID -19 epidemic discussed in the 2022 -23 cycle. The VAG shares the 

Commission’s concern about these issues and believes all victims or potential victims of crime 

have the right to prevention of crime and the full enforcement of criminal laws and their rights 

under 18 U.S.C. 3771. The VAG notes, however, that the BOP has recently engaged in a 

lengthy re -examination of its practices and new strategic planning to address these observed  

> Mary Graw Leary, Chair
> Colleen Clase
> Shawn M. Cox
> Margaret A. Garvin
> Julie Grohovsky
> Francey Hakes
> Christopher Quasebarth
> Theresa Rassas
> Katie M. Shipp

-2-

flaws. 1 The VAG feels it may be appropriate to allow this new strategic plan to be realized. The 

VAG furth er urges the Department of Justice and Congress to intervene if necessary to ensure 

that the BOP fulfills its mission to “ foster a humane and secure environment and ensure public 

safety by preparing individuals for successful reentry into our communities. ”2

However, the VAG notes that those authorities – the Department of Justice and Congress – are 

the proper entities to evaluate and intervene with the BOP. The VAG was great ly concerned that 

during the 2022 -23 amendment cycle that the Commission thought it appropriate to widely 

expand the extraordinary and compelling release provision beyond its purpose to seemingly 

remedy BOP’s internal flaws by allowing a signifi can t and unstructured r eleas e of offenders 

from BOP custody without requiring notice to victims . The VAG agrees with the three 

dissenting C ommissioners ’ concerns about the scope of the Commission ’s authorit y.3 The VAG 

urges the Commission to not continue this practice of seeking methods to release convicted 

offenders to remedy BOP flaws. Such flaws should be addressed by the appropriate authorities 

but not by the Commission through expanding its authority and releasing offenders prior to the 

end of their lawful sentences .

Notwithstanding the vagueness of the proposed priority, the VAG ass umes it could reference 

subparagraph (D) “to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, 

medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.” Crime victims and 

the community have a strong interest in the Co mmission reviewing BOP practices to determine 

which programs, if any, effectively assist incarcerated offenders in addressing and correcting 

their personal internal influences for committing the criminal of fense(s) that harmed others (e. g., 

economic instab ility stemming from poverty, lack of education and lack of job skills; mental 

ill ness, including substance abuse ). Effective BOP practices meeting the requirements of 18 

U.S.C. 3553(a)(2)(D) could provide a measurable means for an incarcerated offender to accept 

responsibility for his/her offense and the harm caused by the offense. Effective BOP practices 

could produce offenders less likely to become recidivists upon release and more likely to be 

restored and reintegrated into the community. If such program s can accomplish these objectives, 

offenders, crime victims and the community at large can benefit from the improved effectiveness 

of such programs. 

(2) Promotion of court -sponsored diversion and alternatives -to -incarceration programs by 

expanding the availabi lity of information and organic documents pertaining to existing 

programs (e.g., Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence Alternatives 

(CASA) Program, Special Options Services (SOS) Program) through the Commission’s        

> 1https://www.bop.gov/resources/news/20230426_mission_vision_core_values.jsp
> 2https://www.bop.gov/about/agency/agency_pillars.jsp
> 3United States Sentencing Com mission ,Public Meeting Minutes ( April 27, 2023 )at 60 (“ further than the
> Commission's legal authority extends ”), 61, 72 (“ a sweeping catch -all that in our view, abdicates the Commission's
> responsibility to articulate clear criteria by effectively delegating the Commission's authority to the courts ”), 73 -74
> (“Under the new policy statement, once a sentence has been imposed, there is no finality and judges have virtually
> unfettered discretion to reduce a sentence for any reason or combination of reasons that they v iew as sufficiently
> grave. This lack of finality is also visited on crime victims. ”). -3-

website and possible worksh ops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, 

implementing, and assessing such programs. 

Similar to effective BOP practices meeting the requirements of 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2), above, 

crime victims and the community have a strong interest in effective programs that are rooted in 

the purpose s of sentences outlined in the Sentencing Reform Act and the Guidelines Manual: 

“deterrence, incapacitatio n, just punishment, and rehabil itation. ”4 If those programs are shown 

by multiple valid studies to ef fectively assist offenders in addressing and correcting their 

personal i nternal influences for committing the criminal of fense(s) that harmed others (e. g., 

economic instability stemming from poverty, lack of education and lack of job skills; mental 

illness , including substance abuse; personal trauma ) then the sharing of that information could be 

beneficial to all . Effe ctive programs in this area could also provide a measurable means for an 

offender to accept responsibility for his/her offense and the harm c aused by the offense, produce 

offenders less likely to become recidivists upon release and more likely to be restored and 

reintegrated into the community , and able to pay restitution for victims more readily. However, 

any diversion or alternative to incar ceration program programs should not be promoted without 

requiring the consultation and in some cases consent of the victim survivor. Furthermore, such 

exploration of these programs must also comply with the crime victim’s rights to protection from 

offend ers, restitution, and to be heard. 5

(3) Examination of the Guidelines Manual , including exploration of ways to simplify the 

guidelines and possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

This proposal is so vague, the VAG finds it difficult on which to comment. While the VAG 

supports clarity in the Guideline it notes a concern raised during the 2022 -23 cycle that the 

Commission was streamlining the Guidelines at the expense of crime victi m rights. It is the 

guidelines that should be simplified, not hearings addressing an offender’s sentence, especially 

when those proposed simplifications directly affect victims’ rights. The VAG previously 

requested the Commission to require hearings for any motion for extraordinary and compelling 

release, as well as potential release under the criminal history amendments. The VAG also noted 

the suggestion that such matter s could be resolved without a hearing in the Impact Analysis of 

the retroactivity of the criminal history amendment indicated “a repeated pattern of the 

Commission to a focus on streamlining processes in favor of offenders – in this case some of the 

most dangerous of offenders - in contravention to the law and recognized due process for 

victims. ”6 The VAG reiterates this concern that “simplifying” the guidelines should not ever be 

at the cost of victim survivors of crime. 

(4) Continuation of its multiyear study of the Guidelines Manual to address case law 

concerning the validity and enforceability of guideline commentary. 

The VAG has no specific comment on this proposed priority.          

> 4Sentencing Guidelines Manual at Ch1, Part A, 1.2
> 518 U.S.C. 3771
> 6Letter to U .S. Sentencing Commission ,from Victims Advisory Group ,Inapplicability of Retroactivity of 2023
> Criminal History Amendment, 1 (June 22, 2023). -4-

(5) Continued examination of the career offender guidelines, including (A) updating the data 

analyses and statutory recommendations set forth in the Commission’s 2016 report to 

Congress, titled Career Offender Sentencing Enhancements ; (B) devising and conducting 

workshops to discuss the scope and impact of the career offender guidelines, including 

discussion of possible alternative approaches to the “categorical a pproach” in 

determining whether an offense is a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance 

offense”; and (C) possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

The VA G previously commented in its February 19, 2019, public comment to the Co mmission’s 

then -proposed amendment regarding Career Offenders and addressed concerns about the 

“categorical approach” as to a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance offense .” If this 

2024 Priority is addressing the same issue, the VAG refers to tho se comments. 

(6) Examination of the treatment of youthful offenders under the Guidelines Manual ,

including possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate. 

The VAG notes that any examination of youthful offenders under the Guidelines manual mus t

still afford victims the right to be heard at sentencing and all other federal rights under 18 U .S.C.

3771. 

(7) Implementation of any legislation warranting Commission action. 

The VAG has no specific comment on this proposed priority. 

(8) Resolution of circuit conflicts as warranted, pursuant to the Commission’s authority 

under 28 U.S.C. 991(b)(1)(B) and Braxton v. United States , 500 U.S. 344 (1991). 

The VAG has no specific comment on this proposed priority. 

(9) Consideration of other miscellaneous issues coming to the Commission’s attention. 

The VAG has no specific comment on this proposed priority. 

(10) Further examination of federal sentencing practices on a variety of issues, possibly 

including: (A) the prevalence and nature of drug trafficking offenses involving 

meth amphetamine; (B) drug trafficking offenses resulting in death or serious bodily 

injury; (C) comparison of sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus 

plea; (D) continuation of the Commission’s studies regarding recidivism; and (E) other 

are as of federal sentencing in need of additional research. 

The VAG notes that d rug trafficking offenses are never victimless, even when an “identified 

victim” is lacking. Drug trafficking offenses resulting in death or serious bodily injury have 

identifiable victims. Recidivism often has identified victims. This priority seems to be directed at 

further study; such studies need to include research on the continuing impact of these offenses on 

victims and communities and the fulfillment of victim rights during sentencing proceedings. 

(11) Additional issues identified during the comment period. -5-

In the VAG’s 2022 letter to the Commission the VAG asked the Commission to allow for victim 

survivors to have access to the Presentence Reports (PSR ) prior to sentencing. Specifically, the

VAG wrote: 

One of the many benefits of the modern sentencing system is the creation of the 

Presentence Report. This document affords offenders the opportunity to place before the 

court information relevant to their life experiences, but also critically gives victims an 

opportunity to provide essential information to the court about the offenders, the offenses, 

and their impact. Offenders and the government have the opportunity to both review the 

report prior to the hearing and to make corrections. However, victims do not have the 

opportunity to review the report. The VAG has observed through its work with victims 

that victims must have access to these reports for several reasons. 

First, when a victim attends a he aring he or she does not know what the Court has been 

told in the report about the offense itself, the victim, or any history. The victim has a 

right to be meaningfully heard at sentencing. “It is hard to see how victims can 

meaningfully provide ‘any inf ormation’ that would have a bearing on the sentence 

without being informed of the Guidelines calculations that likely will drive the sentence 

and reviewing the document that underlies those calculations.” 7 Furthermore, the 

victim’s comments cannot be as meaningful if he or she has less information than all the 

other parties. Secondly, the victim also does not know if the author of the presentence 

report accurately documented the victim’s statements. Members of the VAG recount 

situations in which this in formation is simply incorrect, but they do not learn of it until 

after sentencing. Incorrect information should not be considered by a court at sentencing, 

yet there is no mechanism for a victim to ensure his or her information has been 

accurately conveye d. 

The entire goal of the Presentence Report specifically and the Guidelines generally is to 

produce an accurate sentence based on relevant conduct and specific actions. Only one 

person knows certain information - the victim - and the victim should have t he 

opportunity, just as the offender does, to ensure the information provided is accurate and 

to object if it is not. 8

In light of the amendments in the 2022 -2023 cycle , the request to allow victims access to the 

PSR has reached new urgency. As motions a re filed for early release and the Commission seems 

to have not required hearings and notice to victim survivors (which the VAG believes is required 

by law), courts will be turning to the PSR with greater frequency to assess important questions 

such as the role of offenders in crimes, the danger to the community, the circumstances of the       

> 7Paul Cassell, Recognizing Victims in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure: Proposed Amendments in Light of
> the Crime Victims’ Rights Act, 2005 B.Y.U. L. Rev 835, 894 -895 (2005).
> 8The PS Rappears to now be a sour ce of information a judge will turn to years later to try to assess facts about the
> underlying case. They have a right to review them to ensure accuracy.

-6-

offense, etc. 9 Given this significant change in the role of a PSR, the VAG renews its request for 

the Commission to consider requiring victim’s be able to review the PSR p rior to sentencing. 

The VAG thanks the Commission for this opportunity to address proposed priorities for the 

2023 -24 cycle. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Graw Leary 

Chair 

Victims Advisory Group 

cc: Advisory Group Members   

> 9Letter to U.S. Sentencing Commission from Victims Advisory Group, VAG’s Su ggested Priorities for 2022 ,5-6
> (September 24, 2022).

## www.cjhd.org 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2 -500, South Lobby 

Washington, D.C. 20002 -8002 

Attention: Public Affairs —Priorities Comment 

August 1 , 202 3

Public Comment s on Proposed 202 3-202 4 Priorities of the 

United States Sentencing Commission 

Dear Chairman Reeves and Members of the Commission: 

We are grateful for the opportunity to provide our comments on the proposed priorities for the 

2023 -2024 amendment cycle. We comment here on several of the priorities identified for 

consideration, as we wish to share our views on why these should be adopte d by the Commission. 

Specifically, we recommend that the Commission adopt priorities 2 (alternatives -to -incarceration 

programs), 3 (simplifying and amending the Guidelines), 8 (resolving circuit court conflicts), and 

10 (cases disposed of by trial versus plea, and recidivism studies) .

Our organizations are continually heartened by the active and effective work the Commission is 

doing . We applaud the Commission’s efforts to shift practices in our system toward less frequent 

use of incarceration and lengthy prison sentences , emphasizing approaches to hold ing people 

accountable that do no t unnecessarily separate and harm families and communities and that 

promote equity and fairness , consistent with public safety and the other goal s of sentencing .

The Center for Justice and Human Dignity 

The Center for Justice and Human Dignity (“CJHD”) 1 is a nonprofit organization whose mission is 

safely reducing the use of incarceration in the United States while improving conditions for those 

imprisoned and correctional staff . The Center promotes human dignity and shared safety while 

keeping in mind the needs of survivors , system -impacted people, and society at large. Along side 

diverse partners, the Center works with judges and prosecutors on ways to expand the use of 

alternatives to incarceration; with correctional leaders on the conditions of confinement; and 

with policymakers on legislative reforms to the criminal legal s ystem. At its upcoming October  

> 1https://www.cjhd.org.

2

2023  Rewriting the Sentence II S ummit  on A lternatives to Incarceration , CJHD plans to convene 

hundreds of key stakeholders to discuss and formulate st rategies for implementing innovative 

sentencing practices in the criminal legal system. 

CJHD is closely guided by the expertise of its steering committee, comprised of  20 current and 

former federal judge s. CJHD’s  board  also lends the guidance of a range of experts, including the 

Honorable Larry D. Thompson, former U.S. Deputy Attorney Ge neral; the Honorable Nancy 

Gertner, Senior Lecturer, Harvard Law School and former U.S. District Judge; and the Honorable 

Jeremy D. Fogel, Executive Director of the Berkeley Judicial Institute, former U.S. District Judge, 

and former Director of the Federal Judicial Center. 

The Aleph Institute 

The Aleph Institute (“Aleph”) 2 served as the incubator for CJHD’s formation. Aleph was founded 

in 1981 and has a decades -long history of direct service in prisons around the country, and has 

work ed with judges, legislators, executive branch officials (including prosecutors and prison 

officials), academics, and legal practitioners on criminal legal reform. Aleph was honored to have 

been a part of the bipartisan effort resulting in the passage of the First Step Act of 2018 , which 

brought about much -needed re form to our federal criminal legal system .

Aleph also has submitted alternative sentencing recommendations in dozens of criminal cases 

around the country. In many of t hem, the judge imposed a below -Guideline sentence, based at 

least in part on considerations set forth in Aleph’s submi ssions. Most frequently, courts in these 

cases rely upon defendants’ genuine expressions of remorse and acceptance of responsibility, 

their prior service to their community, the damage that would be caused to their family members 

were the defendant to be i mprisoned, and their willingness to make amends. These are among 

the very factors that support the government’s expanded use of alternatives to incarceration, 

especially for defendants who do not pose a risk to public safety. 

In 2016, Aleph convened a hig h-level  Alternative Sentencing Key Stakeholder (ASKS) summit  at 

the Georgetown Law Center, featuring nearly 200 current and former leaders and senior 

government officials serving in the criminal legal system. And in 2019, Aleph co -hosted (with 

Columbia Law School) a second summit on Alternatives to Incarceration —titled  Rewriting the 

Sentence —to examine the significant changes taking place in the alternatives to incarceration 

arena. This summit was attended by approximately 300 criminal legal stakeholders, including 

federal and state judges, prosecutors, defense counsel, probation and pretrial officers, 

individuals directly affected by incarceration, advocacy groups, and other key stakeholders . 

> 2https://www.aleph -institute.org.

3

Comments on Priority 2

Priority 2 would advance the goals of the Commission’s laudable adoption of Priority 12 during 

the previous amendment cycle 3 to promote “court -sponsored diversion and alternatives -to -

incarceration programs by expanding the availability of information and organic documents 

pertaining to existing programs ( e.g. , Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence 

Alternatives (CASA) Program, Special Options Services (SOS) Program) through the Commission’s 

website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, 

implement ing, and assessing such programs. ”

We ful ly support the adoption of this p riority. Moreover, w e further encourage the Commission, 

alongside promoting the existing federal programs, to consider providing further guidance in its 

pronouncements to lend assurance to judges, prosecu tors , and other system actors that these 

alternatives are legitimate and effective methods to achieve the goals of sentencing in 

appropriate cases .

The benefits of alternatives to incarceration —to the individual defenda nts, their families, and 

their communities —have been demonstrated through data, case studies, and scholarly articles 

as well as the actual implementation of these alternatives in justice systems throughout the 

country. Nevertheless, alternative sentences have remained relatively rare in the federal system ,

at least for many decades. We note with great favor that the use of such alternative s is on a path 

to scaling up significan tly, pursuant to action s by the President of the United States, 4 the U.S. 

Attorn ey General, 5 and (through its dedication to studying this area) the Sentencing Commission 

in recent years. 6

Given the numerous economic and human costs associated with incarceration ,7 all system actors 

should look to limit the use of incarceration to cases in which no reasonable alternative exists . In                        

> 3Priority No. 12: Multiyear study of court -sponsored diversion and alternatives -to -incarceration programs and
> related amendments to the Guidelines Manual ,available at https://www.ussc.go v/policymaking/federal -register -
> notices/federal -register -notice -proposed -2022 -2023 -priorities .
> 4Executive Order on Advancing Effective, Accountable Policing and Criminal Justice Practices to Enhance Public Trust
> and Public Safety , May 25, 2022.
> 5Memorandum From the Attorney General To All Federal Prosecutors , Dec. 16, 2022, at 2.
> 6See note 3 ,supra .
> 7See, e.g., Don Stemen, Department of Criminal Justice and Criminol ogy, Loyola University Chicago, The Prison
> Paradox: More Incarceration Will Not M ake Us Safer, July 2017 (footnotes omitted) (“It may seem intuitive that
> increasing incarceration would further reduce crime… In reality, however, increasing incarceration rates has a
> minimal impact on reducing crime and entails significant costs ”); United States v. Rivera, 281 F. Supp. 3 d 269, 271
> (E.D.N.Y. 2017) (“[i] ncapacitory sentences are usually unnecessary to increase public safety, or prevent recidivism;
> they place a tremendous financial burden on society through excessive incarceration”); U.S. D ep artment of Justice,
> Office of Justice Programs, National Institute of Justice, Five Things About Deterrence (last modified June 6, 2016)
> (“long prison sentences do little to deter people from committing future crimes”); Gall v. United States , 552 U.S. 38,
> 54 (2007) (quoting lower court order with approval) (“a sentence of imprisonment may work to promote not respect,

4

the words of William Fitzpatrick, the former President of the National District Attorneys 

Association, we should “use prison for those we are afraid of, not those whom we are mad at 

based upon their behav ior.” 8

In addition to negatively impacting individuals , lengthy periods of incarceration devastate the 

families and communities left behind, breeding bitterness, anger, and ultimately recidivism. 

Indeed,  the most recent meta -analysis concluded  that, with respect to reducing recidivism, the 

“null effect of custodial compared with noncustodial sanctions” is now established as a 

“criminological fact.” 9 The research concludes that “[i]ncarcera tion cannot be justified on the 

grounds it affords public safety by decreasing recidivism. Prisons are unlikely to reduce 

reoffending unless they can be transformed into people -changing institutions on the basis of 

available evidence on what works organiza tionally to reform [people] .” 10 

Incarceration’s bona fides look even less impressive when considering the outcomes for families, 

particularly for children with an incarcerated parent. More than five million U.S. children 

(approximately seven percent of the country’s population of children ) have experienced the 

incarceration of a parent. 11 Children of incarcerated parents are more likely to live in poverty and 

be homeless; are more likely to experience domestic violence or substance use disorde r by a 

parent; 12 and have higher rates of learning disabilities, developmental delays, speech/language 

problems, attention disorders, and aggressive behaviors. 13 These children are up to six times 

more likely to enter the criminal legal system themselves .14 In our view, a fair and effective 

criminal legal system must take these devastating collateral consequences into account. 

Comments on Priority 3                                      

> but derision, of the law if the law is viewed as merely a means to dispense harsh punishment without taking into
> account the real conduct and circumstances involved in sentencing”).
> 8April 26, 2016, letter to U.S. Senators Mitch McConnell and Harry Reid.
> 9Damon M. Petrich, Travis C. Pratt, Cheryl Lero Jonson, and Francis T. Cullen, Custodial Sanctions and Reoffending:
> A Meta -Analytic Review, Crime and Justice , Sept. 22, 2021.
> 10 Id .
> 11 Annie E. Casey Foundation, Children Of Incarcerated Parents, A Shared Sentence: The Devastating Toll Of Parental
> Incarceration On Kids, Families And Communities , April 19, 2016, available at https://www.aecf.org/resources/a -
> shared -sentence (based on 2011 -2012 data).
> 12 See Youth.gov, Children of Incarcerated Parents ,available at https://youth.gov/youth -topics/children -of -
> incarcerated -parents.
> 13 See Julie Poehlmann -Tyna n and Kristin Turney, Society for Researc h in Child Development, A Developmental
> Perspective on Children with Incarcerated Paren ts ,Nov. 17, 2020, available at
> https://srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/cdep.12392.
> 14 National Institute of Justice, Hidden Consequences: The Impact of Incarceration on Dependent Children , March 1,
> 2017, available at https://nij.ojp.gov/topi cs/articles/hidden -consequences -impact -incarceration -dependent -
> children#note12.

5

Simplifying the Guidelines . Simplifying the Guidelines is a worthy and long -overdue endeavor .

Several data points illustrate the need . The 1987 Guidelines Manual is 290 pages . The 2021 

manual is 600 pages, with another 1,460 pages devoted to the 813 amendments that have been 

promulga ted . 2B1.1, the principal economic offense guideline, has 20 specific offense 

characteristics, 14 of which have one or more subparts . 2D1.1, the principal narcotics offense 

guideline, has 17 specific offense characteristics, 6 of which have one or more sub parts . This, of 

course, does not take into account all of the other components of computin g an advisory 

Guideline range —victim adjustments, role adjustments, obstruction adjustments, multiple -count 

adjustments, acceptance of responsibility adjustments, and the criminal history category (with 

its own m yriad set of intricate rules) —as well as upward departures and downward departures 

from that range . The considerable time and energy required to perform the task of working 

though the Manual to calculate the ra nge for a specific set of charges appears even more 

disproportionate, given that the Guidelines (since 2005) no longer control the sentencing process 

as they once did, but instead provide a non -binding reference point for what a defendant’s 

sentence should be .

The Commission ought to thoroughly review the Guidelines Manual to identify opportunities to 

streamline its contents, consistent with the advisory role the Guidelines now play in the 

sentencing process and the fact that, in some instances, they are more complicated than is 

necessary to fulfill that function. 

Amending the Guidelines —the Loss Table . Much has been said over the years about 2B1.1’s loss 

table . Criticism of it is plentiful —in terms of the outsize role i t has in determining a defendant’s 

Guideline range, its flaws as a proxy for culpability, and the sheer harshness of the results it 

produces .15 Examples of the excesses produced by the loss table abound; for two examples of 

cases in which the Aleph Institut e was involved at various stages, see United States v. Gozes -

Wagner , 14 -cr -637 (S.D. Tex.) (20 -year sentence in health care fraud case for mid -level first -time 

offender/single mother of two children) and United States v. Rubashkin , 08 -CR -1324 (N.D. Iowa) 

(27 -year sentence in bank fraud case for first -time offender with 10 children) . Indeed, it is not a 

coincidence that, in the most recent reporting year, sentencing courts granted downward 

variances in 40.5% of fraud/theft/embezzlement cases .16 

The Gozes -Wagner case is addressed further below (at p.10); the Rubashkin case prompted a 

letter to the sentencing court from six former Attorneys General of the United States and many 

other former high -ranking federal law enforcement officials, excoriating the dra conian nature of 

the loss guidelines. See Letter to Hon. Linda Reade, Apr. 26, 2010, at 2 (“We cannot fathom how                            

> 15 See, e.g. , B. Boss and K. Kapp, How the Economic Lo ss Guideline Lost its Way, and How to Save It , Ohio State Journal
> of Criminal Law ,Vol.18.2, 605 (2021); R. Eliason, The Ne w Sentencing Guideline for Fraud Cases , May 4, 2015,
> available at https://www.sidebarsblog.com/p/the -new -sentencing -guideline -for -fraud -cases ;American Bar
> Association Criminal Justice Section, A Report on Behalf of the American Bar Association Criminal Justice Section Task
> Force on the Reform of Federal Sen tencing for Economic Crimes ,Nov. 10, 2014, available at
> https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publications/criminaljustice/economic_crimes.pdf .
> 16 U.S. Sentencing Commission, 2020 Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics , at 90.

6

truly sound and sensible sentencing rules could call for a life sentence —or anything close to it —

for Mr. Rubashkin, a 51 -year -old, first -time, nonviolent offender whose case involves many 

mitigating factors and whose personal history and extraordinary family circumstances suggest 

that a sentence of a modest number of years could and would be more than sufficient to serve 

any and all applicable se ntencing purposes.”). 

At the same time, our criminal legal system has begun to come to terms with the harms of the 

reflexive, and excessive, resort to incarceration as the preferred means of punishment in this 

country . Alternatives to incarceration are be ing used more often . Pretrial diversion programs 

have taken hold in many federal districts, with more to come by virtue of the United States 

Attorney General’s commendable directive, in December 2022, for every U.S. Attorney’s Office 

to have a pretrial div ersion policy .17 And since 2005, when the Guidelines were made advisory ,18 

courts downwardly vary frequently from the Guidelines, including imposing non -incarceratory 

sentences in cases in which the Guidelines call for imprisonment .19 

Moreover, data show that many individuals can be held accountable without imprisoning them, 

consistent with public safety . To take one recent, striking example: since the spring of 2020, 

13,204 incarcerated individuals have been released early to home confinement pursuant to the 

CARES Act of 2020, on the grounds that they suffered from vulnerability to COVID and were low -

risk individuals least likely to re -offend . Three years later, only 22 of them (a fraction of 1%) have 

been arrested on new charges, the vast majority of which were for nonviolent offenses .20 This 

demonstrat es that many individuals (including ones sentenced based on 2B1.1) who were in 

prison, did not need to be (or at least, did not need to be there for as long as their sentences 

provided) —and that prison space, personnel, and programmatic resources can be more 

effectively deployed .

All of these phenomena support the conclusion that the Commission should review rigor ously 

the loss table and the overall severity of 2B1.1 , and consider amending it to better conform it to 

current federal sentencing policies, practices, and data —including providing for alternatives to 

incarceration in appropriate cases .

Amending the Guid elines —Downward Departures for Personal Characteristics . The Commission 

should examine and, to the extent it is able to, rectify the structural disparity between the 

treatment of a defendant’s personal characteristics under governing federal sentencing sta tutes 

and under the Guidelines. 

Under 3553(a), the primary federal sentencing statute, courts are required to consider seven 

factors in determining what sentence to impose . The first factor includes “the history and         

> 17 Memorandum From The Attorney General To All Federal Prosecutors , Dec. 16, 2022, at 2.
> 18 United States v. Booker , 543 U.S. 220 (2005) .
> 19 U.S. Sentencing Commission, 2002 Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics , at 90 (downward variances in
> 32.2% of all cases).
> 20 Sen. Cory A. Booker, CARES Act Home Confinement Three Years Lat er , June 2023, at 4.

7

characteristics of the defendant[.]” 21 That factor is not qualified in any fashion, or given any less 

weight than any other . It has equal status . Thus, personal characteristics, along with the other 

3553(a) factors, must be taken into account by sentencing courts in determining what sentence 

is “sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes” of sentencing in 

3553(a)(2). 

The Guidelines are different . A defendant’s Guideline range is essentially dictated by two factors: 

the offense conduct (and whether the defendant ple d guilty), and the defendant’s criminal 

history . Many personal characteristics —age; education; employment; mental and emotional 

conditions; physical conditions; family ties and responsibilities; military, civic, charitable and 

public service, and prior go od works —have no role in the determination of that range . Moreover, 

policy statements provide that some personal characteristics (such as a disadvantaged 

upbringing) are never a relevant basis for departure, and that other factors must be present to 

an “unusual” or “extraordinary” degree to warrant departure . In this way, many of a defen dant’s 

personal characteristics —which define who a defendant is as a person; their lifelong track record; 

their potential amenability to rehabilitation or treatment; and the impact their sentence may 

have on others —are given “second -class” status, marginalized by the Guidelines , as compared to 

the other factors that impact a defendant’s sentence .

The wisdom, efficacy, and fairness of that approach is su spect, and our sentencing scheme is 

imbalanced, given that the Guidelines aggravate sentences for virtually any and every prior bad 

act , but then provide that a wide variety of prior good acts (such as civic, charitable , or public 

service; employment -relat ed contributions; and similar prior good works) are ordinarily 

irrelevant in sentencing departure determinations , thus relegating these acts to potentially 

affecting merely where within an often -narrow sentencing Guideline range a sentence should 

fall .

To be sure, we recognize that at least some of this structural disparity exists because Congress 

has provided that certain personal characteristics generally should not be considered when 

determining prison terms . See 28 U.S.C . § 994 (e) (“ The Commission shal l assure that the 

guidelines and policy statements, in recommending a term of imprisonment or length of a term 

of imprisonment, reflect the general inappropriateness of considering the education, vocational 

skills, employment record, family ties and respon sibilities, and community ties of the 

defendant. ”) . But there are steps the Commission can take to rectify the situation . For example, 

the Commission can (1) recognize that certain personal characteristics (such as age, military, civic, 

charitable and publ ic service, and prior good works) are not constrained by 994(e) and therefore 

should not require extraordinary justification before a sentencing court can depart from the 

Guideline range on th ese grounds ; (2) ensure that the Guideline provisions for person al 

characteristics covered by 994(e) are not unduly restrictive when data or experience supports 

having these characteristics play a greater role in the Guideline process ; and (3) recommend 

amendments to 994(e) so that it comports w ith 3553(a) and the legitimate —indeed, critical —   

> 21 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(1).

8

role that personal characteristics should and do play in fashioning an appropriate sentence for a 

defendant in each individual case. 

One example of a potential Guideline amendmen t worthy of focused attention would be for 

5H1.6, dealing with family ties and responsibilities . As now written, such factors are generally not 

a basis for a downward departure, and may only serve that role if they are present to an unusual 

or extraordinar y degree . Moreover, in the case of a loss of family caregiving or financial support, 

four additional c riteria must be met —including a showing that the defendant’s support is not 

only helpful or even i mportant, but “irreplaceable.” 22 Read literally, a defen dant is deprived of 

any downward departure, despite being the sole means of caregiving and financial support for 

several children, if there were, say, a second cousin or a distant aunt who co uld contribute in 

their stead —even if the quantity or quality of that support was inferior, and even if was 

undisputed that the defendant was the person who could provide the best support for their 

family . Indeed, it requires no citation of authority to recognize that parent s can have a crucial , if 

not indispensable , role in the ir children ’s upbrin ging . Guideline 5H1.6 ought to be amended to 

better reflect the critical role that primary caregiver s often ha ve in the lives and well -being of 

their dependents .

Comments on Priority 8

Last year’s priorities included “[c] onsideration of possible amendments to the Guidelines Manual 

to prohibit the use of acquitted conduct in applying the guidelines. ” This did not come to pass .

At the time, the United States Supreme Court had been asked to resolve an inter -circu it court 

conflict with respect to the constitutionality of using acquitted conduct in connection with a 

defendant’s sentencing . Since then, the Supreme Court has chosen not to do so —with several 

Justices explicitly calling on the Sentencing Commission to address this issue . See McClinton v. 

United States , No. 21 -1557 (June 30, 20 23) (statement of Justices Kavanaugh, Gorsuch , and 

Barrett). 

We agree . Much has been sai d, on both sides of the issue —and those matters can be discussed 

further in due course , if t his priority is adopted . But whether and the extent to which acquitted 

conduct can play a role in a defendant’s sentence ought to be resolved by the Commission, at 

least with respect to the use of such conduct to increase the applicable range under the 

Gui delines. 

Comments on Priority 10 

We enthusiastically support the Commission’s consideration of Priority 10, especially the 

portion s that would prompt the Commission’s continued “examination of federal sentencing  

> 22 Guideline 5H1.6, Application Note 1(B)(iii).

9

practices on … (C) comparison of sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus 

plea ” and “ (D) continuation of the Commission’s studies regarding recidivism .” 

The Trial Penalty . Both the Aleph Institute and CJHD have experience with law and policy relatin g

to the constellation of issues often referred to as the “trial penalty.” Because the conditions that 

creat ed this phenomenon are complex and systemic, we hope to see a multi -agency, multi -

branch effort to ensure that we restore and protect the fundamenta l constitutional right to a jury 

trial . Accordingly, we strongly support the selection of this p riority for the Commission’s 2023 -

2024 amendment cycle .

The “trial penalty ” ha s been describ ed as “the substantial difference between the sentence 

offered in a plea offer prior to trial versus the sentence a defendant receives after trial. This 

penalty is now so severe and pervasive that it has virtually eliminated the constitutional right to 

a trial. To avoid the penalty, accused persons must surren der many other fundamental rights 

which are essential to a fair justice system.” 23 In essence , instead of merely conferring a 

reasonable benefit on people who accept responsibility and plead guilty, the current system gives 

prosecutors nearly unfettered po wer to threaten vastly increas ed sentences to people who 

assert their constitutional presumption of innocence and challenge the government to meet its 

burden of proof at trial. 

The magnitude of the effects on our current system cannot be overstated. On ly 2.3 percent of 

federal criminal cases went to trial in fiscal year 2022 ,24 by contrast with prior periods in which 

upwards of 15 percent of federal crim inal cases went to trial .25 Instead , “[t] he vast majority of 

felony convictions are now the result of plea bargains.” 26 The late William J. Stuntz , a former 

Harvard Law School professor and criminal justice scholar, noted that “those who are punished 

most severely are often those who made the worst deals, not those who committed the worst 

crimes.” 27 

Plea bargaining practices routinely induce individuals to waive not only the right to trial, but many 

other fundamental rights as well, such as the right s to obtain discovery, to challenge unlawfully 

obtained evidence, to testify and present defense witnesses, and even to appeal or collaterally                                         

> 23 National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (“NACDL”), The Trial Penalty: The Sixth Amendment Right to Trial
> on the Verge of Extinction and How to Save It ,July 2018, available at
> https://www.nacdl.org/getattachment/95b7f0f5 -90df -4f9f -9115 -520b3f58036a/the -trial -penalty -the -sixth
> amendment -right -to -trial -on -the -verge -of -extinction -andhow -to -save -it.pdf .
> 24 John Gramlich ,Fewer than 1% of defendant s in federal criminal cases were acquitted in 2022 , Pew Research
> Center ,June 14, 2023, available at https://www.pewresearch.org/short -reads/2023/06/14/fewer -than -1-of -
> defendants -in -federal -criminal -cases -were -acquitted -in -
> 2022/#:~:text=30%2C%202022.,were%20found%20guilty%20(1.9%25) .
> 25 See NACDL Report ,supra note 23, at .n. 2; see also Albert Alschuler, "Plea Bargaining and Its History," 79
> Columbia Law Review 1 ,passim (1979).
> 26 Emily Yoffe, Innocence Is Irrelevant: This is the age of the plea bargain —and millions of Americans are suffering
> the consequences, The Atlantic , Sept. 2017.
> 27 William J. Stuntz, The Collapse of American Criminal Justice (2011 ), at 58 .

10 

attack a conviction or sentence . Cases abound in which courts impose severe trial penalties on 

defendants , in the form of a geometrically greater sentence , simply for contesting the charges. 

Not infrequently, the signifi cant leverage given to prosecutors under the current system even 

causes innocent people to give up their constitutional rights, rather than risk draconian sentences 

by going to trial. As has been explained by U.S. District Judge Jed Rakoff of the S outhern District 

of New York ,28 it often makes sense for people who have committed no crime whatsoever to 

convict themselves by accepting a plea offer subject to the explicit or implicit threat that, if they 

fail to do so, the charges will be vastly increased and they will be subjected to the risk of a much 

harsher sentence if they are convicted after a trial. As Judge Rakoff notes, the modern criminal 

legal system “provide[s] prosecutors with weapons to bludgeon defendants into effectively 

coerced plea bargains.” 29 Moreover, “the typical person accused of a crime combines a troubled 

past with limited resources: he thus recognizes that, even if he is innocent, his chances of 

mounting an effective defense at trial may be modest at best. If his lawyer can obtain a plea 

bargain that will reduce his likely time in prison, he may find it ‘rational’ to take the plea … This 

has “caus[ed] the virtual extinction of jury trials in federal criminal cases .”

One e xample of trial penalty injustices is that of Daniela Gozes -Wagner, a single mother of two 

young children, who was sentenced to 20 years in prison for her subordinate role in a health 

fraud scheme. 30 Meanwhile, several ringleaders (and beneficiaries) in the scheme pleaded guilty 

and were given sentences of 5 or 6 years. Ac cording to her trial attorney, “… Daniela was also 

offered the opportunity to plead guilty to a single count of conspiracy to defraud the United 

States (18 U.S.C . § 371), which carries a 5 -year maximum . … I reasonably anticipated that the 

government would have recommended that Daniela receive a guidelines sentence of 48 

months… ” But he notes that Daniela wa s a devoted mother… [who] could not face the possibility 

of separation from her children, and she chose to go to trial.” 31 

Ms. Gozes -Wagner ended up paying an intolerably severe price for that decision. Indeed , the 

imposition of such a long sentence on Ms. Gozes -Wagner was based, in the judge’s own words, 

on the fact that she “exercised the constitutional rights that she has in the United States to ple ad 

not guilty.” 32 Ms. Gozes -Wagner’s sentence drew the condemna tion of numerous interested 

parties, including in the form of an  amicus brief  (spearheaded by the Aleph In stitute and co -

authored by CJHD’s Director of Policy and Legal Affairs, a co -author of this comment letter) ,

signed by six former U.S. Attorneys General, two former So licitors General, a former FBI D irector, 

and nearly 100 former federal and state judges a nd U.S. Attorneys .

The trial penalty also has the unfortunate effect of shifting authority over the proper sentence 

from impartial judges to prosecutors . By offering plea deals that include reduced charges or                

> 28 Jed S. Rakoff, Why Innocent People Plead Guilty ,The New York Review of Books , Nov. 20, 2014 .
> 29 Id.
> 30 Unite d States v. Gozes -Wagner , 14 -cr -637 (S.D. Tex.).
> 31 Letter from Ms. Gozes -Wagner’s trial attorney T. B. Todd Dupont II to the U.S. Pardon Attorney ,Nov .11, 2020 .
> 32 United States v. Gozes -Wagner ,ROA.20157:1234 .

11 

promises not to seek sentencing enhancements to those who accept them, and piling charges 

and sentencing enhancements on those who do not, prosecutors often persuade judges that they 

have no choice but to impose a sentence vastly out of proportion to the actual culpability of the 

defendant. These pract ices also give prosecutors immense leverage to extract guilty pleas in 

multiple -defendant cases , because the first co -defendants to accept a plea offer almost always 

get far better dispositions than those who plead later or insist on going to trial , a prac tice that 

often bears no relationship to either the defendant’s culpability or their amenability to 

rehabilitation .

We urge the Commission to lend its considerable expertise to this important issue. Indeed, we 

are unaware of any ma jor report on the issue since the NACDL ’s report in 2018, or any significant 

traction at the federal government level for examining it . Ameri ca’s criminal jury trial system 

needs significant attention in order to divert its path away from complete extinction. 

In short, t he imposition of the trial penalty is a blemish on the nation’s criminal legal system. The 

diminution of trial rights has bec ome an intractable systemic problem that can only be addressed 

with the participation of all relevant stakeholders —including the Sentencing Commission . We 

believe it is incumbent upon all to do what they can to restore this crucial component of our 

system to its rightful place in our system . For these reasons, we encourage the adoption of 

Priority 10(C) , with the hope that the Commission’s examination will contribute to broader 

progress on this issue .

Recidivism studies . A major goal of our criminal legal sentencing system is (and should be) to 

reduce the risk of recidivism. This does not mean a presumptive reliance on incapacitation of 

defendants; we now know better. For example, there is already a growing body of data 

supporting that many alternatives -to -incarceration (or pretrial diversion) programs result in 

relatively low rates of recidivism, including rates that are favorable to comparison groups of 

defendants who do not participate in such programs. 33 To the exten t that the se programs are 

proliferating —in particular, in the federal criminal legal system —their effectiveness, and the 

precise impacts of these programs and related measure s (such as drug treatment and trauma 

treatment) on recidivism , would be fruitful a rea s for continued study by the Commission. Such 

study could assist system stakeholders in learning from the experiences of others and fashioning 

(or modifying) their respective programs to best achieve the most positive outcomes, including 

lowering the r isk of recidivism among the programs’ participants. Accordingly, we also support 

further study in this area, as set forth in Priority 10(D).           

> 33 See, e.g. ,Laura Baber, Kevin Wolff, Jon athan Muller, Christine Dozier ,and Roberto Cordeiro ,Expanding the
> Analysis: Alternatives to Incarceration Across 13 Federal Districts , Dec. 2021 (individuals who successfully completed
> pretrial diversion programs were “significantly less likely” to b e re -arrested o n supervision); Amanda Garcia, Chief
> U.S. Pretrial Services Officer, N.D. Ill., Comment letter to U.S. Sentencing Commission , Oct. 6, 2022 (no re -arrests
> among 20 most recent graduates of district’s pretrial diversion program); Hon. Ronnie A brams and Hon. Sarah
> Netburn, S.D.N.Y., Comment letter to U.S. Sentencing Commission , Oct. 17, 2022 (recidivism rates among graduates
> of S.D.N.Y.’s Young Adult Opportunity Program has been “gratifyingly low ,” with outcomes that “are nothing short
> of extrao rdinary”).

12 

Conclusion 

We commend the Commission on assembling a list of meaningful, substantive priorities 

for the 2023 -2024 amendment cycle. We stand ready to assist the Commission as it sees fit. 

Respectfully, 

________________________________ 

Hanna Liebman Dershowitz, Esq. 

Director of P olicy and Legal Affairs 

Center for Justice and Human Dignity 

________________________________ _

Rabbi Sholom Lipskar 

Founder and Chairman of the Board 

Aleph Institute AUTISM CONNECTION OF PENNSYLVANIA 

TO 

## THE UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION 

## RE: P ROPOSED 2023-2024 P RIORITIES 

## OPEN COMMENT SUBMISSION 

## AUGUST 1, 2023 The Autism Connection of Pennsylvania fully supports the position paper and recommendations 

(the latter cited at the end of this statement) issued by PARSOL on July 30, 2023. The Autism 

Connection of PA also believes all sexual abuse is unacceptable and that prevention-based, 

rehabilitative, and trauma-informed programs are significantly more effective in healing a person 

as opposed to permanently damaging, disability inaccessible, and life-altering, shame-centered 

punishment. 

Many jurisdictions require people to register under SORNA (“Megan’s Law”) monthly and in 

person, at a designated location. Failure to register due to illiteracy or cognitive issues found in 

autism and/or intellectual disability, along with poverty and lack of transportation, results in re-

incarceration. 1/34 people in the US are autistic, with a higher representation in the Justice 

system. Disabled former prisoners cannot retain instructions, keep paperwork in any order, and 

are focussed on daily survival, not complex re-entry rules. Disabled people are unjustly punished 

and institutionalized as a result of this mandate. 

Case in point - we supported a 19 year old autistic young man who met a younger, distant cousin 

at a family reunion, and they had a sexual contact the following week, resulting in his two year 

incarceration at the Allegheny County, PA Jail. Because he failed to re-register his location at 

release, while on an ankle monitor, police “found” him at his home (his mom’s house) and he 

spent an additional 19 months in the county jail because he did not understand nor know to 

comply with the rules of his original release. 

Autism, lack of consequence thinking, and false confessions are common 

Autistic and intellectually disabled people are in the justice system in large numbers often 

due to sex offenses “on paper.” Recent cases we have worked with include: 

1.) A state trooper who failed to arrest a man for a weapons crime who then proceeded to 

hold a hostage in a prolonged SWAT situation. The parent of a 20 year old autistic man 

filed a grievance complaint against the trooper with the state, then let the trooper know 

she had done so. Soon after, and without parents’ knowledge, the trooper passed the 

autistic adult son’s phone number to teen girls and had them contact him, which they did, 

and arranged to meet at a skating rink. The young man was quickly arrested and jailed. 

His naivete that the could be unde age, and his extreme loneliness, poverty, and poor 

decision making skills, led to him being incarcerated for seven (7) years.* 

2.) A mid-20’s man with no friends and no romantic life, downloaded adult pornography, 

then set his computer for auto downloading when he was at work. He is serving a federal 

sentence after the government first thought he was a major dealer in child pornography, 

only to find out he is autistic with computer skills, but not filtering skills. Child porn 

mixes with adult images online, and accidental possession is common with this disability. 

3.) An man in his early 20’s who “fell in love with a mirage” and believed what he was told 

his entire life, to “just follow your heart” and “if you work hard enough, you can achieve 

anything,” emailed and texted a young woman for 10 years, first to show his love, then to 

get to know her better to understand why she didn’t love him back. His final “crime” was 

sending her a package of gummy Lifesavers and a BlueRay cartoon disk she had on her 

2public Amazon wish list. After he learned she was frightened (judge explained this) he 

still faces stalking and harassment charges, even though he is remorseful and now wants 

to get into therapy to learn “how to date people - I am like a first grader when it comes to 

that.” 

4.) A man with a 58 IQ and autism who went online to buy adult female companionship 

time, and was offered to meet a 15 year old girl - a police decoy. He declined twice in 

texting, stating “No, I don’t want to get into trouble” then “I went downtown to see if she 

was real. I couldn’t believe it! It turned out to be a cop but she looked like a child!” He 

witnessed her in the lobby of a large hotel, and was arrested, shackled to the floor during 

questioning, and is stuck on the shackling and the fact that an adult looks like a child. He 

faced five felony counts for his curiosity and complete ignorance of the law. 

5.) Currently a 23 year old man is in state prison because the girlfriend he moved in with 

wanted to evict him, and he had nowhere to go. She reported that he touched her child 

(the child was a survivor of previous sex abuse by a relative). Detectives found no 

evidence and did not prosecute. However, he became suicidal at the rejection, and went 

with his therapist to the emergency room. Before seeing a doctor, he started screaming “I 

want to see a cop!” He wrote and signed a confession, while stating “She says I did it, I 

might as well get it over with and do what she says, so I can get back with her.” He is 

serving a 7 year sentence. 

There are innumerable similar stories. None of these people are candidates for re-entry 

disability housing due to their convictions and the state understands this and is asking us to help 

find disability appropriate aftercare (nothing exists currently). None of them can survive in 

typical re-entry houses with multiple roommates, strict rules, and inappropriate therapy 

expectations. They don’t have the same types of sex offenses as the current regulations intend to 

address (albeit there are some victims). They did not have criminal intent, usually act out of 

loneliness and naivete, can be “set up” by others, or have no idea how to conduct themselves in 

interviews. They do not “look remorseful” in court, often cannot look a judge in the eye due to 

disability factors, and often lose their words and are unable to communicate in court. 

People with autism need to learn how to navigate in society despite crushing loneliness, 

detachment from the guidance of supports like parents and teachers, and extreme naivete leaving 

them prone to grave social errors they need to learn from differently than predatory, criminally 

intending others. They have even worse than the baseline 75% unemployment rate of their 

autistic peers, due to their conviction records. Employment at re-entry, therefore, will be elusive, 

at best. 

Today, an autistic man, aged 32, with an IQ of 61 hits the end of his sentence and will be 

dropped off at a homeless shelter in Pittsburgh with no destination and no supports, despite a 

three page long conviction record of mainly retail thefts, with a sex offense being the last crime 

on his record. He has no idea how to self-advocate to find: housing, food, income, etc. Disability 

programs will not allow him into residences. Re-entry programs will not meet his needs and will 

likely introduce him to some with criminal intent that may use or abuse him. His story will likely 

have a bad ending. 

3We are supporting a 27 year old man right now who achieved parole on April 6th (the man 

who met girls at a skating rink) and has no place to go, so he remains incarcerated. He is 

frustrated and has banged his head off the floor out of despair, - “why are other guys 

getting out who made parole after me? What is WRONG WITH ME?” - to the point he has 

knocked himself unconscious. This is barbaric. 

We are supporting another man, this one who is 37 years old with schizophrenia and autism, who 

has spent many years in a state psychiatric hospital previously and has been incarcerated for four 

years because he sent one piece of child pornography to his former social worker. He did this 

after she discontinued 20 hours a week of community based services, likely out of feeling 

rejected, hurt, and angry. He has dissociated inside, taking on the persona of rock musician Bryan 

Adams. He needs therapeutic housing, but with his new “sex offense” will not be eligible. 

Disability providers nearly always turn down cases due to these types of convictions. He also has 

nowhere to go upon release and will likely be dropped off at a shelter that cannot meet his needs. 

Therefore, we support the following recommendations from PARSOL: 

“OUR RECOMMENDATIONS 

We, urge The Commission to modify the Federal Sentencing Guidelines in response to 

the requested topic areas from the call for public comment priorities 1 as follows: 

1. Re: (2) Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs, (3) 

Simplification/Structural Reform, and (7) Crime Legislation 

Barring congressional action to change the mandatory minimum assigned, 

recommend that the Court’s sentencing of individuals under 34 U.S.C. §20913(e) 

of “Registry Requirements for Sex Offenders” under subchapter I, par. (a) 

‘Failure to Register,’ a Felony offense with a penalty including a penalty of 

imprisonment of one year, considers the individual’s circumstances. Therefore, 

allowing for a downward discharge toward a Summary offense with a sentence 

commensurate with 18 U.S.C. § 402.9, Contempt of Court constituting a criminal 

offense, wherefore “the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months, and 

the amount of any fine paid to the United States shall not exceed $1,000.” 

2. Re: (3) Simplification/Structural Reform, (7) Crime Legislation, and (9) 

Miscellaneous Guideline Application Issues 

Eliminate the Mandatory Minimums around Child Sexual Abuse Material (Child 

Pornography) cases, as suggested in the Congressional Research Service Report 

R42386 as follows: 

> 1
> https://www.ussc.gov/policymaking/federal-register-notices/federal-register-notice-propos
> ed-2023-2024-priorities

4Two-thirds of the federal trial judges responding to a U.S. Sentencing 

Commission survey questioned the severity of the mandatory minimum 

penalties required for receipt of child pornography (5 years; 15 years for 

repeat offenders). The Commission’s report suggested that the perception 

may lead to inconsistent sentencing in child pornography cases. 2

We suggest that in the USSC's review of the guidelines, examine ways to reduce 

all sentences in line with Executive Order 14074, which states "no individual 

should serve an excessive prison sentence." The President's order intends to 

relieve individuals from unfair and unduly harsh sentences, including those 

driven by mandatory minimums and those excluded from downward variances 

under the PROTECT Act. Implementing E.O. 14074 falls squarely on the 

shoulders of the USSC in re-examining the guidelines, particularly with 

non-production CSAM offenses. 

3. Re: (3) Simplification/Structural Reform, (9) Miscellaneous Guideline 

Application Issues, and (10) Research Topics 

Amend The Commission’s guidelines for Departures and Variances for sexual 

offenses committed by people with decreased mental capacity or underdeveloped 

cognition, including those with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Impulse Control 

Disorder, and other relevant paraphilic mental health disorders and diagnoses. 

This also applies to youth offenders. 3

4. Re: (7) Crime Legislation, and (9) Miscellaneous Guideline Application 

Issues 

We suggest the USSC recommend to Congress to pass legislation that amends the 

law around the awarding of time credits towards time served under pretrial home 

confinement where conditions are equal to or more severe than home 

confinement conditions at the end of a defendant's sentence. This will provide 

immediate and substantial relief to the BOP and thousands of individuals whose 

liberties were suspended during their period of pretrial supervision. In many 

cases, these individuals completed rehabilitative programming to reduce their 

recidivism and made substantial efforts to rehabilitate themselves. These efforts 

should be encouraged and rewarded with credit towards a sentence under 18 

U.S.C. 3553(b)(2). 4 The cost to keep an individual in federal prison is roughly 

$130/day compared to roughly $10/day for that same individual to be under the 

care of the court and the U.S. Probation office.    

> 4https://guidelines.ussc.gov/ab/18U.S.C.%C2%A73553
> 3https://caselaw.findlaw.com/court/us-8th-circuit/2077237.html
> 2https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R42386/4

55. Re: (1) Bureau of Prisons Practices 

Ensure that the programs and services offered by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and related administrative entities align with the desired sentencing and program goals and deliverables intended by the sentencing Court. Testimony from PARSOL members references that this is frequently not the case and, in one instance, “None of us are getting programs we need here. The programs are superficial, focusing on shame-based, demoralizing punishment instead of trauma-informed shame reduction and [dialectical and cognitive] healing. Society loses because prisons release un-reformed people back into the population.” 5

By the United States Sentencing Commission enacting these priorities in their 2023-2024 strategic work, they will advance the fair, non-discriminatory treatment of justice-involved individuals while also helping to foster safe communities across the United States.” 5. Source: Personal interview with inmate Jon Frey [BOP #13317-509], 7/12/2023.” Respectfully submitted, Luciana M. Randall, President Autism Connection of PA 711 Bingham Street Pittsburgh, PA 15203 www.autismofpa.org 412.781.4116 

> 5

6August 1, 2023 

The Honorable Carlton W. Reeves 

Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2 -500 

Washington, D.C. 20002 -8002 

Re: Priorities for the 2023 -2024 Amendment Cycle 

Dear Judge Reeves, 

Founded in 1991, FAMM (formerly known as Families Against Mandatory Minimums) 

pursues a broad mission of creating a more fair and effective justice system. By mobilizing 

communities of incarcerated persons and their families affected by unjust sentences, F AMM 

illuminates the human face of sentencing as it advocates for state and federal sentencing reform. 

FAMM has engaged with the Commission since our founding by submitting public comment s,

participating in hearings, and meeting with staff and commissioners . The Guidelines touch 

countless lives, including those of our own members – over 75,000 people nationwide. We 

welcome the opportunity to share our views of the issues that the Commission has proposed to 

prioritize in this upcoming amendment cycle. 

FAMM thanks the Commission for a productive 2022 -2023 year and has enjoyed 

participating in two public hearings. We are particularly grateful that the Commission made a 

concerted effort to include in its hearings panels of formerly incarcerated people who spoke 

directly to the impact of the Commission’s work. Your honor has said that “when you speak to 

the Commission, your voice will be heard” and we at FAMM, as well as our members, feel that 

to be true. We look forward to continuing our work together in th is coming year. 

I. Proposed Priority (1) : Assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of 

Prisons are effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 

3553(a)(2) and considering any appropriate responses including possible consideration of 

recommendations or amendments. 

FAMM is thrilled that the Commission intends to analyze whether BOP is effective in 

meeting the purposes of sentencing and use its statutory authority to ensure that individuals are 

not serving mo re time than necessary, or under conditions that will not contribute to their success 

upon release. 1  

> 1See generally 28 U.S.C. §§ 994(o), (q).

2

The problems with in BOP are well documented. 2 They include understaffing ,3

overcrowding, 4 denying or neglecting individuals necessary medical care, 5 rampant sexual abuse 

in certain facilities, 6 and refusing to act under its authority to seek release of individuals pursuant 

to 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A). In fact, many of the amendments that the Commission made to 

§1B1.13 in the las t cycle addres sed BOP’s broadscale intransigence and failures. 

The Commission has a critical, yet largely unfilled , role in improv ing the experience of those 

in BOP and ensuring individuals are not serving more time than necessary . As Ste phen Sady 

observed: 

Prisoners themselves are virtually voiceless regarding their 

conditions of confinement. Advocacy groups’ suggestions can be 

administratively shrugged off. Litigation carried out by the few 

attorneys with the expertise to make their way through the 

procedural quagmir e of administrative law face the limitless 

resources of a multi billion -dollar agency that takes advantage of 

every procedural obstacle. The Commission has unique power to 

offer insight and in fluence, given its institutional expertise and 

statutorily conferred authority. 7

Below, we provide just two examples of ways by which the Commission can exert influence 

over the BOP.  

> 2

See, e.g. , Joe Davidson, Senate Prison System Inquiry Reveals ‘national disgrace,’ Washington Post 

(Feb. 10, 2023), https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/10/jon -ossoff -bop -prison -abuse -

hearings/.  

> 3

Glenn Thrush, Short on Staff, Prisons Enlist Teachers and Case Managers as Guards , NY Times (May 

1, 2023), htt ps://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/01/us/politics/prison -guards -teachers -staff.html; see also 

U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Inspector General, Capstone Review of the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ 

Response to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic at 44, Tbl. 3 (M arch 2023) (showing a 13% 

vacancy rate for all BOP employees and 21% vacancy rate for Correctional Officers, which are even 

higher than the rates during COVID -19).  

> 4

See U.S. Dep’t of Justice FY 2024 Performance Budget, Congressional Submission, Federal Prison 

System Buildings and Facilities, (“The BOP faces challenges in managing the existing Federal inmate 

population and providing for inmates’ care and safety in crowded conditions at higher security levels, as 

well as the safety of BOP staff and surroun ding communities.), https://www.justice.gov/d9/2023 -

03/bop_bf_fy_2024_pb_narrative_omb_cleared_3.21.2023.pdf.  

> 5

Devlin Barrett, Judge Blasts Bureau of Prisons’ Treatment of Dying Prisoner , NY Times (Oct. 14, 

2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/national -security/2022/10/14/prisons -contempt -dying -inmate/.  

> 6

See, e.g. , Dep’t of Justice, Sevent h and Eighth Federal Correctional Officers Charged as Part of 

Ongoing Federal Investigation into FCI Dublin , https://www.justice.gov/usao -ndca/pr/two -more -dublin -

federa l-correctional -officers -plead -guilty -sexually -abusing -multiple.  

> 7

Stephen R. Sady, Advice to New Commissioners: The U.S. Sentencing Commission Should Address the 

Failure of the Bureau of Prisons to Adequately Implement Statutes that Reduce Prison Time , Fed eral 

Sentencing Reporter, Vol. 35, No. 1 at 13 (Oct. 2022). 3

For the first time in its history, the Commission heard from panels of system -impacted 

people during the 2023 amendment cycle hearings. In the panel on February 23 and the panel on 

July 19, Commissioner Horn Boom asked the formerly incarcerated witnesses what the 

Commission could do to help give hope to those who ar e currently incarcerated. 8 Witnesses 

responded unequivocally that BOP could increase access to programming. They detailed the 

impact that programming could have on them, but also how difficult it was to access meaningful 

programs .

Programm ing in prison helps ensure that sentences imposed “provide the defendant with 

needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the 

most effective manner. ”9 And yet, access to programming in federal prison remains a 

challenge .10 As an initial matter, availability of programming , and the incentives for 

programming depend on an individual’s PATTERN score and SPARC -13 assessment . For 

example, individuals with a High PATTERN score are unlikely to be able to use their 

programing for early release or early transfer to the community. The problems with PATTERN 

are now well documented. 11 PATTERN has been shown to overpredict recidivism for people of 

color , giving certa in individuals a higher PATTERN score for reasons untethered to the ir 

likelihood to recidivate . In addition, the BOP’s risk and needs assessment, known as SPARC -13, 

which determines the appropriate programs for an individual , w as not conducted on time, 

limiting some individuals ’ access to recidivism reducing programming. 12 Even though these 

problems with PATTERN and SPARC -13 are documented and well known, BOP will continue 

to rely on these systems to determine an individual’s prog ramming needs and eli gi bility to return 

to the community early. 

The Department of Justice’s 2023 report on the First Step Act celebrates increased access to 

programming since 2022, but roughly a quarter of individuals are still not participating in First  

> 8

U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, February 2023 Public Meeting Transcript at 270 (Feb. 23, 2023), 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment -process/public -hearings -and -meetings/20230223 -

24/0 223_Transcript.pdf.  

> 9

18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2) (D) . 

> 10

U.S. Dep’t of Justice, First Step Act Annual Report 21 -23 (Apr. 2023), https://www.ojp.gov/first -step -

act -annual -report -april -2023 . 

> 11

See id. at 8 -11 ; see also Carrie Johnson, Flaws Plague a Tool Meant to Help Low -Risk Federal 

Prisoners Win Early Release, NPR (Jan 26., 2022), https://www.npr.org/2022/01/26/1075509175/justice -

department -algorithm -first -step -act; Nat’l Inst. Of Justice, Predicting Recidivism: Conti nuing to Improve 

the Bureau of Prisons’ Risk Assessment Tool, PATTERN (Apr. 19, 2022) (recognizing, after many 

iterations, that there is still work to be done because “[r]esults demonstrate evidence of differential 

prediction across racial/ethnic groups . . . include[ing] overprediction of Black, Hispanic, and Asian males 

. . .”).  

> 12

GAO, Report to Congressional Committees, Bureau of Prisons Should Improve Efforts to Implement its 

Risk and Needs Assessment System (March 2023), https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao -23 -105139.pdf (“[W]e 

found issues with BOP’s ability to oversee whether risk and needs assessments are conducted on time. 

Specifically, BOP does not have readily -available, complete, and accurate data to determine if risk and 

needs assessments were conduc ted within the First Step Act required and BOP established timeframes. 

While BOP has plans to implement various mechanisms to monitor First Step Act requirements, BOP has 

not confirmed whether it will measure if assessments are conducted on time.”) .4

Step Act activities. 13 Moreover, the GAO recently found “BOP has some data on who 

participates in its programs and activities, but does not have a mechanism to monitor if it offers a 

sufficient amount. Without such a mechanism, BOP c annot ensure it is meeting the incarcerated 

population’s needs.” 14 The Commission should consider ways in which it can help encourage 

increase d access to programing for individuals and enhance monitoring to ensure that individual 

needs are being met .

In h is article, Sady recommends numerous ways the Commission can live up to its 

responsibility to help ensure the BOP is advancing the purposes of sentencing .15 We wanted to 

highlight o ne recommendation in particular. In a recent study, the Commission found a

“significant reduction in the likelihood of recidivism” for people who completed the RDAP 

program. 16 And yet, a group of individuals who would otherwise benefit from this productive 

program are categorically exclud ed because the BOP has determined that a mere sentencing 

enhancement for possession of a weapon is a disqualifying “crime of violence.” 17 This is so even 

though the BOP has acknowledged that gun possessors are statutorily eligible for RDAP, but 

nonetheless exercised its discretion to disqualify individuals with a gun enhancement. 18 The 

Commission should use its authority to recommend that individuals with gun enhancement s who 

are not otherwise statutorily disqualified be eligible for RDAP. Doing so will hel p reduce 

recidivism and ensure that a sentence meets the purpose of punishment while avoiding 

incarceration that is overly punitive , to the detriment of the individual and the system as a whole. 

FAMM communicates daily with individuals in federal prison who share with us their lived 

experience s of trying to survive their days in BOP. We would welcome the opportunity to be 

involved wi th the Commission’s work to help make BOP more efficient and more humane for 

those in federal custody. 

II. Proposed Priority (2) : Promotion of court -sponsored diversion and alternatives -to -

incarceration programs by expanding the availability of information a nd organic 

documents pertaining to existing programs (e.g., Pretrial Opportunity Program, 

Conviction and Sentence Alternatives Program, Special Options Services Program) 

through the Commission’s website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best 

prac tices for developing, implementing, and assessing such programs. 

FAMM supports the Commission’s initiative to promote court -sponsored diversion and 

alternatives -to -incarceration programs. We believe that overincarceration is a systemic problem 

and one that disproportionately impacts communities of color. Identifying and strengthening 

feasible alternatives to incarceration that can protect community safety while reducing the prison 

population and lessening racial disparity is a noble goal for the Commission to pursue . The            

> 13 See supra n. 10 at 21 -22 .
> 14 See supra n. 12.
> 15 See supra n. 7.
> 16 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Recidivism & Federal Bureau of Prisons Programs, Drug Program
> Participants Released in 2010 at 4 (May 2022), https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research -and -
> publications/research -publications/2022/20220517_Recidivism -BOP -Drugs.pdf.
> 17 BOP Program Statement No. 5162.02 (July 24, 1995); 18 U.S.C. § 3632(d)(4)(A); 18 U.S.C. § 3624(g).
> 18 62 Fed. Reg. 53690 -01 (Oct. 15, 1997).

5

Commission heard from a wide variety of stakeholders who provided their views on alternatives 

to incarceration nearly 15 years ago .19 FAMM would support the Commission in once again 

gathering stakeholders to discuss strategies for alternatives to incarceration that c an appropriately 

address current issues in our carceral system and explore how the Guidelines can be adjusted to 

lessen our reliance on incarceration .

III. Proposed Priority (3) : Examination of the Guidelines Manual , including exploration of 

ways to simplify the guidelines and possible consideration of amendments that might be 

appropriate. 

FAMM supports the Commission in its endeavor to simplify the Guidelines in a manner that 

would make them more user -friendly and accessible, particularly to incarcerated in dividuals and 

their loved ones. As we have counseled before, if it embarks on this endeavor, the Commission 

should not conflate simplification with increased mandatory or presumptive direction to judges. 20 

Preserving a judge’s ability to account for n uance in each case is key to “providing certainty and 

fairness . . . while maintaining sufficient flexibility.” 21 

IV. Proposed Priority (6): Examination of the treatment of youthful offenders under the 

Guidelines Manual, including possible consideration of a mendments that might be 

appropriate. 

FAMM adopts the comment of the Federal Public Defender s regarding the Commission’s 

consideration of youthful offenders and amendments that may be appropriate . As the 

Commission is well aware, brain science on the impac t of age on impulse control and arousal ha s

improved significantly in recent years . FAMM applaud s the Commission’s proposal to study and 

perhaps amend the guidelines to reflect this scientific advancement. 

V. Proposed Priority (9) : Consideration of other miscellaneous issues coming to the 

Commission’s attention. 

a. Acquitted conduct 

Last year, FAMM and many others urged the Commission to tackle the use of acquitted 

conduct at sentencing. The Commission commendably proposed an amendment to the acquitted 

conduct guideline. FAMM , while supportive of the general thrust of the proposal, pushed back 

on it to the extent it would have retained some use of the p ractice . In our view, the proposed 

amendment was confusing and cr eate d an unnecessary carve out for an exceedingly rare        

> 19 U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Proceedings from the Symposium on Alternatives to Incarceration (July 14 -
> 15, 2008), http s://www.ussc.gov/research/research -reports/proceedings -symposium -alternatives -
> incarceration -july -14 -15 -2008 .
> 20 Letter from Kevin A. Ring & Mary Price to Hon. William H. Pryor, Jr. 7 and n. 21 (Aug. 9, 2018),
> https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment -process/public -comment/20180810/FAMM.pdf.
> 21 28 U.S.C. § 991(b)(1)(B).

6

circumstance (split verdicts) .22 We advocated that the Commission prohibit the use of acquitted 

conduct unequivocally. 23 

After hearing testimony on the issue and reviewing submissions from FAMM and others on 

the topic , the Commission announced that it would not be voting to finalize its acquitted conduct 

proposed amendment in 2023. The Commission explained it “needs a little more time . . . before 

coming to a final decision on such an important matter. We intend to resolve these questions 

involving acquitted conduct next year.” 24 

Given the Commission’s expressed intention to resolve the issue of acquitted conduct, 

FAMM was surpris ed to see that it was not included on the list of priorities . We urge the 

Commission to add acquitted conduct to this amendment cycle . Doing so is particularly 

important in light of the fact that the Supreme Court recently denied certiorari in a handful of 

cases raising the constitutionality of the practice . Justice Sonia Sotomayor observ ed that “[t]he 

Court’s denial of certiorari today should not be misinterpreted. The Se ntencing Commission, 

which is responsible for the Sentencing Guidelines, has announced that it will resolve questions 

around acquitted -conduct sentencing in the coming year.” 25 Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh, joined 

by Justices Neil M. Gorsuch and Amy Coney Ba rrett, echoed this sentiment and added that “[i]t 

is appropriate for this Court to wait for the Sentencing Commission’s determination before the 

Court decides whether to grant certiorari. . . .” 26 

The Commission should take up this issue given the Court’s expectation that it would do so .

FAMM urges the Commission to end the practice of augmenting an individual’s sentence using 

acquitted conduct. Public confidence is key to the legitimacy of our courts. Justice Sotomayor 

echoed the opinion of numerous jurists when she observ ed that “acquitted -conduct sentencing 

raises questions about the public’s perception that justice is being done, a concern that is vital to 

the legitimacy of the criminal just ice system.” 27 FAMM agrees. 

VI. Conclusion 

FAMM appreciates the Commission’s consideration of our input on issues critical to federal 

sentencing and prison reform. We look forward to participating in the Commission’s upcoming 

amendment cycle.                  

> 22 Letter to the Hon. Carlton W. Reeves from Mary Price and Shanna Rifkin, Proposed Amendments to
> the Federal Sentencing Guidelines 28 (Mar. 14, 2023), ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment -
> process/public -comment/202303/88FR7180_public -comment.pdf#page=1052.
> 23 Id. at 29 -30.
> 24 U.S. S entencing Comm’n, April 2023 Public Meeting Transcript at 23,
> https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment -process/public -hearings -and -
> meetings/20230405/20230405_transcript.pdf.
> 25 McClinton v .United States , No. 21 -1557, 600 U.S. ___ (2023),
> 26 Id.
> 27 Id. at 4; see also United States v. Katallah , 41 F.4th 608, 646 -47 (D.C. Cir. 2022); United States v. Bell ,
> 808 F.3d 926, 929 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (Millet, J., concurring in the denial of rehearing en banc); United
> States v. Settles , 530 F.3d 920, 924 (D.C. Cir. 2008).

7

Si ncerely, 

Mary Price Shanna Rifkin 

General Counsel Deputy General Counsel 7/25/2023 17:38 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Middle Ground Prison Reform 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices

# Comments: 

We are the only advocacy group in Arizona that has consistentsly operated since 1983 to advocate to protect the rights of jail and prison inmates, including those housed in the BOP in Arizona. Our experience with the BOP is that this gargantuan bureaucratic agency is mostly engaged in cover-up and non-compliance with basic constitutional rights, especially (in our direct experience) with the legal rights of prisons for access to legal counsel, the lack of confidential handling of legal mail, delays in scheduling legal visits, lack of access to clients with immediate-pending court deadlines when the prisoner is in a SHU, etc. Legal mail is often photocopied and a poor copy is provided to the prisoner (and who knows where the original document is filed or by whom it is read?), a poor quality -- often unreadable -- copy is provided to the prisoner, legal calls are difficult to arrange and not given the priority they deserve. In short, the BOP has many, many enormous problems to overcome and we don't see any improvement at all since the new Director has come aboard. Drastic measures are required to fix this embarrassing government agency. 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023 JUSTICE | COURAGE | EXCELLENCE | ACCOUNTABILITY |COMMUNITY
> To advance equality and justice for American Muslim organizations and individuals by promoting legal compliance and protecting their rights in matters concerning national security law.

August 1, 2023 

Honorable Judge Carlton W. Reeves 

Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2-500 

Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 

Comment on U.S.S.C. Proposed Priorities 

for Amendment Cycle Ending May 2024 

Dear Judge Reeves, 

The Muslim Legal Fund of America (MLFA) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit legal organization dedicated to defending Muslims’ civil rights and liberties in national security cases through federal litigation. MLFA has a federal criminal defense department that represents clients in federal courtrooms across the country in national security cases (often material support of terrorism offenses, obstruction of justice, false statements in a terrorism investigation, distribution of bomb-making instructions online and others). These cases are selected for the unique constitutional issues they present, including prosecutorial overreach and discriminatory application and enforcement of federal law and sentencing guidelines. 

MLFA respectfully submits the following comments on the Commission’s proposed priorities for the amendment cycle ending in May 2024. We will address the Commission’s following proposed priorities: 

• To study and reform the career offender guidelines (Proposed Priority #5) 

• Reform the Guidelines’ treatment of youthful offenders (Proposed Priority #6) 

• Further study and reform of the sentencing differences due to the trial penalty (Proposed Priority #10) 

• Continued study regarding recidivism (Proposed Priority #10) 

• Promote court-sponsored diversion and alternatives-to-incarceration programs (Proposed Priority #2) 2

MLFA submits that the study and reform of the career offender guidelines is not complete without discussion of the Terrorism Enhancement. The Terrorism Enhancement (U.S.S.G. § 3A1.4) 1 is ripe for reform and further study as part of each of these proposed priorities (#’s 2, 5, 6, 10 and 11). 

The Terrorism Enhancement is currently not addressed in any of the Commission’s Reports or analyses 2 on the Career Offender guidelines, but § 3A1.4 automatically increases an individual’s criminal history category to Category VI (career offender) and raises the offense level by 12 points. The Terrorism Enhancement, more so than the § 4B1.1 (career offender) guideline, does not distinguish between youthful, first-time, non-violent offenders and those with significant violent criminal history and often results in overly severe penalties for the largely Muslim individuals it is applied to. The Terrorism Enhancement does not have any evidentiary basis to support its draconian treatment of Muslims convicted of terrorism-related offenses, and it is discriminatorily applied to Muslims convicted of crimes “calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government.” But the Enhancement is rarely sought for non-Muslim 3 and white individuals and was found inapplicable where it has been sought. Reforming the Enhancement, expanding court diversion alternatives, and studying its discriminatory application and lack of evidentiary basis fits well within the Commission’s proposed priorities. 

A. The impact of the Terrorism Enhancement ( § 3A1.4) – a career offender guideline 

Terrorism-related offenses have been aggressively prosecuted in the United States since 9/11. The leading statute in the anti-terror push is the material support statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2339B, which punishes knowingly providing material support or resources to a designated foreign terrorist organization ("FTO") or attempting or conspiring to do so. The government frequently uses the material support statute because convictions under the law do not require that the defendant engaged in terrorism, aided or abetted terrorism, or conspired to commit terrorism. This endlessly broad statute, along with many others (false statements, and obstruction of justice) 4, has resulted in unjust convictions and unjustifiably lengthy sentences. 

The statutory maximum of a § 2339B conviction is 20 years. The sentences prescribed for material support independently reflect Congress’s intent to deter and punish terrorism-related crimes. If the offense results in the death of any person, the required prison sentence is any term of years or for life. The guideline for material support offenses, USSG § 2M5.3, carries a base offense level of 26. If the offense involved dangerous weapons, firearms, explosives, funds to purchase any of those items, or funds or other support believing they will be used to commit a                         

> 1Section 3A1.4 is one of five “Victim-Related Adjustments” in the Guidelines. Of the five, the EN is the most severe. It applies to non-violent offenses that do not have any victims.
> 2U.S. SENT ’GCOMM ’N,PRIMER ONCATEGORICAL APPROACH 20 (2022).
> 3Sameer Ahmed, Is History Repeating Itself? Sentencing Young American Muslims in the War on Terror , 126 YALE L. J. 1520, 1560 (2017), https://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/ylj/vol126/iss5/5.
> 4For example, 18 U.S.C. § 2339A, 18 U.S.C. § 2339C, but the Terrorism Enhancement is also applied to false statements (1001(a)), obstruction of justice, and other conduct that does not warrant the extreme treatment of the Terrorism Enhancement.

3

violent act, 2 levels are added. 5 Assuming a criminal history category I and an offense level of 26, the advisory guideline range is 63 to 78 months; at offense level 28, the advisory guideline range is 78 to 97 months. 

But these sentencing ranges are rarely ever the advisory guidelines ranges for individuals convicted under the material support statutes. The Terrorism Enhancement then, on top of the sentencing in § 2339B (and other statutes), increases the sentence for individuals convicted of “a federal crime of terrorism,” i.e., crimes “calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government.” See U.S.S.G § 3A1.4 (adopting the definition of “Federal Crime of Terrorism” in 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5)). This adds 12 more levels to the offense level, or increases the level to 32, whichever is higher. And regardless of the individual’s actual criminal history, the enhancement assigns them to Criminal History Category VI, usually reserved for career offenders. 

See United States v. Segura-Del Real , 83 F.3d 275, 277 (9th Cir. 1996) (“Defendants are placed in category VI because they are the most intractable of all defendants.”). The Terrorism Enhancement is the reason that individuals convicted of terrorism-related conduct, no matter how minor, receive abnormally long criminal sentences. 

After applying the Terrorism Enhancement, the minimum possible Guidelines range for any offense is 210 to 262 months—that is, 17.5 to 21.8 years. 6 But more typically, the enhancement leads to a sentence of thirty years to life or the statutory maximum, whichever is less. The result: it can put a criminal defendant away for thirty years to life for a crime that would otherwise result in a sentence of around five years. 7

B. The Terrorism Enhancement does not consider, and actually undermines, the objective factors required under 18 U.S.C. 3553(a). 

Courts are required to consider seven factors in developing an appropriate sentence, including the nature of the offense and the characteristics of the defendant. § 3553(a)(1). The Terrorism Enhancement violates 28 U.S.C. § 991(b)(1)(A)—and undermines 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)—as its express language and application suggests the Commission does not advise courts to follow the § 3553(a) factors for terrorism-related cases. In fact, none of the § 3553(a) factors are encompassed within or referenced by the enhancement at all. Instead, the Terrorism Enhancement automatically increases the level of the offense and the Criminal History Category, neither of which are based on an evaluation of the defendant’s conduct or characteristics or the need for the sentence imposed. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). 

In the context of a material support offense under 18 U.S.C. § 2339A or 2339B, the Terrorism Enhancement would not direct a court to consider objective factors, such as the amount or kind of support given, whether the support was choate or inchoate, the defendant’s actual role in the terrorist activity, or the extent of harm caused by the defendant’s support. Rather, the enhancement hinges on a single question: was “the offense a felony that involved, or was intended                

> 5§ 2M5.3(b)
> 6U.S. SENT ’GGUIDELINES MANUAL § 2X1.1(b), 406-07 tbl. (U.S. SENT ’GCOMM ’N2021).
> 7Id.

4

to promote, a federal crime of terrorism,” with “federal crime of terrorism” defined as an offense calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government. U.S.S.G. § 3A1.4(a); 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5). If the court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant provided material support to a terrorist or terrorist organization, then the Guidelines oblige the sentencing court to apply the Terrorism Enhancement with no adjustment for mitigating or aggravating conduct. See United States v. Awan , 607 F.3d 306, 317 (2nd Cir. 2010) (citing 18 U.S.C. § 2332(b)(g)(5)(A)). 

In reality, the type of criminal conduct subject to the enhancement varies significantly: from planning and participating in a terrorist attack that kills many people (i.e. what would likely be accompanied by life in prison to capital punishment) to making false statements to law enforcement officials (i.e. punishable by a maximum five-year prison sentence). See e.g., United States v. Benkahla , 530 F.3d 300, 304, 307 (4th Cir. 2008) (applying the Terrorism Enhancement, the defendant’s sentence for perjury was increased from approximately three years to 10-12 years, or up to four times the normal length for perjury). This variance in conduct is not accounted for in the Terrorism Enhancement and the resulting Guidelines range is thus often inconsistent with the statutes criminalizing and punishing the conduct. Id. 

Moreover, the Terrorism Enhancement directly contradicts the language of the material support statutes, which acknowledge that there are different levels of support requiring different punishments. For example, while § 2339A permits a maximum sentence of fifteen years, if death results from the support provided, the maximum sentence increases to life. Likewise, under § 2339C, if a defendant provides financial support with the intent or knowledge that the funds will be used in an act of terrorism, the maximum sentence is twenty years. But if someone only conceals, rather than provides, financial support, the maximum is just ten years. By contrast, the minimum sentence under the Terrorism Enhancement is 17.5 years, regardless of the type of material support provided .8 While the material support statutes’ variation in sentencing shows that Congress intended for sentences to be “proportional to the culpability of the conduct, to the injury that can be directly attributed to a defendant’s actions, and to the nature of the organization’s actions,” the Terrorism Enhancement treats an individual who provides any type of material support as harshly as the terrorist who himself commits violent acts. 9,10 

C. The Terrorism Enhancement functions as a mandatory minimum sentence in terrorism-related cases. 

Although the Guidelines were deemed advisory in Booker , because sentencing courts are required to consider them and must provide a sufficient justification for departing from them, they                     

> 8U.S. SENT ’GGUIDELINES MANUAL (U.S. SENT ’GCOMM ’N2021) 406-07 tbl.
> 9James P. McLoughlin, Jr., Deconstructing United States Sentencing Guidelines Section 3A1.4: Sentencing Failure in Cases of Financial Support for Foreign Terrorist Organizations , 28 L AW &INEQ . 51, 100, 116 (2010).
> 10 Attachment 1 is a table demonstrating the wide ranging sentences for similar types of offenders subject to the Terrorism Enhancement. The result is disparate and dissimilar sentencing for similar offenses.

5

largely continue to act as mandatory. 11  See Rita v. United States , 551 U.S. 338, 366 (2007) (Stevens, J., concurring) (“I am not blind to the fact that, as a practical matter, many federal judges continued to treat the Guidelines as virtually mandatory after our decision in Booker.”). Perhaps nowhere is this more evident than with the Terrorism Enhancement. Sentencing courts start from a place of little experience with terrorism-related cases, like the district judge noted in United States v. Said Azzam Rahim (N.D. Tex. 2019). 12  They rely on the Terrorism Enhancement in the Guidelines based on the assumption that the Commission, with superior knowledge and data, must have created the Terrorism Enhancement for some logical and substantiated reason. See Gall v. United States , 552 U.S. 38, 46 (2007) (explaining that the Guidelines are the “product of careful study based on extensive empirical evidence”). While this assumption is inaccurate 13  , terrorism defendants then receive severe punishments that, when reviewed by an appellate court, are given a “presumption of reasonableness.” See Rita , 551 U.S. at 347. 

In other words, because the sentences are within the Guidelines range, appeals courts typically defer. It seems that the only time appellate courts have stepped in is to overturn sentences as too lenient when district judges vary downward from the Guidelines range created by the Terrorism Enhancement. 14  See United States v. Ressam, 679 F.3d 1069 (9th Cir. 2012); id . at 1106 (Schroeder, J., dissenting) (“The majority’s implicit assumption that terrorism is different . . . flies in the face of the congressionally sanctioned structure of sentencing that applies to terrorism as well as all other kinds of federal criminal offenses.”); United States v. Jayyousi , 657 F.3d 1085, 1117 (11th Cir. 2011) (vacating sentence which varied downward from Guidelines range and remanding with instructions to increase sentence into range of 360 months to life). Thus, to call the Terrorism Enhancement “advisory” is to ignore reality—that no matter the route taken, we end up right back at applying the Terrorism Enhancement’s automatic offense level and Criminal History Category increases without regard for the defendant’s conduct or characteristics. 

D. The Sentencing Commission’s analysis of the career offender guideline also applies to the Terrorism Enhancement and should include it in recommended reforms. 

The Guidelines classify defendants by Criminal History Category based on their number of past offenses because, according to the Commission, courts should impose a sentence that will “protect the public from further crimes of the defendant” (18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)), and “repeated criminal behavior is an indicator of a limited likelihood of successful rehabilitation.” 18 U.S.C. § 4A1.1, Introductory Comment. “Prior convictions . . . serve under the Guidelines to place the                             

> 11 See United States Sentencing Commission, Federal Sentencing: The Basics ,3(2015), https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-projects-and-surveys/miscellaneous/201510_fed-sentencing-basics.pdf (“[T]he average sentence imposed for all cases has closely tracked the average guideline range—both before and after Booker .”).
> 12 United States v. Said Azzam Rahim , 3:17-cr-00169 (N.D. Tex. 2019), Doc. 180, Transcript of Sentencing Hearing, 69 (“Mr. Rahim, we don’t see many cases like this here. We might do maybe one case a year for the various courts . . .”).
> 13 See discussion infra Section VI.C.1.c.i.
> 14 See Wadie E. Said, Sentencing Terrorist Crimes , 75 O HIO ST. L.J. 477, 525 (2014). See also Said, supra note 8, at 525-27.

6

defendant in one of six ‘criminal history’ categories; the greater the number of prior convictions, the higher the category. . . . the Guidelines seek to punish those who exhibit a pattern of ‘criminal conduct.’” Nichols v. United States , 511 U.S. 738, 751 (1994) (Souter, J., concurring). In other words, the Criminal History Category is intended to increase sentences for “career offenders.” 

The Sentencing Commission has studied the career offender guideline (§ 4B1.1) which implements a Congressional directive instructing the Commission to set the guideline range for offenders with specified instant and prior convictions at or near the statutory maximum. A defendant qualifies as a career offender if (1) the defendant was at least eighteen years old at the time he or she committed the instant offense of conviction; (2) the instant offense is a felony that is a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense; and (3) the defendant has at least two prior felony convictions of either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense. 

In its analysis, the Sentencing Commission explored concerns that the career offender guideline does not meaningfully distinguish among career offenders. That same concern applies to the Terrorism Enhancement, and the career offender portion of the Terrorism Enhancement is significantly more problematic than section 4B1.1 because it is applied to first-time, non-violent offenders regularly. Unlike § 4B1.1 that at least required a present felony, and two prior felonies for either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense. 

Importantly, the Commission found clear differences between offenders who had drug trafficking only offenses, violent only offenses, and mixed offenses. The Commission found that “career offenders who have committed a violent instant offense or a violent prior offense generally have a more serious and extensive criminal history, recidivate at a higher rate than drug trafficking only career offenders, and are more likely to commit another violent offense in the future.” 15 

Based on its findings, the Sentencing Commission concluded that the career offender directive is best focused on those offenders who have committed at least one “crime of violence.” The Commission recommended that “Congress amend the directive to reflect this principle by no longer including those who currently qualify as career offenders based solely on drug trafficking offenses” and noted that such “reforms would help ensure that federal sentences better account for the severity of the offenders’ prior records, protect the public, and avoid undue severity for certain less culpable offenders.” 16 

The same findings apply to the Terrorism Enhancement, which pretends that first-time offenders are career offenders. 17  There is no evidentiary basis for the harsh impact of the enhancement. In fact the evidence in the aftermath of these prosecutions reveals what the      

> 15 U.S. SENT’G COMM’N, REPORT TO CONGRESS: CAREER OFFENDER SENTENCING ENHANCEMENTS 26 (2016).
> 16 Id. at 3.
> 17 None of the other “Victim-Related Adjustments” result in an automatic Criminal History Category increase. See
> U.S.S.G §§ 3A1.1-3.

7

Commission has already learned about “career offenders”—that past crimes of violence are better indicators of recidivism, and non-violence indicates a much lower risk of recidivism. 

E. The empirical evidence does not support treating and sentencing first-time terrorism offenders like career offenders. 

According to the Commission, “the guidelines represent an approach that begins with, and builds upon, empirical data.” U.S.S.G. Part A Introduction and Authority (2021) at 5. Indeed, the Supreme Court has repeatedly claimed that the reason courts should and do look to the Guidelines in imposing fair sentences is because the Commission develops the Guidelines by using empirical data. See Rita , 551 U.S. at 349 (outlining the “empirical approach” that the Sentencing Commission used to structure the Sentencing Guidelines); Kimbrough v. United States , 552 U.S. 85, 108-09 (2007) (The Commission “has the capacity courts lack to ‘base its determinations on empirical data and national experience. . . .’”). Despite this imperative, there was little empirical data on terrorism sentences when the Commission promulgated the Terrorism Enhancement in 1994. 18  Instead, the Terrorism Enhancement was created on the unsubstantiated assumption that terrorism defendants, no matter their individual situation, were so different from other defendants that an extreme increase in Criminal History Category was necessary across the board. 19 

Moreover, the evidence since 1994 strongly discredits the logic of the Terrorism Enhancement’s blanket increase in Criminal History Category, particularly where the defendant is a first-time offender. According to the Commission, individuals with no criminal record have the lowest rate of recidivism. 20  One study cited by the Commission in 2004 determined that 93.2% of first-time offenders did not reoffend. 21  Based on this evidence, for non-terrorism defendants without a criminal history, courts regularly impose sentences below the advisory Guidelines range because they recognize that a lesser prison sentence is nonetheless a significant punishment and deterrent for someone who has never experienced prison. 22  There is no evidence however, that terrorism-related defendants are an exception or reoffend at higher rates. To the contrary, the available data shows that individuals convicted of terrorism-related offenses do not reoffend at                  

> 18 See Brown ,supra note 2, at 547.
> 19 At the time, neither Congress nor the Commission could have envisioned how a group like ISIS would use the internet to ensnare individuals online into making verbal statements of support, offers of financial support, or discussions about traveling abroad etc., thereby exposing first-time non-violent offenders to statutory maximum sentences.
> 20 See Sameer Ahmed, Is History Repeating Itself: Sentencing Young American Muslims in the War on Terror , 126 Yale L. J. (2017), https:// digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/ylj/vol126/iss5/5.
> 21 Recidivism and the “First Offender ,”U.S. S ENT ’GCOMM ’N26 (May 2004), http://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-publications/2004/20040 5_Recidivism_First_Offender.pdf [http://perma.cc/MLD8-RQU8].
> 22 See, e.g. ,United States v. Willis , 479 F. Supp. 2d 927, 937 (E.D. Wis. 2007) (varying downwards because the “sentence provided a substantial punishment for someone . . . who had never before been to jail and who engaged in no violence”).

8

higher rates than those convicted of other crimes. Scott Shane, Beyond Guantánamo, a Web of Prisons for Terrorism Inmates, N.Y. TIMES (Dec. 10, 2011), 

https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/11/us/beyond-guantanamo-bay-a-web-of-federal-prisons.html .

Of more than 300 prisoners who had completed terrorism sentences since 2001 (up to 2011), “Justice Department officials and outside experts could identify only a handful of cases in which released inmates had been rearrested, a rate of relapse far below that for most federal inmates . . .” Id. Thus, “it appears extraordinarily rare for the federal prison inmates with past terrorist ties to plot violence after their release.” Id. Because the Terrorism Enhancement automatically increases a defendant’s Criminal History Category to VI, the fact that the defendant is a first-time offender with a low likelihood of recidivism is not only ignored but actually erased. 

Courts scrutinizing this issue agree that the complete lack of evidence is a weak basis for the Terrorism Enhancement. Senior Judge George O’Toole, Jr., presiding over United States v. Mehanna , Transcript of Disposition, No. 09-10017-GAO (D. Mass. 2012), criticized the mandatory Criminal History Category VI as “too blunt an instrument to have any genuine analytical value” and “fundamentally at odds with the design of the Guidelines” because it “imputes a fiction into the calculus.” Mehanna , Sentencing Transcript (Doc. 480) at 8-9. Moreover, the Court in United States v. Jumaev refused to apply the enhancement because it “is not backed by any empirical evidence” and because “treating all ‘terrorists’ alike is impermissible under our sentencing paradigm.” 2018 WL 3490886, *10, CR 12-0033 JLK (D. Colo. July 18, 2018). And the court explained in United States v. Alhaggagi: 

[T]he enhancement’s treatment of criminal history-automatically assigning to all terrorism defendants a criminal history category of VI is inappropriate based on the seriousness of the crime, inappropriate based on assumptions about recidivism, and inappropriate as to this Defendant, warranting a downward departure. 

2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37889, 2019 WL 1102991 at *16 (N.D. Cal. March 8, 2019). See also United States v. Khan , No. 4:15-cr-00263, Judgment at Doc. 126 (S. D. Tex. July 2, 2018), rev’d and remanded, 938 F. 3d 713 (5th Cir. 2019), resentenced (sentencing the defendant to 18 months because he had no criminal history and terminated his plans). 23 

Courts applying the Terrorism Enhancement, on the other hand, conspicuously fail to cite any evidence to justify imposing the Guidelines’ harsh sentences in terrorism-related cases. 24  They seek to justify its steep increase by arguing, with no evidence, that “terrorists[,] [even those] with no prior criminal behavior[,] are unique among criminals in the likelihood of recidivism, the difficulty of rehabilitation, and the need for incapacitation.” Jayyousi , 657 F.3d at 1117; see also        

> 23 United States v. Khan (S.D. Tex. 2019) (initial Court did not apply the Terrorism Enhancement to Khan’s sentence), rev’d, 5 th Cir. (2021). The government appealed a second time, the Fifth Circuit reversed and remanded again, the original judge was recused, and the new sentencing judge sentenced the defendant to 12 years.
> 24 McLoughlin, supra note 6, at 112-15.

9

United States v. Meskini , 319 F.3d 88, 92 (2d Cir. 2003). This belief, “that terrorism is different, maybe even exceptional” is premised on “a type of visceral outrage at all conduct linked to terrorists that can taint the individualized and careful process that is supposed to go into a criminal sentencing” and, despite the lack of evidence, is used to “justif[y] a departure from the normal standards.” 25  Not only is this belief unsupported, its resultant sentencing enhancement also causes harm to the Muslim American community. 26 

The Terrorism Enhancement should be included in the Commission’s analysis and recommend reforms of career offender guidelines, and considered for additional reforms, study, and alternatives-to-incarceration for first-time, youthful, non-violent offenders. 

F. Discriminatory application of the Terrorism Enhancement to Muslim individuals, and court refusal to apply the enhancement to non-Muslim, white offenders where applicable 

While the Terrorism Enhancement is written for broad application, it has been largely applied only to Muslim defendants, or offenses involving Muslim organizations. 27  The Terrorism Enhancement is intended to dramatically increase the punishment of offenses that were “calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct.” This can apply to the list of enumerated statutes in § 3A1.4, but Application Note 4 to § 3A1.4 also allows for an upward departure—equivalent to what would result if the enhancement was applied—for any other offense that “was calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct.” The upward departure can also apply to any of the enumerated statutes where the terrorist motive was to intimidate or coerce a civilian population, rather than influence the conduct of government. 

Many of the January 6 th convictions, were based on a clear and established intent to “influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or retaliation,” and would thus qualify for application of the Terrorism Enhancement or the upward departure it provides for in Application Note 4. 

On January 6, 2021, a mob of President Donald Trump’s supporters went to the U.S. Capitol, attempting to interfere with the certification of electoral votes from the 2020 presidential election. The rioters assaulted the Capitol police force, and looted and invaded the complex for several               

> 25 Said, supra note 8, at 521.
> 26 Ahmed, supra note 15, at 1556. “These [similar] negative effects include (1) increasing discrimination by reinforcing stereotypes of African Americans and Muslims as inherently dangerous, (2) furthering distrust of law enforcement among African Americans and Muslims, . . . and (3) failing to effectively rehabilitate drug and terrorism offenders and reintegrate them into society.” Id .
> 27 Trevor Aaronson & Margot Williams, Trial and Terror , T HE INTERCEPT (last updated June 14, 2023), Trial and Terror (theintercept.com) . This online database spotlights 992 terrorism-related prosecutions by the Department of Justice. Of these 992, only ~95 cases are against non-Muslim offenders/non-Muslim organizations.

10 

hours. They destroyed property and sent members of Congress and their staff into hiding in offices and bunkers. More than 100 members of law enforcement were injured. 28 

The Justice Department however has only sought the Terrorism Enhancement in a couple of the over 900 prosecutions. 29  Courts have not applied the enhancement to any of the January 6 th rioters. 

The discriminatory application of the Terrorism Enhancement to mostly Muslims, or offenses involving Muslim organizations, has long been established. But in the face of the government’s refusal to seek the enhancement, and courts’ refusals to apply the enhancement to white, non-Muslims whose conduct clearly warrants its application, the enhancement is now on its face discriminatory on the basis of religion. 

The Sentencing Commission’s tracking and reported data does not show this clear discrimination however. The Commission only tracks race as commonly tracked in the U.S. Census. There is no category for Arab, Iranian, or Southwest Asian. More than 80% of individuals of Middle Eastern, Southwest Asian, or North African (Egypt, Morocco etc.) background, select themselves as “white.” 30  Indeed, the Sentencing Commission indicates that the Terrorism Enhancement is applied to 50% “white” individuals. This is inaccurate and results in an erasure of the discriminatory impact of the Enhancement on those of Southwest Asian, Arab, and North African descent. 

The Commission also does not track religion. As a result, there is currently no data from the Sentencing Commission that would alert a clearly discriminatory application of the Terrorism Enhancement to Muslim Americans. For the reasons discussed above, religion should be clearly tracked for this enhancement and analyzed in the context of discriminatory application.                     

> 28 History.com Editors, U.S. Capitol Riot , H ISTORY .COM (last updated Dec. 20, 2022),
> https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/january-6-capitol-riot .
> 29 United States v. Reffitt , (D.D.C. 2022) Case number: 1:21-cr-00032 (tried to storm the Capitol while armed with a gun. The judge refused to apply the terrorism enhancement and sentenced Reffitt to just over 7 years .); United States v. McCaughe y, III et al (D.D.C. 2023), Case number: 1:21-cr-00040
> (Judd launched a lit object at a tightly packed tunnel of law enforcement and the mob in an attempt to clear a path for rioters. The judge did not apply the terrorism enhancement, sentenced to 32 months.).
> See also Josh Gerstein, Why DOJ is Avoiding Domestic Terrorism Sentences for Jan. 6 Defendants , P OLITICO (Jan. 4, 2022, 4:30 AM), https://www.politico.com/news/2022/01/04/doj-domestic-terrorism-sentences-jan-6-526407 .
> 30 Sarah Parvini & Ellis Simani, Are Arabs and Iranians white? Census says yes, but many disagree , L OS ANGELES TIMES (March 28, 2019), https://www.latimes.com/projects/la-me-census-middle-east-north-africa-race/ . ; See also
> Abboud, Sarah et al. “The Contested Whiteness of Arab Identity in the United States: Implications for Health Disparities Research.” American journal of public health vol. 109,11 (2019): 1580-1583. (Discussion on how “Arab classification as White leads to their cultural invisibility and perpetuates a cycle of undocumented health disparities.”)

11 

G. RECOMMENDATIONS 

Based on the above, MLFA makes the following recommendations using a three-pronged approach: 

a. Revise the Terrorism Enhancement itself (Proposed Priority #2 and #8) 

1. The Commission should recommend that the Terrorism Enhancement be amended to remove the automatic criminal history category increase to career offender status, and recommend that the 12 level increase be removed as statutory elements and other enhancements already adequately account for specific types of conduct. The arbitrary 12 level increase ignores these measures, and undoes the purposes of 18 U.S.C. §3553(a). 

2. Application Note 1 to § 3A1.4, states that a "federal crime of terrorism" has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5), which in turn defines a "federal crime of terrorism" as "an offense that (A) is calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct; and (B) is a violation of [the enumerated statutes]." 

The Commission should recommend that this definition be amended to reduce the list of enumerated offenses to include only offenses which do not already incorporate provisions for aggravating conduct. 

The Commission should also recommend that any amended Terrorism Enhancement should only apply to conduct in which there was at least one victim, 31  and that the defendant specifically intended to himself “influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct.” This would fall under the purview of proposed priority #8 as well, which seeks to resolve circuit splits. The specific intent requirement of the Terrorism Enhancement is the source of a circuit split among various circuits. 32  Conduct in support of a foreign terrorist organization that is indirect and unconnected to any specifically known terrorist activities should not be included (i.e. an online agreement to travel to live in the territory of an FTO, or sending donations for food, clothing, other types of aid to an FTO, providing contact information for travel to the FTO, etc.).   

> 31 Many of the attempted provision of material support convictions state there were no victims of the offense in the PSR.
> 32 See United States v. Amer Sinan Alhaggagi , 978 F.3d 693 (9th Cir. 2020).

12 

b. Conduct further research on terrorism-related sentencing (Proposed Priority #10) 

3. Proposed priority #10 proposes further examination and comparison of sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus plea. The trial penalty in terrorism-related offenses is extraordinary because of the Terrorism Enhancement. The broad applicability of the enhancement and its severe impact, mean that defendants feel enormous pressure to plead guilty with a cap on the potential sentence, rather than facing a statutory maximum recommend sentence after trial because of the enhancement. The Enhancement is also used as a “bargaining chip to strong-arm a desired result” and “prosecutors sometimes seek the Terrorism Enhancement against a formerly cooperative defendant if they default on a cooperation agreement. Rather than determining ‘who is and who is not…a terrorist, the enhancement’s practical utility is often reduced to that of a tool used to punish a lack of cooperation.” 33 

Given that many of these offenses are non-violent, first-time offenders, the impact of the trial penalty in these cases is particularly harmful to the defendants and their communities. The Commission should include a comparison of sentences imposed in terrorism-related cases that went to trial versus plead guilty. 

4. Proposed priority #10 also proposes continued studies regarding recidivism. As discussed above, there is no empirical evidence to support the Terrorism Enhancement and the data that exists demonstrates that contrary to the idea that terrorism-related defendants are different, and intractably incapable of rehabilitation, they have some of the lowest recidivism rates. The Commission should study the recidivism rates of those convicted of terrorism-related crimes to gather empirical evidence on whether there is any evidentiary justification for the Terrorism Enhancement. 

5. The Commission should also study and track the discriminatory application of the Terrorism Enhancement by accounting for the fact that those of Arab, North African, and Southwest Asian descent self-select as “white” for racial identification because of a lack of other options. 

6. The Commission should study and track individuals’ religion for those who receive the Terrorism Enhancement as an analysis of material support convictions and those who receive the Terrorism Enhancement indicate a distinct discriminatory application on the basis of religion.   

> 33 Madeline Johl, Activism or Domestic Terrorism? How the Terrorism Enhancement Is Used to Punish Acts of Political Protest , 50 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 465 (2023).

13 

c. Expand court-sponsored diversion and alternative-to incarceration programs for first-time terrorism-related offenders (Proposed Priority #2) 

The Commission should expand court-sponsored diversion and alternative-to-incarceration programs for young, non-violent terrorism-related offenders. The District of Minnesota has had great success with their program and additional study of their program and expansion of either the program, or access to the program from other districts would present a better alternative to the draconian sentences we have seen in other districts. 

In the District of Minnesota, first-time non-violent offenders, convicted of terrorism-related crimes, receive sentences far less severe. As of the end of 2018, the District of Minnesota has dealt with 59 foreign terrorism related cases. See Kevin D. Lowery: Responding to the Challenges of Violent Extremism/Terrorism Cases for United States Probation and Pretrial Services, Journal for Deradicalization, Nr. 17 (December 28, 2018). 

The District of Minnesota is home to a large Somali immigrant population. Mr. Lowery’s study points out that some of these young Somali men have become disillusioned with America, and thus were especially vulnerable to ISIS propaganda. Several of these cases thus appeared after ISIS proclaimed the caliphate and the atrocities perpetrated by al-Assad in Syria. 

Because many of these young men charged with attempting to join ISIS didn’t have a criminal record and were facing extraordinary prison time, Senior Judge Michael J. Davis worked with the U.S. Attorney’s office and the Federal Public Defender to deal with this modern phenomenon. 

It was determined through extensive research that there were no other federal agencies, state or local jurisdictions, or nongovernment organizations in the U.S. that had specialized evaluation and assessment practices or intervention programming for radicalized defendants and offenders. This imminent issue required further initiatives to provide for public safety on a number of levels. Therefore, the District conducted further research to evaluate international programs for possible solutions. The focus of this research was to identify components of other countries’ extremism/terrorism intervention programs claiming success, which could be useful to the circumstances in Minnesota and the U.S. 

Id. at 41. 

Mr. Lowery continues: 

The scarcity of civil prevention and intervention programs in the U.S. has unfortunately resulted in criminal prosecutions being the nation’s almost exclusive intervention response to extremism thus far. The District of Minnesota’s justice system model team process for intervention starts at the point of arrest or criminal charges. Although the federal justice system has worked with domestic terrorism 14 

cases such as white supremacists for many generations, this new brand of jihadist extremist involved with foreign terrorist organizations has brought new challenges. …Included in the justice system team decision-making process is a more elaborate consideration of the underlying motivating factors and levels of radicalization, which is in addition to assessing the motivations or circumstances for other types of criminal behavior. Id. at 58-59. 

The District of Minnesota, overwhelmed with material support to foreign terrorist organizations cases, understood that to treat this new class of defendant fairly, they needed to look beyond just the federal sentencing guidelines. The young people who have attempted to leave the United States to join ISIS resulted from a combination of the Syrian Civil war, and ISIS’ unprecedented success in using the internet to lure vulnerable, young Muslims. 

The District of Minnesota and many other criminal justice professionals are committed to developing effective alternative solutions to lengthy incarceration alone to best deal with extremism/terrorism-related cases. There is no need to debate on how critical it is to incapacitate radicalized individuals involved in and committed to carrying out terrorism related offenses. However, in terrorism-related activities, there are a number of differing types of offenses and levels of involvement. Failing to develop sentencing and supervision practices at the appropriate, varying levels for these defendants and offenders could have catastrophic future consequences. 

Terrorism defendants generally fit no set profile. However, many terrorism defendants seen in the District of Minnesota and in other districts have been young, often first exposed to the radicalization process as teenagers, and have little or no history of criminal behavior or actual violence. Dissecting the underlying motivations and understanding the level of radicalization of terrorism-involved defendants are factors criminal justice professionals must consider when recommending an appropriate sentence. Treating this population ineffectively may result in dire, catastrophic consequences that range from freeing a dangerous offender to commit an act of terrorism in the community to unnecessarily over incarcerating very young offenders, possibly creating long-term breeding grounds for terrorists in prisons. Probation and Pretrial Services faces the challenge of determining a defendant’s level of radicalization and intent to pinpoint actual, potential harm to the community through acts of violence in addition to the threat he/she could pose to national and international security. Determining if a sentence within the guideline range of imprisonment greatly increased by the Chapter 3 terrorism adjustment is greater than necessary to accomplish the statutory goals of sentencing is a complex and concerning process. 

Id. at 68-69 (emphasis added). 15 

The District of Minnesota decided that hiring an expert consultant that gets involved immediately after these types of cases are charged and who works to assist the Court with issues from bond all the way through sentencing was a good solution. 

Thus far, there have been a number of variances and departures from the enhanced sentences in the District of Minnesota, demonstrating that a one-size-fits-all approach was not justified based on U.S. Criminal Code Title 18, Section 3553 sentencing factors. District of Minnesota sentences for the first 30 jihadist-type, terrorism-related cases ranged from 3 years’ probation for cooperators and those with minor involvement to 35 years’ custody with life terms of supervised release to follow for the most serious offenders. 

Id. at 75-76 (emphasis added) 

Because many of these offenders are young, first-time, non-violent offenders, lengthy sentences are unjust and cause immeasurable damage to the local communities and families. Research has shown that these types offenders can be rehabilitated and have an exceptionally low recidivism rate. MLFA recommends that the sentencing commission study and introduce alternative-to-incarceration programs and other court-sponsored diversions for these offenders. The District of Minnesota’s model is one that has had great success and warrants expansion. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, MLFA hopes that these issues regarding the Terrorism Enhancement and sentencing of young, Muslim, first-time offenders are studied and reformed through amendment proposals in the coming amendment cycle. We look forward to submitting additional comments on such proposals. 

/s/ Sufia M. Khalid 

Lead Counsel 

Federal Criminal Defense Department 

Muslim Legal Fund of America (MLFA) 

100 N. Central Expy. 

Suite 1010 

Richardson, TX 75080 

Charles D. Swift 

Director, Federal Criminal Defense Department 

Muslim Legal Fund of America (MLFA) 

Arshia Ali-Khan 

Chief Executive Officer 

Muslim Legal Fund of America (MLFA) 16 

NAME & CASE #  LOCATION  CHARGE  SENTENCE 

ADAM DANDACH  C.D. 

California 

Attempt to provide material support to ISIS, false statement on passport application 1542 

15 years 

ARMIN HARCEVIC  E.D. Missouri  Conspiracy and providing material support to ISIS 2339A 

5.5 years 

ASHER ABID KHAN  S.D. Texas  Material support to ISIS 23339A and 2339B 

12 years 

DONALD MORGAN  M.D. 

North Carolina 

Attempt to provide material support to ISIS; possession of firearm (assault rifle) by convicted felon 

20.25 years 

GEORGIANNA GIAMPIETR O M.D. 

Tennessee 

Concealment of material support and resources to ISIS 

2339C 

5.5 years 

JASMINKA RAMIC  E.D. Missouri  Conspiracy to commit offenses against the U.S. (371) 

3 year s

JOSEPH HASSAN FARROKH  E.D. 

Virginia 

Attempting to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

8.5 years 

LEON DAVIS  S.D. 

Georgia 

Attempt to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

15 years 

MEHIDA MEDY SALKICEV IC  E.D. Missouri  Conspiracy to provide material support to ISIS 2339A 

6.5 years 

MICHAEL TODD WOLFE  W.D. Texas  Attempt to provide material support ISIS 2339B 

6.75 years 

MOHAMMED HAMZAH KHAN  N.D. Illinois  Attempt to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

3.3 years 

MUHAMMAD DAKHLALLA & 

JAELYN YOUNG 

N.D. Mississippi 

Conspiracy to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

8 years 

and 

12 years 

NICHOLAS MICHAEL 

TEAUSANT 

E.D. 

California 

Attempting to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

12 years 

SAID RAHIM  N.D. Texas  Conspiracy and attempt to provide material support to ISIS 2339B, false statement 1001 

30 years 

SAMANTHA ELHASSANI  N.D. Indiana  Concealment of financing terrorism 2339C(c) 

6.5 years 

SAYFULLO SAIPOV  S.D. 

New York 

8 counts 18 USC 1959(a)(1), 7 counts 18 USC 1959(A)(3), 9 counts 18 USC 1959(a)(5), 1 count 2339B, 1 count 33(a), 34 

Life imprisonment 

Table 1: Illustrating Sentencing Disparities within Material Support Offenses 17 

NAME & CASE #  LOCATION  CHARGE  SENTENCE 

SEDINA UNKIC HODZIC  E.D. Missouri  Conspiracy to provide material support to ISIS 2339A 

4 years 

SHANNON CONLEY  D. Colorado  Conspiracy to provide material support to ISIS 2339B 

5 years 

SHELTON BELL  M.D. Florida  Conspiracy and attempt to provide material support to ISIS 2339A 

20 years 

SULTANE SALIM  N.D. Ohio  Concealment of financing terrorism 2339C(c) 

5 years 

RAHATUL ASHIKIM KHAN  W.D. Texas  Conspiracy to provide material support to ISIS 2339A 

10 years 

RAMIZ HOD ZIC  E.D. Missouri  Conspiracy and material support to ISIS 2339A 

8 years 

TABLE 1 34  

> 34 This table is representative of the wide variance and disparities of material offense sentences subject to the Terrorism Enhancement. The Terrorism Enhancement applies to other offenses as well; this table selects specifically for material offense sentences where the Terrorism Enhancement was applied for the sake of comparison.

Table 1: Illustrating Sentencing Dispari ties within Material Support Off enses August 1, 2023 

Honorable Judge Carlton W. Reeves 

Chair, United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E., Suite 2-500 

Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 

Re: Proposed Priorities for the 2023-2024 Amendment Cycle 

Dear Judge Reeves: 

The National Association of Defense Lawyers (NACDL) respectfully submits the following comments on the Commission’s possible policy priorities for the amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024. 

The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers is the preeminent organization advancing the mission of the criminal defense bar to ensure justice and due process for persons accused of crime or wrongdoing. A professional bar association founded in 1958, NACDL's many thousands of direct members in 28 countries – and 90 state, provincial and local affiliate organizations totaling up to 40,000 attorneys – include private criminal defense lawyers, public defenders, military defense counsel, law professors and judges committed to preserving fairness and promoting a rational and humane criminal legal system. 

I. 2023-24 Proposed Priority No. 2: Alternatives to Incarceration and Diversion Programs 

NACDL welcomes the Commission’s focus on court-sponsored diversion and alternatives to incarceration (ATI) in the federal system. These programs, long a feature of state criminal legal systems, have been instituted in many federal districts at a grassroots level in recent years with considerable success. The Commission’s support of these programs by publicizing them on its website, disseminating foundational documents, and facilitating the exchange of information and ideas through workshops and seminars would be an important step in furthering and enhancing these initiatives. The Commission will thereby be giving ATI its official imprimatur, as well as 2

setting the stage for a more fulsome engagement by the Commission in instituting, promoting and critically evaluating ATI in the federal system. 

The overriding feature of the federal sentencing system since the Sentencing Reform Act has been its punitiveness. Incarceration rates have not only sky-rocketed – sentences have become considerably longer. 1 Contrary to the vision of the SRA drafters, 2 probation is the exception rather than the rule, with only 6.2% of federal defendants receiving a probation-only sentence in FY2021. 3 In response, several districts started diversion and ATI programs, often with no funding and utilizing volunteer hours. 4 Today, at least 52 districts have such programs, and the results are encouraging. 5 As a group of researchers studying these federal programs recently concluded: 

Successful completion of an ATI program is associated with more favorable case dispositions and less severe sentences. Participants are more likely to avoid new arrests for criminal behavior, remain employed, and refrain from illegal drug use while their cases are pending in court. Such positive outcomes help defendants place their best foot forward while awaiting sentencing, demonstrating to the judge that they are on the path to rehabilitation, and thus deserving of a more favorable disposition that imposes “a sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in paragraph (2)” of that provision. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). 6

These results parallel the extensive scholarship conducted at the state level and internationally establishing that ATI and diversionary programs reduce recidivism; 7 decrease racial and  

> 1

See Federal Bureau of Prisons, Sentences Imposed (March 14, 2023) (indicating that 53.7% of BOP prisoners are serving sentences over ten years),  https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/statistics_inmate_sentences.jsp . 

> 2

See Comments of Federal Defenders on Commission’s Proposed Priorities for the 2022–2023 Amendment Cycle (December 1, 2022) at n. 126-28.  

> 3

FY 2021 Sourcebook, at fig. 6 & tbl. 14.  

> 4

See Laura Baber et al., A Viable Alternative? Alternatives to Incarceration Across Several Federal Districts , 83 Fed. Prob. J . 8 (June 2019); see also Julian Adler, “There’s Something Happening Here:” On the Tentative Emergence of Federal Alternatives to Incarceration , 35 Fed. Sent. Rep. 29 (October 2022) (describing the “considerable profess” of “scrappy and ambitious district courts in the federal space” in the context of ATI programs) (“ Something Happening ”).  

> 5

See Laura Baber et al., Expanding the Analysis: Alternatives to Incarceration across 13 Federal Districts, 85 Fed. Prob. 3 (December 2021) (“ Expanding the Analysis ”).  

> 6

Id. at 12.  

> 7

See , e.g. , James Austin et. al., A Guidelines Proposal: How Many Americans are Unnecessarily Incarcerated , 29 Fed. Sent. R. 140, 143 (Dec. 2016 - Feb. 2017) (“Research shows that prison does little to rehabilitate and can increase recidivism in such cases. Treatment, community service, or probation are more effective. For example, of the nearly 66,000 prisoners whose most severe crime is drug possession, the average sentence is over one year; these offenders would be better sentenced to treatment or other alternatives.”). 3

economic disparities; 8 ensure the young and those with mental and physical disabilities get the therapeutic care they need; 9 and keep families together. 10  Thus, it is appropriate for the Commission to show leadership on the issue of encouraging and promoting ATI and diversionary programs. 

The Commission proposes that it will promote ATI and diversionary programs “by expanding the availability of information and organic documents pertaining to existing programs . . . through the Commission’s website and possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for developing, implementing, and assessing such programs.” Notice at 4. This proposal is consistent with the Commission’s educational role and would be an important step to encouraging implementation of ATI programs in districts that do not have them, as well as promoting the informational exchange necessary to identifying best practices. 

NACDL urges the Commission to go further: express its wholehearted support for such programs and advocate for widespread implementation across districts. Importantly, such an endorsement from the Commission will encourage extensive mitigation advocacy early on in a case, potentially leading to expeditious, more equitable and more cost-effective outcomes. 

In addition, NACDL urges the Commission, as it proposed in the last amendment cycle, to support a new policy statement permitting a downward departure if the defendant industriously participated in the necessary requirements of a court-sponsored or approved ATI program. NACDL supports making this downward departure option as broad as possible, encompassing not only ATI programs run by the district court but also ATI programs run by nonprofit organizations that have been vetted and approved by the district court. In addition, as the Commission suggested last year, the departure should also apply to those defendants who productively participated in any such program even if they did not fulfill all requirements for completion. There are many reasons why a motivated and responsible person cannot fulfill the rigorous requirements of a rehabilitation program, including childcare and elderly care responsibilities, illness, conflicts with work schedules, etc. District courts should have discretion                

> 8For a discussion of the racial disparities in imprisonment, see generally Ashley Nellis, The Color of Justice: Racial and Ethnic Disparity in State Prisons (Sentencing Project 2016), https://www.sentencingproject.org/reports/the-
> color-of-justice-racial-and-ethnic-disparity-in-state-prisons-the-sentencing-project/ .
> 9For a discussion on the appalling treatment of individuals with mental illnesses in prison, see generally KiDuek Kim, The Processing & Treatment of Mentally Ill Persons in the Criminal Justice System (Urban Institute 2015),
> http://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publication-pdfs/2000173-The-Processing-and-Treatment-of-
> Mentally-Ill-Persons-in-the-Criminal-Justice-System.pdf ; for a discussion on the criminogenic impact of prison on
> young offenders, s ee generally , Patrick McCarthy et al., The Future of Youth Justice: A Community-Based Alternative to the Youth Prison Model (National Institute of Justice 2016) at 13, n.56 ((“Mounting evidence from the best statistical analyses suggests that incarceration of youth may actually increase the likelihood of recidivism.”).
> 10 See MODEL PENAL CODE: SENT’G § S1.02(2), reporters’ note b(3) (Am. Law Institute 2021) (citing sampling of literature on adverse effects of incarceration on families).

4

to consider partial completion accompanied by committed engagement in granting this downward departure. Importantly, the Commission has the expertise and resources to set forth some evidence-based threshold criteria for approval of these ATI programs. Such requirements would include that the ATI programs (1) do not result in a “net widening” of those subject to federal charges or onerous probationary conditions; 11  (2) focus on those of highest need rather than cherry-picking those most likely to succeed; 12  and (3) are subject to careful monitoring to ensure they do not replicate the racial and economic disparities they are designed, in part, to address. 13 

Finally, we urge the Commission to consider more systemic changes to the guidelines to facilitate and encourage non-custodial sentences, including a presumption of probation for first-time, non-violent offenders, 14  offense-level reductions for first-time offenders; elimination of the zones in the Sentencing Table or at least a large expansion of Zones A and B, where probation-only sentences are authorized. 

II. 2023-24 Proposed Priority No. 10(A): Drug Trafficking Offenses Involving 

Methamphetamine (Actual v. Mixture) 

The Commission proposes as a priority the “examination of federal sentencing practices” on issues such as “the prevalence and nature of drug trafficking offenses involving methamphetamine.” NACDL welcomes the Commission’s focus on methamphetamine cases, which at 48.5% represent the largest percentage by far of sentenced drug cases. 15 

In particular, NACDL urges the Commission to consider eliminating the distinction between “actual” methamphetamine and “mixture” guidelines and, instead, apply the “mixture” guidelines across the board to all methamphetamine cases. This is in accord with a growing number of federal courts, who have taken such action in an effort to reduce the sentencing            

> 11 Something Happening at 30 (noting that “treating lower-risk individuals can ‘do harm,’ the treatment itself disrupting people's existing routines (e.g., work or school), bringing them into contact with influences from higher-risk peers, and creating recidivism risks that did not previously exist”).
> 12 Id. (noting that in the optimal ATI program, “the level or intensity of intervention offered someone (e.g., treatment, social services, supervision) should correspond to their risk” of recidivism).
> 13 Expanding the Analysis at 5 (noting state court initiatives and resolutions to identify and eliminate racial disparities).
> 14 Such presumption would be consistent with the Congressional directive at 28 U.S.C. §994(j) to “insure that the guidelines reflect the general appropriateness of imposing a sentence other than imprisonment in cases in which the defendant is a first offender who has not been convicted of a crime of violence or an otherwise serious offense.”
> 15 See U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Distribution of Primary Drug Type in Federal Drug Cases, Fiscal Year 2022 (Figure D-1), found at https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/annual-reports-and-
> sourcebooks/2022/FigureD1.pdf 5

disparities resulting from the excessive purity enhancement that is without foundation in either empirical research or fact. 

Drug Quantity Table: Tied to Statutory Mandatory Minimums, not Empirical Research 

In formulating the United States Sentencing Guidelines, the United States Sentencing Commission developed and used data on past practices and recidivism, conducting statistical analyses on pre-Guidelines sentencing practices and utilizing an empirical approach to establish the base offense levels for each crime. See USSG § 1A1.1, intro. comment, pt. A, p. 3; see also 

United States Sentencing Commission, Fifteen Years of Guidelines Sentencing , Nov. 2004. 

However, that was not the case with the current drug trafficking Guidelines provisions. Following the passage of the 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act, later codified at 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1), the Commission revised the Drug Quantity Table found in USSG § 2D1.1 and, departing from past practices of using an empirical approach, increased the base offense levels to better equate to the statutory mandatory minimum sentences. See Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38, 46 n.2 (2007) (following passage of the 1986 Act, the resulting Guidelines ranges for drug trafficking offenses are driven by the quantity of drugs, and keyed to statutory mandatory minimum sentences based on weight). 

For methamphetamine, because the statutory mandatory minimum penalties had a 10:1 ratio based on purity, the Commission revised the Drug Quantity Table to distinguish actual/pure methamphetamine from methamphetamine mixtures at the same 10:1 ratio. See, e.g., United States v. Ferguson, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 129802 at *1 (D. Minn. Aug. 2, 2018) (citing Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 100-690, § 6470(g)-(h), 102 Stat. 4181, 4378); see also United States v. Pereda, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 19183 at *4 (D. Colo. Feb. 6, 2019). 

In 1998 Congress amended the statutory penalties for methamphetamine offenses, cutting in half the amount that triggered the mandatory minimum sentences. Ferguson at *4 (citing 

Methamphetamine Trafficking Penalty Enhancement Act of 1998, Div. E, § 2, Pub. L. No. 105-277, 112 Stat. 2681, 2681-759 ). And, again, the Commission increased the base offense levels for methamphetamine offenses to better align with the mandatory minimum sentences. Id; see also Pereda at **4-5. 

Historical Premise for Actual-to-Mixture Ratio for Methamphetamine Offenses is No Longer 

Valid 

The Commission sought to justify the 10:1 actual-to-mixture methamphetamine ratio by stating, “[s]ince controlled substances are often diluted and combined with other substances as they pass down the chain of distribution, the fact that a defendant is in possession of unusually pure 6

narcotics may indicate a prominent role in the criminal enterprise and proximity to the drugs.” 

See U.S.S.G. § 2D1.1, note 27(c). Historically, that may have been so; however, as evidenced by the Drug Enforcement Agency’s 2020 National Drug Threat Analysis, the average purity of methamphetamine between 2014 and 2019 was over 95%. 16 

Acknowledging this increase in purity of the methamphetamine being marketed in this country, a growing number of federal courts, from Nebraska to Idaho to Louisiana and more, have recognized that the distinction between actual methamphetamine and methamphetamine mixture is no longer appropriate as it is not based on empirical data, does not serve as an accurate proxy for culpability, and creates unwarranted sentencing disparities between methamphetamine and other drugs. See, e.g., United States v. Bean, 371 F. Supp.3d 46, 52-56 (Dist. of N.H. 2019); 

United States v. Castillo, 440 F. Supp.3d 1148, 1154-56 (E.D. Cal. 2020); United States v. Hartle, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 93367 at *7-8 (D. Idaho 2017) (finding that the purity enhancement resulted in arbitrary and irrational distinctions between sentences imposed upon similarly situated defendants); see also United States v. Celestin, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25406 at **7-14 (E.D. La. Feb. 15, 2023) (noting that at least eleven district courts across the country have deviated from the Guidelines and applied the methamphetamine mixture guidelines to all methamphetamine violations ( see fn. 47 for survey of courts)). 

As recognized by these courts, the high purity of methamphetamine available today at all levels of the distribution chain means that virtually all defendants face enhanced punishment for threshold purity levels, not enhanced punishment based on individualized determinations (e.g., for leadership or “kingpin” roles), making the Guidelines purity enhancement excessive. 

Enhanced purity enhancement results in severe sentencing disparities 

The enhanced punishment is by no means nominal. Take, for example, a defendant charged with distribution involving 28 grams of methamphetamine. If the court used actual 

methamphetamine, based on the Drug Quantity Table this would result in a Base Offense Level of 26. If, however, the court used the methamphetamine mixture, based on the Drug Quantity Table, this would result in a Base Offense Level of 18. This leads to a difference of years – years      

> 16 See DEA, 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment, at 20, https://www.dea.gov/sites/default/files/2021-f02/DIR-
> 008-21%202020%20National%20Drug%20Threat%20Assessment_WEB.pdf .

7

– between the advisory ranges across Criminal History Categories. For sentencing purposes, the impact of this distinction is severe. 

Accordingly, NACDL urges the Commission to revisit the methamphetamine purity enhancement. Put simply, it does not accurately reflect the culpability of most federally prosecuted drug offenders. 

Further, NACDL joins the Federal Defenders in their suggestion to delink the Drug Quantity Table altogether for the reasons set forth in their letter addressing the proposed priorities for the 2023-24 amendment cycle. 17 

III. 2023-2024 Proposed Priority (10)(C): Comparison of Sentences Imposed in Cases Disposed of Through Trial Versus Plea 

We strongly urge the Sentencing Commission to compare sentences imposed in cases disposed of through trial versus plea. NACDL’s own extensive research on this very question, which used Sentencing Commission data, has shown that for most primary offense categories, the average trial sentence in the federal system is three times higher than a plea sentence for the same crime. 18  For some crimes, the prison sentence for a person convicted at trial is as much as eight times greater than for those convicted after a plea. NACDL and many other individuals and organizations refer to this systemic, often massive, and inherently coercive differential as the trial penalty. 

Over the last 40 years, the trial penalty has converted the Framers’ vision of a system of public jury trials into an assembly line of guilty pleas coerced principally by mandatory minimum sentencing and overuse of pretrial detention. Walk in a courthouse today and you will see guilty plea after guilty plea and virtually no public trials in which the government is put to its proof and prosecutorial power is scrutinized (and limited) by citizens. 

The trial penalty not only undermines the Sixth Amendment right to trial; it also undermines every right in the Bill of Rights because plea agreements typically require waivers of rights including bail, discovery, and all the liberties enumerated in the Fourth and Fifth Amendments including the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. For these reasons, a       

> 17 See Defender Annual Letter, dated May 24, 2023, at pp. 3-8 (found at https://src.fd.org/sites/src/files/blog/2023-
> 05/20230524%20Defender%20Annual%20Letter.pdf ).
> 18 NACDL, The Trial Penalty: The Sixth Amendment Right to Trial on the Verge of Extinction and How to Save It
> (2018), https://www.nacdl.org/Document/TrialPenaltySixthAmendmentRighttoTrialNearExtinct .

8

diverse consensus – across the political, ideological, and professional spectrum – has joined NACDL in attempting to eliminate the trial penalty. 

This differential is significant and has major impacts on the criminal legal system. As suggested above, the trial penalty has virtually eliminated trials from the federal system. In 2022, over 97% of convictions in the federal system were the result of pleas with less than 3% occurring after trials. 19  In 2021, less than 2% of convictions were the result of trial and there were fewer than one thousand criminal trials in the entire federal system. 20  This is far from what our Constitution’s framers, who revered and repeatedly emphasized the importance of the right to trial, would have imagined. 21 

The trial penalty has a major coercive effect, with defendants understandably influenced to accept pleas because of the real threat of a geometrically higher sentence if convicted at trial, even if a defendant has a strong defense. The trial penalty also allows for other coercive tactics including piling on charges, charge bargaining, threats of superseding indictments and sentencing enhancements, and threats to withdraw plea offers if the defendant seeks to assert other constitutional rights under the Fourth or Fifth Amendments. Perhaps most concerningly, the trial penalty in our system is often so severe that it coerces even innocent people into pleading guilty. 22 

Advocacy groups, individuals, and academics from across the political spectrum have recognized the pervasiveness and harm of the trial penalty and have formed a broad cross-ideological  

> 19

U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, 2022 Annual Report and Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics , at 56 table 11, 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/annual-reports-and-sourcebooks/2022/2022-

Annual-Report-and-Sourcebook.pdf  (showing that 97.5% of federal criminal convictions in fiscal year 2022 were 

the result of guilty pleas).  

> 20

U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, 2021 Annual Report and Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics , at 56 table 11, 

https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/annual-reports-and-

sourcebooks/2021/2021_Annual_Report_and_Sourcebook.pdf  (showing that 98.3% of federal criminal convictions 

in fiscal year 2021 were the result of guilty pleas).  

> 21

See, e.g. , John Adams, The Revolutionary Writings of John Adams 55 (C. Bradley Thompson ed., 2000) (calling representative government and trials the “heart and lungs of liberty”); Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Thomas Paine (July 11, 1789), in The Life and Selected Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Adrienne Koch & William Peden, eds., 1998) (calling trials “the only anchor ever yet imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the principles of its constitution”). Note, also, that the right to trial is the only individual right guaranteed in both the Original Text of the Constitution and in the Bill of Rights. U.S. Const. art. III, §2, cl. 3 (“The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury . . .”); U.S. Const. amend. VI (“In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed . . .”).  

> 22

Data from the National Registry of Exonerations shows that 18% of exonerees—people who have been found innocent and completely cleared of the crime they were once convicted of—pleaded guilty. See The National Registry of Exonerations, Browse Cases, 

https://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Pages/detaillist.aspx?View=%7BFAF6EDDB-5A68-4F8F-8A52-9

coalition to fight against it. Coalition members include NACDL, Right on Crime, ACLU, leaders at the Cato Institute, The Innocence Project, and Stand Together. Additionally, the Plea Bargain Task Force, a task force of the Criminal Justice Section of the American Bar Association, recently released a report urging major changes to plea bargaining including a reduction in the use of trial penalties to coerce pleas. 23 

We are pleased to see the Sentencing Commission raise this issue as a possible priority for this amendments cycle and strongly urge the Commission to examine this differential and the resultant harmful effects it has on our system. 

We recognize that many of the major policy contributors to the trial penalty, such as mandatory minimum sentencing and prosecutorial control of the charging function, are beyond the Sentencing Commission’s control and purview. However, there are many smaller, but still important, actions the Commission could take to reduce the trial penalty and its coercive effects. 

First, Acceptance of Responsibility: U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(b) should be amended to authorize courts to award a third point for acceptance of responsibility if the interests of justice dictate without a motion from the government and even after trial. 

Second, Obstruction of Justice: U.S.S.G. § 3C1.1 should be amended to clarify that this adjustment should not be assessed solely for the act of an accused testifying in her or his defense. Like the right to trial, the right to testify in one’s own defense is also constitutionally protected. 24 

While Application Note 2 states that the “provision is not intended to punish a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional right,” clarification that this includes the right to testify in one’s own defense would be welcome. 

Third, Acquitted Conduct: U.S.S.G. § 1B1.3 should be amended to prohibit the use of acquitted conduct as relevant conduct. This important issue, discussed in greater detail below, is well known to the Commission and was carefully considered during the Commission’s last amendment cycle, although no action was ultimately taken. We urge the Commission to      

> 2C61F5BF9EA7%7D&FilterField1=Group&FilterValue1=P . For individual stories of innocent defendants who
> were coerced to plead guilty, see https://guiltypleaproblem.org .
> 23 American Bar Association, 2023 Plea Bargain Task Force Report ,
> https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publications/criminaljustice/plea-bargain-tf-report.pdf .
> 24 Rock v. Arkansas , 483 U.S. 44, 49-53 (1987).

10 

reconsider acquitted conduct sentencing which is unjust on its own but is also a contributor to the trial penalty. 

IV. Additional Proposed Priority: The Use of Acquitted Conduct in Sentencing 

NACDL urges the Commission to again consider an amendment to the Guidelines that would eliminate the unjust practice of sentencing defendants based on acquitted conduct. The Commission considered amendments on this important issue during the previous amendment cycle, but ultimately took no action. We urge the Commission to consider it again and to amend the Guidelines as described below to end the unjust practice of sentencing people for conduct they have been acquitted of at trial. 

The Fifth and Sixth Amendment guarantees of due process and the right to trial by jury for those accused of a crime are fundamental to our criminal justice system. However, as the Commission noted in its proposed priorities for the previous amendments cycle, current federal law allows judges to override a jury’s not-guilty verdict by sentencing a defendant for the very conduct he or she was acquitted of by the jury. 25  This is because, while a jury must find a defendant’s guilt based on the standard of “beyond a reasonable doubt”, a judge may apply the relevant conduct factors in the Sentencing Guidelines using the less demanding standard of preponderance of the evidence. Permitting sentencing based on acquitted conduct undermines due process and subverts the critical function of, and constitutional right to, trial by jury. This practice has been roundly criticized by practitioners, judges—including Supreme Court justices 26 —and scholars. 

In our experience, lay people and even lawyers who practice in civil rather than criminal cases are shocked when they learn that people may be sentenced to prison time based on conduct they were acquitted of at trial by a jury. Acquitted conduct sentencing harms the public’s perception of the legitimacy of our legal system. Furthermore, studies show that these types of decisions – subjective decision-making of this nature – are entry points for racial implicit bias in sentencing. Juries, of course, are intended to be diverse, and replacing a jury’s judgment with that of a judge,     

> 25 United States v. Watts , 519 U.S. 148, 157 (1997) (“[A] jury’s verdict of acquittal does not prevent the sentencing court from considering conduct underlying the acquitted charge, so long as that conduct has been proved by a preponderance of the evidence.”)
> 26 See, e.g., id. at 170 (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (allowing district judges “to increase a sentence based on conduct underlying a charge for which the defendant was acquitted does raise concerns about undercutting the verdict of acquittal.”); United States v. Bell , 808 F.3d 926, 928 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in denial of the r’hrg en banc) (“Allowing judges to rely on acquitted or uncharged conduct to impose higher sentences than they otherwise would impose seems a dubious infringement of the rights to due process and to a jury trial.”).

11 

especially given the racial, socioeconomic, and professional composition of our judiciary, deepens the impact of bias on well-established racial disparities in sentencing. 

It is important to note that, since the Commission’s last amendments cycle, multiple Supreme Court justices have indicated in published opinions that “the use of acquitted conduct to alter a defendant’s [sentence] raises important questions” while adding explicitly that the Supreme Court is awaiting the Sentencing Commission’s action on the issue. 27  The time is ripe for Sentencing Commission action. We respectfully urge the Commission to act this cycle to eliminate acquitted conduct sentencing by amending U.S.S.G. § 1B1.3 to prohibit the use of acquitted conduct as relevant conduct. 

Respectfully Submitted, 

JaneAnne Murray 

Co-Chair, NACDL Sentencing Committee 

Darlene Comstedt 

Member, NACDL Sentencing Committee 

Nathan Pysno 

Director, NACDL Economic Crime & Procedural Justice 

Elizabeth Blackwood 

Director, NACDL First Step Act Resource Center     

> 27 See McClinton v. United States , 600 U.S. __ (2023), No. 21-1557 (statement of Kavanaugh, J., joined by Gorsuch & Barrett, JJ., respecting the denial of certiorari) (“The use of acquitted conduct to alter a defendant’s Sentencing Guidelines range raises important questions. But the Sentencing Commission is currently considering the issue. It is appropriate for this Court to wait for the Sentencing Commission’s determination . . .”); id. (statement of Sotomayor, J., respecting the denial of certiorari) (“The Sentencing Commission, which is responsible for the Sentencing Guidelines, has announced that it will resolve questions around acquitted-conduct sentencing in the coming year.”).

# MEMORANDUM OF 

# PUBLIC INTEREST 

## BY THE PENNSYLVANIA ASSOCIATION FOR 

## RATIONAL SEXUAL OFFENSE LAWS (PARSOL) 1

## TO 

## THE UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION 

## RE: PROPOSED 2023 -2024 PRIORITIES 

## OPEN COMMENT SUBMISSION 

## JULY 30, 2023 

Lead Author 

John W. Dawe, MNA, CNP, RCP, Dallas, PA 

Contributors 

Michael Cooperman, M.Ed., Philadelphia, PA 

Amy Frey, Philadelphia, PA 

Jon Frey, FCI Fort Di x, NJ 

Randall A. Hayes, Harrisburg, PA 

Josiah Krammes, Pottsville, PA 

Theresa Robertson, Ph.D., York, PA  

> 1

The Pennsylvania Association for Rational Sexual Offense Laws (PARSOL) believes all sexual abuse is 

unacceptable and that prevention, treatment, and healing are possible. We take a person -first approach to 

criminal justice reform that c ultivates a fair and just society, honors inherent dignity, and promotes respect and 

fairness. People can and do change. As such, PARSOL advocates for sexual offense public safety measures 

and resources that work for all through prevention -based, treatment -informed, and healing -focused legislative 

and public policy initiatives that respect our Constitution and all people's dignity. [PARSOL.org] 

PARSOL is the Pennsylvania affiliate of the National Association for Rational Sexual Offense Laws (NARSOL .org ). 2

INTRODUCTION 

During her confirmation hearings, now Supreme Court Justice Ketanji Brown 

Jackson and former vice -chair of the USSC commission said, reflecting the 

Commission’s stance on sexual offenses and sentencing: 

# “The statute doesn’t say, “Look only at the guidelines and stop.” 

The statute doesn’t say, “Impose the highest possible penalty for this 

sickening and egregious crime.” 

The statute says, “Calculate the guidelines, but also look at various 

aspects of this offense and impose a sentence th at is sufficient but not 

greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment.” 

[The Statute] is not doing the work of differentiating who is a more 

serious offender in the way that it used to. The commission has taken that 

into account, and more importantly, courts are adjusting their sentences to 

the changed circumstances but say[s] nothing about the judge’s view of 

the seriousness of these offenses. ”

Justice Brown Jackson referenced that current sentencing guidelines, specifically 

around possess ion and distribution of child sexual abuse materials, were 

developed when receiving 1,000 images of child pornography was done via postal 

mail for extreme fees. The manufacture involved significant physical media, not 

the click and download of one zip file within seconds. 

Like Justice Brown Jackson, the Pennsylvania Association for Rational Sexual 

Offense Laws (PARSOL) believes all sexual abuse is unacceptable and that 

physical, mental, and emotional healing is possible by focusing on prevention -

based, reha bilitative, and trauma -informed programs rooted in healing rather than 

lifetime, shame -centered punishment. 

In addition, we know many federal laws and sentencing recommendations 

unfairly discriminate against people with sexual offenses. 

To that end, we present the following background information and 

recommendations for the Uni ted States Sentenc ing Commission to c onsider 

during its 2023 -2024 session. 3

## BACKGROUND INFORMATION 

SORNA REGISTRATION PUNISHES HOMELESS/TRANSIENT 

INDIVIDUALS BECAUSE OF THEIR ECONOMIC STATUS 

Many jurisdictions require that homeless and transient individuals required to 

register under SORNA (“Megan’s Law”) do so monthly and in per son at a 

designated location. If they fail to register due to indigency, incarceration results. 

10.5% of adults in America walk in poverty, and registration facilities, especially 

in rural areas, are difficult or impossible to reach solely by public transi t. These 

individuals are further punished because of their economic status. 2

PA SUPREME COURT CHIEF JUSTICE: MAKE [SORNA] FAILURE TO 

REGISTER A CONTEMPT OF COURT CHARGE 

In the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Williams , 574 Pa. 487, 527 (Pa. 2003), 

then -Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, Thomas G. Saylor, 

stated that “As noted, the [Megan’s Law II] penalty provisions provide an 

enforcement mechanism for the registration and verification mandates. They do 

so by erecting an enormous disincen tive for failing to comply. .. . Moreover, even 

absent the penalty provisions, enforcement is possible. Because registration and 

verification are statutorily required, the district attorney could implicate the 

judicial process through an enforcement proceeding in which failure to comply 

with the resulting order would be punishable by the court's contempt powers.” 3

LEGISLATION AIMED AT REDUCING INCARCERATION AND HARM 

REDUCTION EXCLUDES INDIVIDUALS WITH SEXUAL OFFENSES 

The Prosecutorial Rem edies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children 

Today (PROTECT) Act of 2003 4 excluded persons with sexual offenses from 

obtaining downward variances, declaring their crimes “aberrant behavior and 

diminished capacity.” 5

The First Step Act (FSA ) of 2018 , formerly known as the “Formerly Incarcerated 

Reenter Society Transformed Safely Transitioning Every Person [FIRST STEP] 

Act,” discriminates against persons with sexual offenses. Under FSA, an inmate 

is “ineligible to receive time credits if th ey are serving a sentence for a conviction 

under certain provisions of law,” including sexual offenses. This prohibits them      

> 2https://federalsafetynet.com/poverty -statistics/
> 3Com. v. Williams, 574Pa.487,527 (Pa03) ,https://casetext.com/case/com -v-williams -224
> 4https://www.congress.gov/bill/108th -congress/senate -bill/151/text
> 5https://www.justice.gov/archive/opa/pr/2003/April/03_ag_266.htm

4

from receiving good time credits for completing rehabilitative programming, even 

though they have the lowest rate of recidivism and the lowest incidence of 

disciplinary infractions in prison 6. This statutory discrimination discourages sex 

offenders from engaging in treatment programs, which have shown to be highly 

effective in preventing re -offense and recidivism. In contrast, drug of fenders with 

much higher recidivism rates are provided with this benefit. They are more likely 

to have discipline problems in prison (i.e., contraband, cell phones, substance 

abuse, fighting, etc.) 7

UMASS LAW REVIEW : PRE -TRIAL DIVERSION FOR NON -

PRODUCTION CHILD PORNOGRAPHY OFFENSES INCREASES 

TREATMENT SUCCESS AND HARM -REDUCTION 

The Case for Extending Pretrial Diversion to Include Possession of Child 

Pornography , an article published in the January 2014 University of 

Massachusetts Law Review , proposed including child pornography offenders in 

pretrial diversion programs. Given the statistics on these specific offenders, doing 

so would decrease the prison population /incarceration cost burdens. The article 

proposes that i mplementing such a program and offering early release to 

qualifying offenders would achieve such goals and increase the likelihood of 

treatment program success. 8

PENNSYLVANIA DEPT. OF CORRECTIONS: RECIDIVISM RATES FOR 

SEXUAL OFFENSES ARE THE LOWEST OF ANY CRIME 

CLASSIFICATION , WITH TWO -THIRDS RE CIDIVATING DUE TO 

TECHNICAL VIOLATIONS 

A 2022 report from the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, PA DOC: 

Recidivism , found that recidivism rates for property crime (59.9%), Public Order 

(52.1%), and Drug Off enses (50.1%) were significantly higher than those with 

sexual offenses (28.9%). Note: All rates reflected a combination of reoffense and 

technical violations, with two -thirds of individuals reincarcerated within three 

years of release being returned for t echnical violations. 9

INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER REQUIRE 

SPECIAL TREATMENT PROGRAMS AND CONSIDERATIONS 

Both a 2017 study, A Psycho -Legal Perspective on Sexual Offending in 

Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder , published in the Internat ional Journal     

> 6https://parsol.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/05/Fact -Sheet -Ineffectiveness -Recidivism -v2.pdf
> 7https://www.bop.gov/inmates/fsa/overview.jsp
> 8https://scholarship.law.umassd.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1041&context=umlr
> 9https://www.cor.pa.gov/About%20Us/Statistics/Pages/R eports.aspx 5

of Law and Psychiatry , and Autism, Sexual Offending, and the Criminal Justice 

System , published by The Journal of Intellectual Disabilities and Offending 

Behavior (2016), state that there are innate vulnerabilities that increases the risk 

of an individual with an autistic spectrum disorder (ASD), predominantly those 

defendants diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome, being charged and convicted of 

a sexual offense. Judi cial officers must consider the fact that Autism -related social 

impairments, including an individual’s difficulty with the capacity to develop 

appropriate and consenting sexual relationships because of impaired social 

cognition, is a factor in ASD sexual o ffending. 10 

ARIZONA LAW REVIEW: FEDERAL SENTENCING GUIDELINES 

AROUND NON -PRODUCTION CHILD PORNOGRAPHY OFFENSES 

ARE LESS EFFECTIVE IN FUTURE HARM -REDUCTION, MAY DO 

MORE DAMAGE 

The Arizona Law Review provides a deep -dive into the USSC’s work around 

sentencing guidelines for child pornography offenses in its 2021 article, The 

Condemnation of Scopophilia: How the Federal Sentencing Guidelines 

Perpetuate Rather Than Discourage Child Pornography Offenses , stating that in 

1987, the U.S. Sentencing Commission created its first federal sentencing 

guideline for child pornography offenses. As Congress grappled with dynamic 

technological advances that changed the child pornography landscape, the 

Commission contin ually revised and amended these guidelines, creating the last 

significant amendment in 2009. Since then, federal judges have utilized these 

guidelines when tasked with sentencing child pornography offenders, yet little has 

been done to determine whether th ese guidelines diminish the number of children 

victimized by child pornography. While acknowledging that child pornography 

victimizes and harms children in countless ways and must be criminalized to 

account for these egregious harms, this article argues th at the sentencing 

guidelines fail to deter the production, distribution, and consumption of child 

pornography and do not fulfill congressional goals of protecting children from 

victimization. Rather, the guidelines have resulted in the mass incarceration o f

child pornography offenders and a system that punishes viewers of child 

pornography more severely than it does child rapists. If the government truly 

wants to protect children from being victimized through child pornography, then 

the sentencing guideline s, as written, cannot stand. They must be replaced by a 

system that allows child pornography offenders to access rehabilitative resources 

> 10
> https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0160252716302461?via%3Dihub

6

both inside and outside of the federal prison system. 11 

USSC : NON -PRODUCTION CHILD PORNOGRAPHY REPORT 

SUPPORTS AN OVE RHAUL OF RELATED SENTENCING 

The 2021 report Federal Sentencing of Child Pornography Non -Production 

Offenses 12 , by the USSC under the chairmanship of Charles R. Breyer, reported: 

● Facilitated by advancements in digital and mobile technology, non -

production c hild pornography offenses increasingly involve voluminous 

quantities of videos and images that are graphic, often involving the 

youngest victims. 

● Constrained by statutory mandatory minimum penalties, congressional 

directives, an d direct guideline amendments by the PROTECT Act of 

2003, Section G2.2 contains a series of enhancements that have not kept 

pace with technological advancements. Four of the six enhancements –

accounting for a combined 13 offense levels - cover conduct that has 

become so ubiquitous that they now apply in most cases sentenced. 

● Because enhancements initially intended to target more severe and more 

culpable offenders apply in most cases, the average guideline minimum 

and average sentence imposed for non -product ion offenses have increased 

by more than 38%. (Average sentences increased by 13%) 

● When tracking 1,093 non -production child pornography offenders released 

from incarceration or placed on probation in 2015, 27.6% were rearrested 

within three years, but only 4.3% were arrested for a sex offense. 8.1% 

were rearrested for failure to register under SORNA.   

> 11 https://arizonalawreview.org/the -condemnation -of -scopophilia
> 12 https://www.ussc.gov/research/research -reports/federal -sentencing -child -pornography -non -production -offenses 7

OUR RECOMMENDATIONS 

We, therefore, urge The Commission to seek the following modifications to the 

Federal Sentencing Guidelines in response to the requested topic areas from the 

call for public comment priorities 13 as follows: 

1. Re: (2) Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs, 

(3) Simplification/Structural Reform, and (7) Crime Legislation 

Barring congressional action to change the m andatory minimum assigned, 

we recommend that the Court’s sentencing of individuals under 34 U.S.C. 

§20913(e) of “Registry Requirements for Sex Offenders” under 

subchapter I, par. (a) ‘Failure to Register,’ a Felony offense with a penalty 

including a penalt y of imprisonment of one year, considers the 

individual’s circumstances. We recommend a llowing for a downward 

discharge toward a Summary offense with a sentence commensurate with 

18 U.S.C. § 402.9, Contempt of Court constituting a criminal offense, 

wherefore “the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months, and the 

amount of any fine paid to the United States shall not exceed $1,000.” 

2. Re: (3) Simplification/Structural Reform, (7) Crime Legislation, and 

(9) Miscellaneous Guideline Application Is sues 

Eliminate the Mandatory Minimums around Child Sexual Abuse Material 

(Child Pornography) cases, as suggested in the Congressional Research 

Service Report R42386 as follows: 

Two -thirds of the federal trial judges responding to a U.S. 

Sentencing Commissi on survey questioned the severity of the 

mandatory minimum penalties required for receipt of child 

pornography (5 years; 15 years for repeat offenders). The 

Commission’s report suggested that the perception may lead to 

inconsistent sentencing in child porn ography cases. 14 

We suggest that in the USSC's review of the guidelines, examine ways to 

reduce all sentences in line with Executive Order 14074, which states "no 

individual should serve an excessive prison sentence." The President's 

order intends to relie ve individuals from unfair and unduly harsh   

> 13 https://www.ussc.gov/policymaking/federal -register -notices/federal -register -notice -
> proposed -2023 -2024 -priorities
> 14 https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R42386/4 8

sentences, including those driven by mandatory minimums and those 

excluded from downward variances under the PROTECT Act. 

Implementing E.O. 14074 falls squarely on the shoulders of the USSC in 

re -examining the gu idelines, particularly with non -production CSAM 

(Child Sexual Abuse Material) offenses. 

3. Re: (3) Simplification/Structural Reform, (9) Miscellaneous Guideline 

Application Issues, and (10) Research Topics 

Amend the Commission’s guidelines for Departures and Variances for 

sexual offenses committed by people with decreased mental capacity or 

underdeveloped cognition, including those with Autism Spectrum 

Disorder, Impulse Control Disorder, and other relevant paraphilic mental 

health disorders and diagnoses. Thi s should also apply to youth 

offenders. 15 

4. Re: (7) Crime Legislation and (9) Miscellaneous Guideline 

Application Issues 

We suggest the USSC recommend to Congress to pass legislation that 

amends the law awarding time credits towards time served under pretri al 

home confinement where conditions are equal to or more severe than 

home confinement conditions at the end of a defendant's sentence. This 

will provide immediate and substantial relief to the BOP and thousands of 

individuals whose liberties were suspende d during their period of pretrial 

supervision. In many cases, these individuals completed rehabilitative 

programming to reduce their recidivism and made substantial efforts to 

rehabilitate themselves. These efforts should be encouraged and rewarded 

with cr edit towards a sentence under 18 U.S.C. 3553(b)(2). 16 The cost to 

keep an individual in federal prison is roughly $130/day compared to 

roughly $10/day for that same individual to be under the care of the court 

and the U.S. Probation Office. 

5. Re: (1) Bureau of Prisons Practices 

Ensure that the programs and services offered by the Federal Bureau of 

Prisons and related administrative entities align with the desired 

sentencing and program goals and deliverables intended by the sentencing 

Court. Testimony from PARSOL members references that this is 

frequently not the case and, in one instance, “None of us are getting 

programs we need here. The programs are superficial, focusing on shame -

based, demoralizing punishment instead of trauma -informed shame   

> 15 https://caselaw.findlaw.com/court/us -8th -circuit/ 2077237.html
> 16 https://guidelines.ussc.gov/ab/18U.S.C.%C2%A73553

9

reducti on and [dialectical and cognitive behavioral ] therapeutic healing. 

Society loses because prisons release un -reformed people back into the 

population.” 17 

Members also report that inmates with sexual offenses , especially contact 

offenses, are frequently den ied access to, or restricted from participating in 

educational, recreational, and harm reduction/treatment programs 

available to individuals with non -sexual offenses. The USSC’s and Bureau 

of Prison’s existing Sex Offender Treatment Programs (SOTP -R) polic ies 

confirm these reports. 18 

Were the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC) to enact these 

recommendations during their 2023 -2024 strategic work, they would advance the 

fair, non -discriminatory treatment of justice -involved individuals while also 

helping to foster safe communities across the United States.     

> 17 Personal interview with inmate Jon Frey [BOP #13317 -509], conducted 7/12/2023.
> 18 https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/trainin g/annual -national -training -
> seminar/2015/BOP_slides.pdf

# About PARSOL 

The Pennsylvania Association for Rational Sexual Offense Laws (PARSOL) 

believes all sexual abuse is unacceptable and that prevention, treatment, and 

healing are possible. We take a person -first approach to criminal justice reform 

that cultivates a fair and just society, honors inherent dignity, and promotes 

respect and fairness. People can and d o change. As such, PARSOL advocates for 

sexual offense public safety measures and resources that work for all through 

prevention -based, treatment -informed, and healing -focused legislative and public 

policy initiatives that respect our Constitution and all people's dignity. 

PARSOL is also the Pennsylvania affiliate of the National Association for 

Rational Sexual Offense Laws (NARSOL). 

Pennsylvania Association for Rational Sexual Offense Laws 

P.O. Box 399 - New Freedom, PA 17349 

www.PARSOL.org 

General: 717 -820 -2237 – contact@parsol.org 

Legislative Affairs: 717 -526 -9733 – legis@parsol.org 

Public Policy & Communication – 570 -706 -6794 – commdesk@parsol.org  

> Special thanks to the PARSOL Members and Donors for Supporting our Public Po licy Efforts.

Justices: we represent a group of concerned individuals who would like to propose an 

idea of Restorative Justice Pretrial Diversion for those who have been accused of a sexual 

offense. 

Everyone is worthy of a second chance if they WANT to get help. Most first time non-

violent sexual offenders realize they have a problem when they are brought into custody, but 

they are told they are unredeemable. However, if they were a first time drug offender, domestic 

abuse offender, or suffered from mental illness they are offered different forms of pretrial 

diversion. 

Pretrial diversion (PTD) is an alternative to prosecution which seeks to divert certain 

offenders from traditional criminal justice processing into a program of supervision and services 

administered by the U.S. Probation Service. In the majority of cases, offenders are diverted at 

the pre-charge stage. Participants who successfully complete the program will not be charged or, 

if charged, will have the charges against them dismissed; unsuccessful participants are returned 

for prosecution. 

The major objectives of pretrial diversion are: 

To prevent future criminal activity among certain offenders by diverting them from 

traditional processing into community supervision and services. 

To save prosecutive and judicial resources for concentration on major cases. To 

provide, where appropriate, a vehicle for restitution to communities and victims of 

crime. 

Why can this not be done for those individuals who have been accused of a sexual offense? Past 

studies have found childhood sexual abuse and deprivation in the histories of sex offenders. As 

such, first time non-violent sex offenders should be offered a mental health pretrial diversion, 

but currently being a sex offender unqualifies an individual from pretrial diversion and they are 

not able to get the therapy they need until after they are charged and imprisoned (SOMP) or 

after charged and on probation. If they were granted mental health pretrial diversion/therapy 

before incarceration it would save taxpayers money from housing non-violent offenders and get 

these individuals back to being productive members of society where they can continue to 

maintain employment to pay restitution to their victims and legal fees. 

When the court grants an offender mental health pretrial diversion, the charges are put "on 

hold" to give the offender up to two years to rehabilitate through the appropriate treatment. A 

treatment plan may be inpatient or outpatient but must be specialized to address the mental 

disorder that played a role in the commission of the offense. The purpose of the treatment is to 

prevent the offender from committing further crimes due to the mental disorder. The offender 

must be willing to enter the program voluntarily (after a guilty plea) and satisfy the court that he 

or she will cooperate with treatment. 

This is not a "get out of jail free" card. The diversion period can be revoked by the court at 

any time if the offender is charged with another crime or is engaged in criminal activity or is reported to be responding unsatisfactorily to treatment. In such a case, the court must hold a 

hearing to determine whether the criminal proceedings should be reinstated, if indicated, the 

treatment should be adjusted to better address the offender’s mental health disorder. During the 

treatment period, the court must receive regular reports from the program regarding the 

offender’s progress. 

We implore you to consider alternatives to incarceration for a carved out, marginalized 

group, of individuals. Our team is working on a program to accomplish this goal. Please feel 

free to contact us directly to discuss this further, including details on how this could work for the 

safety and security of our community and our children. 

Signed: Project Crimson Flower 

Represented by: 

Tammy Henke, BSLS 

Matthew Lister, BT,LT 

Kasey Cockrell, BBA Submitted Electronically 

July 31, 2023 

Honorable Carlton W. Reeves 

Chair 

United States Sentencing Commission 

One Columbus Circle, N.E. 

Suite 2 -500, South Lobby 

Washington, D.C. 20002 -8002 

Re: The Sentencing Project Comment on the Commission’s Proposed Policy Priorities 

Dear Judge Reeves: 

The Sentencing Project appreciates t he opportunity to comment on the Commission’s proposed 

priorities for the amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024. T he S entencing Project advocates for 

effective and humane responses to crime that minimize imprisonment and criminalization of 

youth and adults by promoting racial, ethnic, economic, and gender justice. We are eager to be a 

resource as you work to create just a nd equitable sentencing policies. We write to comment on 

several of the Commission’s proposed priorities and to suggest an additional priority. 

Across all of these topics we urge the Commission to consider that fifty years ago, the United 

States embarked on the path to mass incarceration. 1 To ensure that our country does not 

experience another fifty years of mass incarceration’s harms, we urge you to take bold, evidence -

based steps to decrease incarceration. 

In 1980, federal prisons held 25,000 people, no w they hold almost 160,000. 2 The toll of that 

increase on individuals and communities has been profound. Mass incarceration tears apart 

families, creates lasting trauma, harms the health of individuals and communities, and deepens 

poverty. 3 And those har ms are disproportionately borne by Black, Latinx, and Native American 

communities. We are approaching the third annual increase in the federal prison population, 

following seven years of decline. 4 The need for change is urgent. We applaud the Commission’s 

work thus far to decrease excess incarceration and we urge you to continue to build on that 

progress.        

> 1Ghandnoosh, N. (2023). Ending 50 y ears of mass incarceration: urgent reform needed to protect future
> generations . The Sentencing Project.
> 2Federal Bureau of Prisons (2023). Statistics .
> 3Travis, J., Western, B., & Redburn, S. (2014). The growth of incarceration in the United States . National Academy
> of Sciences.
> 4Federal Bureau of Prisons (2023) , see note 2.

2

Topic 1: Assessing the degree to which certain practices of the Bureau of Prisons are 

effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2). 

Congress has instructed courts to impose a sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary to 

meet four purposes: (1) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, 

and to provide just punishment for the offense; (2) to affo rd adequate deterrence to criminal 

conduct; (3) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and (4) to provide the 

defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional 

treatment in the most effective manner. Persistent inhumane conditions and insufficient services 

in federal prisons interfere with these purposes. 

Federal prisons are plagued by inadequate medical care, overcrowding, staff shortages, 

unsanitary conditions, violence, and abuse, which a re well -documented in Office of Inspector 

General 5 and Bureau reports, 6 media coverage, 7 and congressional testimony. 8 Education and 

vocational training is often lacking and falls far short of the requirements of the First Step Act 

and rehabilitative needs . Inadequate medical care may turn a brief sentence for a medically 

vulnerable individual into a death sentence. Pervasive sexual violence at institutions like FCI 

Dublin subjects the individuals incarcerated there to sexual abuse that can have lifelong 

tr aumatic effects. 

Under 28 U.S.C. § 994(g), the Commission is charged with making “recommendations 

concerning any change or expansion in the nature or capacity of [correctional] facilities and 

services that might become necessary as a result of the guidelines promulgated.” We urge you to 

use this power to make recommendations that will assist the Bureau in reducing over -

incarceration and crowding, improving access to rehabilitative services, and bettering conditions. 

For example, the Bureau has historically made next to no u se of its ability to grant 

compassionate release – the Commission could recommend otherwise. Chief Deputy Federal 

Public Defender for the District of Oregon Stephen Sady has also advanced several other 

recommendations the Commission could adopt to encourag e the Bureau to make better use of 

programs and statutes which could lessen incarceration. 9 The Commission should consider these 

potential recommendations and others and embrace its statutorily mandated role in providing 

guidance to the Bureau.                      

> 5See, e.g. ,Office of the Inspector General (2023). The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ efforts to maintain and construct
> institutions ; Office of the Inspector General (2021). Management advisory memorandum: Impact of the failure to
> conduct formal policy negotiations on the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ implementation of the First Step Act and
> closure of Office of the Inspector General recommendations .
> 6See, e.g., Federal Bureau of Prisons (2019). After action report: partial electrical and reported heating outage civil
> disturbance .
> 7See, e.g., Willson, C. (2022) .Inmates at Oregon’s only federal prison report dire medical care . OPD; Lacey, A.
> (2022). Federal prison officials knew of misconduct, corruption, and abuse, senate investigation finds . The
> Intercept; Thompson, C. (2022). How the newest federal prison became one of the deadliest . NPR.
> 8See, e.g., Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Permanent Subcommittee On Investigations (July 26,
> 2022), Witness Opening Statements in PSI Hearing Investigatin g Corruption, Abuse, & Misconduct at U.S.
> Penitentiary Atlanta .
> 9Sady, S. (2022). Advice to new commissioners: The U.S. Sentencing Commission should address the failure of the
> Bureau of Prisons to adequately implement statutes that reduce prison time . Federal Sentencing Reporter. 3

Topic 2: Promotion of court -sponsored diversion and alternatives -to -incarceration 

programs, including possible workshops and seminars sharing best practices for 

developing, implementing, and assessing such programs. 

The Sentencing Project encourages the robust use of diversion and restorative justice programs 

as an alternative to incarceration (ATI). Some federal districts have strong diversion and ATI 

programs while others have few opportunities. We encourage the Commission to use this topic 

as a means to lift up the work of successful programs, as well as to advise on how to remedy 

limited access to diversion and ATI programs in some districts, including potentially by 

permitting sentencing judges greater latitude to consider evidence of post -conviction 

rehabilita tion. 

We also urge the Commission to expand this topic to include the consideration of potential 

amendments to the guidelines concerning alternatives to incarceration. Currently, the guidelines 

recommend non -custodial sentences for individuals convicted o f low -level offenses with no 

criminal history. A far broader swath of individuals could benefit from ATI programs. A 

growing body of research indicates that categorical exclusions from ATI programs based on 

offense type, criminal history, or the need for d rug or substance use treatment run the risk of 

excluding those who may most benefit from such programs and disproportionately exclude 

people of color. 10 

We encourage the Commission to consider amending the guidelines to both encourage the 

broader use of di version and ATI programs and to incentivize their successful completion by 

adopting guidelines that grant appropriate adjustments in §3E1.1 (Acceptance of Responsibility), 

or departures in Chapter 5F (Sentencing Options) or Chapter 5H (Specific Offender 

Ch aracteristics) for successful completion of an ATI program. 

Topic 5: Categorical approach and other “career offender” guideline issues. 

During the 2022 -2023 Commission amendment cycle, The Sentencing Project joined several 

other criminal justice reform and civil rights organizations in commenting on potential changes 

to the “career offender” guidelines. 11 We incorporate those comments by re ference and reiterate 

our concerns that the current “career offender” guidelines already drive over -incarceration and 

racial inequity in federal sentencing without any evidence that they enhance public safety. 

Modifications should be carefully considered t o avoid subjecting more individuals to extreme 

sentences and deepening racial disparities. 

Topic 6: Examination of the treatment of “youthful offenders” under the guidelines 

Manual, including possible consideration of amendments that might be appropriate .

As the Commission found in its 2017 report on “youthful offenders” in the federal system, 

between 2010 and 2015, youth and emerging adults 25 years and younger accounted for about      

> 10 Adler, J. & Barrett, J. (2023). Plenty of science, just not enough passion: Accelerating the pace of felony
> decarceration . Center for Justice Innovation.
> 11 FAMM et al (2023). Comment: Proposed amendme nts to the career offender and criminal history guidelines .

4

18% of the federal prison population. 12 The majority were Latinx, and over whelmingly, they 

were convicted of non -violent offenses. Their offenses were similar to their mature adult 

counterparts, but they were significantly more likely to recidivate. 13 This higher recidivism rate 

illustrates the failure of the current approach in the guidelines, which offer judges little leeway to 

consider the unique characteristics, needs, and experiences of youth and emerging adults. 

That approach is inconsistent with the growing body of research and jurisprudence recognizing 

that youth and youn g adults are different and deserving of distinct sentencing treatment. The 

development from adolescence to “late adolescence” or emerging adulthood is marked by lower 

levels of emotional control and higher levels of impulsive actions. 14 The Supreme Court ha s

recognized these qualities in minors and thus the need to sentence them differently in a way that 

reflects their diminished culpability and great potential for growth. 15 Emerging adults share 

many of the same qualities as teenagers below 18, and the same sentencing principles should 

apply. 16 

In 2016, the Tribal Issues Advisory Group recognized the guidelines’ failure to reflect this body 

of evidence and recommended that the Commission amend USSG §5H1.1 regarding the “age” 

policy statement, add a departure concerning youth and emerging adults as USSG §5K2.25, and 

the expansion of opportunities for diversion. 17 

Similarly, we urge the Commission to amend the guidelines to permit greater consideration of 

the needs and characteristics of emerging adults, inclu ding cognitive development, the mental 

health impact of incarceration, the availability of appropriate services and educational 

opportunities, and the importance of maintaining and developing pro -social community -based 

ties and behaviors. 

Additional sugge sted topic: Life sentences for Base Level 43 offenses, especially for 

individuals with limited criminal history. 

Finally, we urge the Commission to consider an additional priority: potential amendments to the 

guidelines regarding the imposition of life s entences for Base Level 43 offenses, especially for 

those with little or no criminal history. As Jason Hernandez, a clemency recipient who was 

sentenced at 21 to life without parole plus 320 years for drug -related offenses that were 

committed mostly in his teens, articulated in his 2018 comment to the Commission, the 

guidelines depart from international and domestic sentencing norms by mandating a life sentence 

in some circumstances even for non -violent offenses where an individual has no prior criminal 

his tory. 18               

> 12 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2017). Youthful offenders in the federal system .
> 13 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2017) , see no te 12.
> 14 Nellis, A. & Monazzam, N. (2023). Left to die in prison: Emerging adults 25 and younger sentenced
> to life without parole . The Sentencing Project.
> 15 Miller v. Alabama , 567 U.S. 460 (2012).
> 16 Nellis, A. & Monazzam, N. (2023) , see note 14.
> 17 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2016). Report of the Tribal Issues Advisory Group .
> 18 Hernandez, J. (2018). Comment to the U.S. Sentencing Commission that a policy statement be implemented
> advising that offense level 43’s recommendation of life without parole be reduced to 360 months -life without
> parole for offenders with a criminal history category I and II who are convicted of a nonviolent crime .

5

Under the Commission’s sentencing table an individual’s recommended sentence is determined –

in most circumstances – by calculating the offense’s “base offense level” based on its severity 

and the individual’s criminal history category. 19 With one e xception, for each base offense level 

the recommended sentencing range rises with an individual’s criminal history category. For 

offenses with a base level of 43, however, a life sentence is mandated regardless of whether an 

individual has a criminal histo ry. 20 

Base level 43 offenses can include a wide array of conduct. §2A1.1 (First Degree Murder), 

§2D1.1(a)(1) (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting or Trafficking), and §2M1.1(a)(1) 

(Treason) all specifically establish a base offense level of 43. 21 Other offenses, including non -

violent drug offenses, may be aggravated to a base level of 43 based on an individual’s role in 

the offense and other factors. 

Such a sentencing structure, however, is inconsistent with a wealth of evidence that makes clear 

that extreme sentences – including sentences to life and death – are not necessary to protect 

public safety. 22 The vast majority of individuals age out of crime. 23 Individuals with little or no 

criminal history are also less likely to recidivate. 24 

As such , we recommend that the Commission amend the guidelines to remove the 

recommendation that all offenses with a base level of 43 should result in life sentences and 

institute sentencing ranges for such offenses, especially for those with little to no crimina l

history. 

Thank you for this opportunity to comment. We look forward to working with the Commission 

to advance justice in federal sentencing. 

Sincerely, 

Kara Gotsch 

Acting Executive Director 

The Sentencing Project             

> 19 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2022). Life sentences in the federal system .
> 20 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2022) , see note 19.
> 21 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2022) , see note 19.
> 22 Nellis, A. (2021). No end in sight: America’s enduring reliance on life sentences .The Sentencing Project.
> 23 Farrington, D. (1986). “Age and crime.” In Michael Tonry and Norval Morris (eds.), Crime and Justice: An
> Annual Review of Research . Vol. 7. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press; Piquero, A., Jennings, W., and
> Barnes, J. (2 012). Violence in criminal careers: A review of the literature from a developmental lifecourse
> perspective. Aggression and Violent Behavior . Vol 17 (3): 171 -179.
> 24 U.S. Sentencing Commission (2016). Recidivism among federal offenders:
> A comprehensive overview .1

# Public Comment to the 

# U.S. Sentencing Commission’s 

# Request for Comment on 

# Proposed Priorities for 

# Amendment Cycle 2023 -2024 

# Prepared by Tzedek Association 

# Author: Rabbi Mordechai Biser, Esq. 

# Advisors: Douglas Berman & Norman Reimer 

# August 1, 2023 2

# About Tzedek Association: 

Tzedek Association is a nonprofit humanitarian organization that focuses on criminal justice 

reform, religious liberty and humanitarian cases around the globe. Tzedek was instrumental in 

the drafting and passing of the Fir st Step Act, among other criminal justice reform legislation, 

such as a provision in the CARES Act that allowed for home -confinement for incarcerated 

individuals vulnerable to COVID -19 based on CDC -approved high -risk criteria. Tzedek 

continues to work to ensure that the FSA is correctly implemented in accordance with statute, the 

intent of Congress, and spirit of the legislation, as well as many other important criminal justice 

reform efforts. 

# About Rabbi Mordechai Biser , Esquire :

Rabbi Mordechai Biser , OB M, a graduate of Yale Law School, served for over 20 years as 

General Counsel at Agudath Israel of America. In 2019, Mordechai joined the Tzedek team to 

help develop meaningful criminal justice reform ideas that would truly impact our justice system 

for the better, especially our sentencing system. His tireless efforts made up the basis of this 

document. Sadly, Mordechai recently passed away before he could see the fruition of his work. 

We pray that his contribution of ide as laid out in this document will indeed bear fruit with 

concrete reforms that will improve our justice system as he envisioned and so desired .

# About Professor Douglas A. Berman :

Douglas A. Berman serves as a Professor at Moritz College of Law and is Executive Director of 

the Drug Enforcement and Policy Center. Professor Berman’s principal teaching and research 

focus is in the area of criminal law and criminal sentencing. Professor Berman attended 

Princeton University and Harvard Law School. He serv ed as a law clerk for Judge Jon O. 

Newman and then for Judge Guido Calabresi, both on the United States Court of Appeals for the 

Second Circuit. Professor Berman has authored books on sentencing, served as an editor of the 

Federal Sentencing Reporter for more than twenty five years , serves as co -managing editor of the 

Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law and today is the sole creator and author of the widely -read 

and widely -cited blog, Sentencing Law and Policy. 

# About Norman L. Reimer :

Norman L. Reimer currently serves as Of Counsel at Vladeck, Ra skin & Clark, P.C. Norman 

has devoted his career to the defense of the criminally accused at the trial, appellate and post -

conviction levels and to criminal justice reform advocacy. Most recently, Norman was Global 

CEO of Fair Trials . Norman is renowned for his tenure as Executiv e Director to the National 

Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL), a position he valiantly served for fifteen 

years. He co -founded the John Adams Project with the ACLU to provide attorneys qualified in 3

capital defense to represent individuals at Guantanamo Bay, and le d a collaboration among 

several groups to establish Clemency Project 2014, one of the largest national pro bono projects 

ever undertaken by the legal profession and which secured the com mutation of long federal 

prison sentences for 894 individuals, including more than 300 who were serving life sentences. 4

# Introduction: 

Congress , in the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, provided that the U.S. Sentencing Commission 

is to “establish sentencing policies and practices for the Federal criminal justice system that … 

reflect, to the extent practicable, advancement in the knowledge of human behavior as it relates 

to the criminal justice process.” 28 U.S.C. § 991(b)(1)(C). Decades of mass incarceration and 

massively long prison sentences have advanced our knowledge about the limits of an excessively 

punitive system in providing meaningful pu blic safety and achieving true justice and spiritual 

healing for offenders and victims. The Commission should seize the opportunity to lead the 

federal criminal justice system away from the harmful and counter -productive carceral 

commitments that have und uly dominated modern federal sentencing policies and practices. 

The United States has less than five percent of the world’s population but close to one -quarter of 

its prisoners —an incarceration rate five to ten times that of other Western democracies. I ndeed, 

the U.S. incarcerates more people (both in absolute numbers and per capita) than any nation on 

Earth, including the far more populous China, which rates second, and authoritarian Russia, 

which rates third. These are disconcerting realities in a nat ion that, when its citizens pledge 

allegiance to our flag, promises to be a republic with “liberty and justice for all.” 4 U.S.C. § 4. 

Over the past 40 years, the number of people held in prisons and jails in the United States per 

capita has more than q uadrupled, with the total number of incarcerated persons now around 2 

million. And since 1970, the federal prison population has grown nearly 1000 percent, a rate that 

far outpaces that of the general U.S. population and crime rates. Nearly half of all t hose 

incarcerated throughout the United States are serving time for non -violent drug, property, or 

public order crimes, and more than two -thirds of the federal prison population are imprisoned for 

these sorts of non -violent offenses. Despite recent declin es, every state and the federal 

government have seen a massive increase in inmate populations in recent decades, and the 

modest prison population decline resulting partially from pandemic developments are reversing 

within many justice systems. See Jacob K ang -Brown, Stephen Jones, Joyce Tagal & Jessica 

Zhang, The VERA Institute, People in Jail and Prison in 2022 (June 2023). 

This epidemic of incarceration has arguably done little to reduce crime and has, along the way, 

helped to destroy innumerable lives, e specially the lives of children and spouses of incarcerated 

individuals. Reform and clarity of what our justice system is truly about are desperately needed, 

including a sober assessment of whether and when prison terms, especially long prison terms, 

serv e legitimate purposes. We need to provide alternatives to incarceration, reduce excessively 

long sentences, especially for non -violent first -time offenders, give incarcerated individuals the 

education and training they need to successfully reintegrate and find employment after leaving 

prison, lift barriers to reentry and, yes, show compassion. Everyone would benefit from a 

criminal justice system that takes seriously its obligation to rehabilitate as well as to hold people 

accountable for their misdeeds. 

The United States Sentencing Commission (USSC) plays a pivotal role in enlightening our 

justice system, particularly through the Sentencing Guidelines. This Commission has taken a 5

number of important and valuable steps toward an improved federal sentenc ing system through 

its Guideline amendments in the last amendment cycle. But there is much more work to do, and 

significant and ambitious reforms are needed to more fully address the substantial and systemic 

problems of the current federal sentencing syst em. 

The comments and priorities we propose here are intended to address some of what we believe 

are key shortcomings in our criminal justice system that we hope can be clarified and corrected 

via instruction to judges throughout the country through amendme nts to the Sentencing 

Guidelines. While these proposals all deal with the federal criminal justice system, the hope is 

that enacting these reforms would also inspire state legislators and state sentencing 

commissioners —who often look to the federal system for guidance —to enact similar reforms. 6

# Table of Contents 

The First Step Act – 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) ................................ ................................ .......... 7

Alternatives to Incarceration ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 9

Maximum Sentences for First -time Non -violent Offenders ................................ .................... 16 

Family Hardship and Other Sentencing Considerations ................................ ........................ 18 

Revise the Fraud Sentencing Guidelines & Other Guideline Provisions ............................... 21 

Mens Rea Reform ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 26 

Acquitted Conduct ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 28 

Recommendation for Judges and DOJ Officials and Others to Visit Prisons ....................... 30 7

# The First Step Act – 18 U.S.C. § 

# 3582 (c) (1)(A) 

The First Step Act (FSA) is the most monumental criminal justice reform legislation passed in 

decades. In Title 1, it sets out to meaningfully assist incarcerated individuals to rehabilitate 

themselves and provide them with the necessary tools that will h elp them to successfully reenter 

society as contributive members of society. It also incentivizes men and women in our federal 

prison system to better utilize their time in prison by participating in recidivism reduction 

programs, job training, educationa l courses and faith -based activity. These productive activities 

have all proven not only to reduce the risk of reoffending, but also to create a more productive 

experience while incarcerated. 

The subsequent provisions in the FSA are important, and truly critical compassionate pieces, as 

well as sentencing reforms, that are significant improvements to our justice system. This 

includes 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) (implementing the right to court review of a compassionate 

release denial). This comment addres ses this important provision in particular. 8

Comments Regarding Amendment to 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A). 

The Commission’s amendments to 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) are astute and praiseworthy, and 

effectively address issues regarding sentence reductions that have been of great concern and 

attention since the FSA was passed into law in December of 2018. We than k the Commission 

for its attention to this important issue. 

Importantly, in the months and years ahead, it will be critical for the Commission to monitor and 

assess how its sentence reduction guidelines are applied by judges in the exercise of their broa d

discretion in considering these requests. 

While the Commission can and likely will seek to monitor and assess whether sentence 

reductions are being granted consistently around the country, we think it especially important for 

this Commission to monitor and assess whether sentence reductions are being granted 

sufficiently . Our view is that many federal sentences, especially those imposed due to severe 

mandatory minimums or guidelines, often prove over time to be “greater than necessary to 

comply with th e purposes set forth” by Congress. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). We believe it will be 

essential for this Commission to continue to encourage sentencing courts to recognize and act 

upon their obligations to reduce prison terms to ensure persons are not serving unn ecessary and 

wasteful prison time. 9

# Alternatives to Incarceration 

The length of incarceration for released federal prisoners doubled between 1988 and 2012, from 

an average of 17.9 months to 37.5 months. But increasingly, lengthy prison terms for fe deral 

offenses have become counterproductive for promoting public safety. Long -term sentences 

produce diminishing returns for public safety as individuals “age out” of the high -crime years; 

such sentences are particularly ineffective for drug crimes as dr ug sellers are easily replaced in 

the community; long -term sentences have deleterious consequences on families and 

communities, which undermines public safety; increasingly punitive sentences add little to the 

deterrent effect of the criminal justice syste m; and mass incarceration diverts resources from 

program and policy initiatives that hold the potential for greater impact on public safety. 

Further, there is evidence that prison sentences —especially lengthy ones —are “criminogenic,” 

i.e ., actually increa se crime and criminal attitudes by exposing first -time offenders to more 

hardened offenders and reducing post -incarceration opportunities for jobs, housing, and social 

connections. 1

The comments below promote alternative sentencing (such as home confinement , electronic 

monitoring, weekend jail stays, and other forms of supervision) for first -time, non -violent 

offenders. 

These comments also address how a “crime of violence” should be defined, which is responsive 

to comments being sought by the USSC at this time in the Career Offender section. 

We would also strongly recommend that the Commission plan a national convening in the form 

of a Commission -sponsored symposium, and/or conduct a series of regional hearings, in order to 

give much needed attention to alternatives to prison. Federal judges, U.S Probation, Congress, 

federal prosecutors, states and localities nationwide —as well as many other stakeholders and 

interested parties —could and would draw considerable guidance from a Commission -sponsored 

event that brought together leading researchers and scholars to discuss what we continue to learn 

about alternatives to incarceration and public safety. In addition to informing this Commiss ion’s 

work, one (or a series of major events) on this topic would help advance our collective 

knowledge of whether and when incarceration is needed and appropriate as a response to a range 

of wrongdoing.     

> 1See, e.g., Marc Mauer, “Long -Term Sentences: Time to Reconsider the Scale of Punishment.” The Sentencing
> Project. November 5, 2018, https://www.sentencingproject.org/publications/long -term -sentences -time -reconsider -
> scale -punishment/; Marta Nelson, Samuel Feineh and Maris Mapolski, The VERA Institute, A New Paradigm for
> Sentencing in the United States (Feb. 2023), https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/Vera -Sentencing -Report -
> 2023.pdf

10 

Favoring Alternatives to Prison Incarceration for a Certain Class of Non -violent 

Offenders in Keeping with Congressional Statutory Direction. 

We propose that the USSC place a strong emphasis on alternatives to incarceration and on 

exploring how such alternatives can be better and more broadly utilized in our sentencing 

system. Alternatives to incarceration, including home confinement, were much more commonly 

utilized by judges prior to the Sentencing Guidelines. Indeed, we believe this is one of the 

unfortunate unintended negative consequences of the Gui delines and one that has not received 

nearly as much attention in the modern federal sentencing era as it merits, given the low -risk 

nature of many of those subject to federal prosecution. Congress, in the Sentencing Reform Act 

of 1984, stated clearly tha t the Commission “shall insure that the guidelines reflect the general 

appropriateness of imposing a sentence other than imprisonment in cases in which the defendant 

is a first offender who has not been convicted of a crime of violence or an otherwise seri ous 

offense,” and also provided that the Guidelines should direct that imprisonment is generally 

appropriate only when persons are “convicted of a crime of violence that results in serious bodily 

injury.” 28 U.S.C. § 994(j). 

Many federal defendants fit t he profile that Congress has ordained should qualify for “a sentence 

other than imprisonment. ” Nevertheless, Commission data regularly document that over 90% of 

all federal defendants are sentenced to imprisonment terms every year. (Notably, state crimin al 

courts process many more violent offenses and sentence many more repeat offenders and yet 

data generally shows that about 30% of felony offenders sentenced in state courts receive 

alternatives to incarceration.) Commission data also highlight that a la rge percentage of federal 

defendants do not have any significant criminal history: the Commission’s Fiscal Year 2022 

reports show that over 40% of sentenced persons scored in the lowest possible criminal history 

category (CHC I). And yet the mean sentence for that group, many of whom would fit the 

category Congress indicated should generally receive a “sentence other than imprisonment,” was 

imprisonment for 40 months (nearly 3.5 years). 

The USSC should, therefore, aggressively pursue and find more ways to encourage judges to 

utilize the important option of prison alternatives when sentencing offenders deserving of such 

consideration. Work by this Commission to highlight alternatives ranging from home 

confinement to electronic monitoring to traditional c ommunity supervision can and should not 

only advance congressional directives as judges make initial sentencing determinations but also 

help better inform judges when they are considering motions for sentence reductions brought 

pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3582 (c)(1)(A) and also when considering options in response to 

supervised release violations. As detailed below, we have set forth some specific suggestions for 

various ways to amend the Sentencing Guidelines to encourage judges to give more and greater 

consi deration to prison alternatives. In addition to those particular recommendations, we urge 

the Commission to give sustained attention to alternatives to incarceration. 

There are numerous reasons why our justice system needs alternatives to incarceration now more 

than ever: 11 

• Our federal prisons are overcrowded, understaffed and place an increasingly heavy 

burden on taxpayers to pay for them. 

• Health care is completely inadequate in our federal prison system due to limited 

resources. Because of that, inmate s—especially the elderly —get sick unnecessarily since 

their medical issues were not addressed at all or adequately, or worse, result in their 

untimely deaths. These tragic examples of illness and death would have been avoidable 

had the individual been in the community receiving regular health care. 

• Family units are broken up due to incarceration. 

• Children are separated from their fathers and mothers due to incarceration. Many of 

these children tragically later turn to crime without a father figure at hom e to educate 

them, among many other negative consequences. (See below section titled “Family 

Hardship and Other Sentencing Considerations” for more details and data on this issue.) 

• Spouses are left without the breadwinner or other critical resources to support their 

children and other family members due to incarceration. 

We propose that the USSC should immediately begin a comprehensive review of the federal 

sentencing system that c ulminates in a report to Congress and the public on: 

• The effectiveness of the current system. 

• Its conformity to the purposes set forth under Section 3553(a) of Title 18 of the United 

States Code and other key provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 , as well as 

the more recent First Step Act of 2018 and 

• Whether the current list of factors to be considered when imposing a sentence under 

Section 3553(a) of Title 18 of the United States Code are producing appropriate results 

that serve the public’s inte rest. 

This report should include recommendations for needed actions and appropriate reforms directed 

to every federal institution that plays a central role in the imposition and administration of 

sentences, including Congress, the U.S. Department of Jus tice, federal defender offices, U.S. 

Probation and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. 

We propose that this sort of comprehensive review focused on alternatives to incarceration be 

conducted at least every ten years and that the Commission’s annual reports a nd priorities 

consistently examine and assess the use of, and potential for expanding, alternatives to 

incarceration for various classes of cases. 

We offer further specific comments on this important subject: 

1. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to am end 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b) to delete 

subsections (1) and (2) 2—which became largely unconstitutional and inapplicable due    

> 2Directing consideration of “(1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of
> the defendant; [and] (2) the need for the sentence imposed —(A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote
> respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense; (B) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal
> conduct; (C) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and (D) to provide the defendant with
> needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.

12 

to the Supreme Court’s ruling in U.S. v. Booker —and insert a subsection that would 

address alternatives to prison sentences. The new sub section should establish that, at 

least for defendants with no prior felony convictions for federal or state criminal 

offenses, and no act of violence was involved in the offense for which they were 

convicted, it shall be presumed, absent a ju ry finding of aggravating circumstances, 

that alternatives to prison shall be sufficient to satisfy justice and the other purposes 

set forth under Section 3553(a) of Title 18. 

Alternatives shall include, but not limited to: 

• Home confinement 

• Supervised pro bation 

• Confinement in “ Residential Confinement Centers” 

• Intermittent confinement 

• Electronic monitoring 

• Community service 

• Fines 

• Restitution to victims 

• Participation in rehabilitation, faith -based or other programs. 

Definitions: 

“Act of violence” should be defined as causing actual physical harm to another 

person, intentionally putting another person in reasonable fear of imminent 

violence , attempting to sexually assault another person or actually sexually 

assaulting another perso n.

“Residential Confinement Centers” should be defined as centers based in 

communities for the purpose of confinement, similar to Residential Reentry 

Centers currently contracted by the Federal Bureau of Prisons. 

“Intermittent confinement” may include al ternatives such as being home on 

weekends and in prison on weekdays or vice versa. 

2. For defendants to whom this section applies who are currently serving a prison term, 

on the motion of the prisoner, a court that imposed a prison sentence prior to the 

enac tment of this guidance should generally impose an alternative to prison for the 

remainder of the defendant’s sentence as if this guidance was in effect at the time the 

offense was committed. Notably, in last year’s amendments, this Commission 

soundly reco gnized the need to reduce recommended guideline ranges for certain 

offenders with zero criminal history points under the Guidelines (“zero -point 

offenders”). The logical next step is to create a statutory presumption against 

incarceration for first -time n on -violent offenders. 13 

3. Importantly, we propose that the USSC amend its Sentencing Guidelines, Section 

5B1.1, by adding a new subsection (c) that reads as follows: 

“For defendants with no prior felony convictions for federal or state criminal 

offenses, an d who committed no act of violence in the offense for which they 

were convicted, alternatives to prison shall be considered sufficient to comply 

with the purposes set forth in 18 U.S.C. Section 3553(a)(2), absent a ju ry finding 

of aggravating circumstances that would warrant a sentence of incarceration. 

Supervised probation, community service, home confinement, intermittent 

confinement, fines, restitution payments to victims, electronic monitoring, 

participation in rehabilitation programs, participation in faith -based programs, 

placement in Residential Confinement Centers, and other authorized alternatives 

to prison shall all be presumed to be sufficient for first -time offenders convicted 

of crimes that did not involve acts of viol ence. Intermittent confinement may 

include alternatives such as being home on weekends and in prison on weekdays 

or vice versa. Prisoners may be sentenced by judges directly to Residential 

Confinement Centers or may be placed in such Residential Confinem ent Centers 

by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, as long as their sentence is less than five years 

long. Probation officers shall include a discussion of viable alternatives to prison 

in the pre -sentencing report.” 

4. We further propose that the USSC create an advisory list of aggravating factors that 

may provide the basis for a court to be authorized to sentence an individual to an 

alternative to prison .

5. We further propose another category of individuals for a presump tion in favor of 

alternatives to incarceration even if they have a modest criminal history: people who 

demonstrate pretrial and/or presentence rehabilitation, such as through exemplary 

performance on pretrial release, should also presumptively receive an a lternatives -to -

prison sanction. This alternative basis captures deserving individuals who might 

otherwise be excluded, and it properly adds a focus on rehabilitation to the 

Guidelines. 

6. Given the success (low recidivism rates 3) of the Home Confinement pr ovision of the 

CARES Act, we believe that its provision should be permanently adapted with its 

emergency provision replaced by the requirement of consideration of the overall 

health of the incarcerated individual. We propose the following language or simi lar:  

> 3Of the 13,204 individuals placed on CARES Act home confinement since March 2020, only 22 people —less than
> 1% —have been charged with a new criminal offense. CARES Act Home Confinement Three Years Later, Senator
> Cory A . Booker, June 2023 at page 8,
> https://www.booker.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/cares_act_home_confinement_policy_brief1.pdf .

14 

“A prisoner who has served at least 50% of his or her sentence may be transferred 

to home confinement if: 1) The prisoner is at elevated risk for of a serious or 

debilitating illness, 2) has no history of violence, 3) has no detainers, and 4) is 

ass essed as Low or Minimum risk to recidivate in their PATTERN score.” 

7. Additionally, we propose that the USSC amend its Sentencing Guidelines, Section 

5C1.2(a) by adding a new subsection (6) that reads as follows: 

“(6) the defendant does not qualify for al ternative sentencing under section 

5B1.1(c).” 

8. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to amend Title 18 U.S.C. 3552(a) to add 

the following sentence: 

“The report shall include a discussion of viable alternatives to prison.” 

9. We propose that the USSC amend its Sentencing Guidelines, Section 6A1.1 by 

adding a new subsection (c) that reads as follows: 

“The pre -sentencing report shall include a discussion of viable alternatives to 

prison.” 

10. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to provide a sense of Congress that Rule 

32 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure should be revised by adding to section 

(d)(1) a new subsection (F) to read as follows: 

“F. Include a discussion of viable alte rnatives to prison.” 

11. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to amend 28 U.S.C. § 997 to add a 

sentence that shall read as follows: 

“As part of its annual report, the Commission shall address its effort to develop 

and expand alternatives to prison for a s many federal defendants as possible.” 

12. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to amend 28 U.S.C. § 994(j) to read as 

follows: 

“The Commission shall ensure that the Guidelines recommend imposing a 

sentence other than imprisonment in cases in which th e defendant is a first -time 

offender of a federal or state felony offense, whose conviction was not for a crime 

that involved an act of violence, absent a ju ry finding of aggravating 

circumstances that would warrant a prison sentence. The Commission shall create 

an advisory list of aggravating factors that may provide the basis for a court to be 

authorized to sentence an individual to an alternative to prison.” 15 

13. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to amend 28 U.S.C. § 994 by adding a 

new subsection (z) to read as follows: 

“The Commission shall further evaluate, develop, and promote alternatives to 

prison as a strategy to divert appropriate convicted individuals from prison and 

shall promote the availability of evidence -based sentencing al ternatives to 

incarceration across the system.” 

14. Finally, at a time when we as a nation have become addicted to excessive sentences, 

erroneously thinking that prison is the answer to all our criminological problems, it is 

critical that the United States Sen tencing Commission —the preeminent entity we all 

look toward for sentencing guidance —send a message that is loud and clear that we 

must expand the utilization of alternatives to incarceration. What better way to send 

that message than by the Commission pr oposing that the Commission itself be 

reorganized to focus more on alternatives? Accordingly, we propose that the USSC 

advise Congress to amend 28 U.S.C. § 991 by revising subsection (a) to read as 

follows: 

“(a) There is established as an independent commission in the judicial branch of 

the United States a United States Sentencing Commission which shall consist of 

nine voting members and three nonvoting members. The President, after 

consultation with represe ntatives of judges, prosecuting attorneys, defense 

attorneys, law enforcement officials, senior citizens, victims of crime, and others 

interested in the criminal justice process, shall appoint the voting members of the 

Commission by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, one of whom shall 

be appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, as the Chair and 

three of whom shall be designated by the President as Vice Chairs. One of the 

vice -chairs shall be dedicated to researching, develop ing and proposing 

alternatives to prison incarceration to be included in the United States Sentencing 

Guidelines and associated materials. At least three of the members shall be 

Federal judges selected after considering a list of six judges recommended to the 

President by the Judicial Conference of the United States. Not more than five of 

the members of the Commission shall be members of the same political party, and 

of the three Vice Chairs, no more than two shall be members of the same political 

party. The Attorney General, or the Attorney General’s designee, shall be an ex 

officio , nonvoting member of the Commission. The Chair of the United States 

Parole Commission, or the Chair’s designee, shall be an ex officio , nonvoting 

member of the Commission. A federal public defender shall be an ex officio , non -

voting member of the Commission, to be appointed by the President. The Chair, 

Vice Chairs, and members of the Commission shall be subject to removal from 

the Commission by the President only for neglec t of duty or malfeasance in office 

or for other good cause shown.” 16 

# Maximum Sentences for First -time Non -

# violent Offenders 

When alternatives to prison are not appropriate, the argument against lengthy prison stays for 

first -time, non -violent offenders is still no less compelling. The bold proposal below would cap 

maximum sentences for first -time, non -violent federal offenders at ten years, absent a ju ry 

finding of aggravating circumstances that would warrant a prison sentence. As previously 

mentioned, in last year’s amendments this Commission soundly recognized the need to reduce 

recommended guideline ranges for certain offen ders with zero criminal history points under the 

Guidelines (“zero -point offenders”). We believe that one important and sensible next step is to 

create a cap against lengthy incarceration terms for first -time non -violent offenders. 17 

Establishing Maximum Sentences for First -time Non -Violent Offenders Convicted 

of Federal Crimes. 

1. We propose that the USSC advise Congress to amend 18 U.S.C. §3553(b) by inserting a 

new subsection (2) which should read as follows: 

“(2). Maximum sentences for certain offender s. 

Notwithstanding any other law, statute, regulation, or guideline to 

the contrary, a court may not impose on a defendant with no prior 

felony convictions for federal or state criminal offenses and was 

not convicted of a crime that involved an actual act of violence, a 

sentence of more than ten years, absent a ju ry finding of 

aggravating factors would justify a longer sentence.” 

Definitions: 

“Act of violence” should be defined as causing actual physical harm to another 

person, intentionally putting another person in reasonable fear of imminent 

violence, attempting to sexually assault another person or actually sexually 

assaulting another person. 

2. We propose the USSC amend Chapter Five of the United States Sentencing Guidelines 

by adding, in the introductory commentary to that chapter, the following or similar 

language to the same effect: 

“For those with no prior felony convictions for federal or state criminal offenses, 

and no actual act of violence in the offense for which they were convicted, a court 

may not impose on a defendant a sentence of more than ten years, absent a ju ry 

finding of aggravating factors that would justify a longer sentence.” 

3. We further propose that the USSC create an advisory list of aggravating factors that may 

provide th e basis for a court to be authorized to impose a sentence longer than ten years. 18 

# Family Hardship and Other Sentencing 

# Considerations 

The incarceration of a parent can have devastating effects on children. Astonishingly, the 

number of minors with a parent in prison increased 500% (!) between 1980 and 2000. 4 In 2007, 

there were 1.7 million children in America with a parent in prison, more than 70% of whom were 

children of color. 5 A study based on U.S. Department of Justice statistics found that be tween 

1980 and 2019, the number of incarcerated women increased by more than 700% —and about 

60% of these incarcerated women have children under age 18. 6

Incarceration of a parent, and especially of a mother, is associated with a host of poor outcomes 

for children, including a substantially increased likelihood of being incarcerated themselves as 

adults. One study found that the majority of children with an incarcerated parent are subject to 

four or more risk factors. 7 Obviously, almost immediately, fami ly income (already low among 

this group) drops sharply when a parent is incarcerated. About one -third of children with an 

incarcerated parent live in poverty. 8

Children’s behaviors also diverge dramatically from their peers who do not have an incarcerat ed 

parent. One study found that children with an incarcerated parent “had higher levels of problem 

behaviors between the 5th and 10th grades,” with the differences being significant and increasing 

over the course of this time period. Moreover, “serious” delinquency —essentially, conduct that 

was otherwise a felony crime —was significantly higher for this group than for children without 

incarcerated parents. 9

Overall, and not surprisingly, having an incarcerated parent was strongly correlated in children 

wi th increased rates of substance abuse, mental health disorders, violence, anti -social behaviors, 

learning disabilities, homelessness, and mental and physical health issues (including migraines, 

asthma, high cholesterol, depression, anxiety, and post -trauma tic stress disorder). 10 

Incarceration of a mother especially seems to have an outsized impact on children. Dallaire 

found that the adult children of incarcerated mothers were 2.5 times more likely to be 

incarcerated than the adult children of fathers. Th e risk of incarceration for the adult children of  

> 4

Leila Morsy & Richard Rothstein, Mass incarceration and children’s outcomes , Economic Policy Institute (Dec. 

15, 2016), available at  https://www.epi.org/publication/mass -incarceration -and -childrens -outcomes/ . 

> 5

D.H. Dallaire, Incarcerated Mothers and Fathers: A Comp arison of Risks for Children and Families , 56 Family 

Relations 440 (2007).  

> 6

The Sentencing Project, Incarcerated Women and Girls (Nov. 20, 2020), available at 

https ://www.sentencingproject.org/publications/incarcerated -women -and -girls/ . 

> 7

J. Poehlmann, Children’s family environments and intellectual outcomes during maternal incarceration , 67 J. 

Marriage & Family 1275 (2005).  

> 8

Jean M. Kjellstrand & J. Mark Eddy, Parental Incarceration During Childhood, Family Context, and Youth 

Problem Behavior Across Adolescence, 50 J. Offender Rehab. 18 (Jan. 1, 2011).  

> 9

Kjellstrand & Eddy, supra . 

> 10

Morsy & Rothstein, supra .19 

women who used drugs regularly was particularly high. 11 And nearly half of all children with an 

incarcerated mother live in poverty, as opposed to slightly less than one -third who have an 

incarcerated father. 12 

Given these relationships, it seems clear that reducing the number of parents and caretakers who 

are incarcerated is not just good criminal justice policy, it is a pro -family policy that can serve 

society’s interests in many ways. 

The proposals below fill an overdue void: to incorporate family hardship in the Sentencing 

Guidelines .

The Commission long ago promulgated a policy statement that mere “family ties and 

responsibilities are not ordinarily relevant in determining whether a departure may be 

warranted.” (USSC Section 5H1.6). Since nearly every person has some family ties and 

responsibilities, this old policy statement is understandable. But, before and since the Booker 

ruling, federal judges have recognized there are many situations in which family hardships are 

directly relevant to the sentencing purposes and considerations Congress set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 

3553(a). Indeed, Commission data show that family considerations are consistently one of the 

most commonly cited fac tors for traditional departures and for variances from the Guidelines. 

The recommendations below seek to ensure the Guidelines more effectively guide federal judges 

toward appropriately considering family hardships at sentencing.     

> 11 Dallaire, supra .
> 12 Kjellstrand, et al., supra .

20 

Additional Factors to b e Considered at Sentencing. 

1. We propose that the USSC amend the Sentencing Guidelines, Section 5H1.6, 

commentary Application Note (B)(ii) to read as follows, or similar language to the same 

effect: 

“The loss of caretaking or financial support to third pa rties that could prove 

detrimental to their well -being. The fact that the defendant’s family might incur 

significant financial hardship or suffer in other ways from the absence of the 

defendant as a result of incarceration, including but not limited to em otional and 

psychological harm to children, a special needs child in the defendant’s family, a 

family member with medical or mental health issues, a spouse, or elderly parents, 

may be a sufficient basis for departure from the Sentencing Guidelines. 

In order to qualify for a departure on this basis, a defendant must demonstrate to 

the court’s satisfaction that he or she has reasonably assumed his or her 

responsibilities to the third parties in question. For example, in the event a 

defend ant has a child or children with a person or persons to whom the defendant 

is not married, and the child or children do not reside with the defendant, the 

defendant must demonstrate that he or she regularly visits said child or children, 

makes regular and sufficient child support payments to the best of their ability and 

did so regularly before their arrest for the current offense.” 

2. We further propose that the USSC amend the Sentencing Guidelines, Section 5H1.6, 

commentary Application Note (1)(B)(iii) to re ad as follows or similar language to the 

same effect: 

“The loss of caretaking or financial support is one for which effective remedial or 

ameliorative programs are not readily available.” 

3. We further propose that the USSC amend the Sentencing Guidelines , Section 5H , by 

adding a new subsection, 5H1.13, which shall read as follows or similar language to the 

same effect: 

“Consideration of Collateral Consequences and Extraordinary Acceptance of 

Responsibility. 

Punitive collateral consequences resulting from the defendant’s prosecution ( e.g ., 

loss of employment and income, or other formal and informal societal sanctions, 

coupled with the defendant’s demonstration of genuine remorse and sincere effort 

to make amends to any victims or the broader community) may provide a reason 

to depart downward.” 21 

# Revise the Fraud Sentencing Guidelines 

# & Other Guideline Provisions 

The portions of the Sentencing Guidelines on federal fraud crimes —embezzlement, securities 

fraud, insider trading, and related crimes —have long been the subject of extensive and bipartisan 

criticisms. Due to the Guideline’s instructions to use the higher of “intended” or “actual” loss, 

its numerous overlapping sentencing enhancements, and its tendency to treat both intentional 

conduct (think Bernie Madoff) and less culpable conduct similarly, there is a broad consensus 

that the fraud Guidelines often recom mend excessive punishment for many types of economic 

offenses. They also may now result in widely disparate sentences for like conduct, especially as 

federal judges register their disapproval of these Sentencing Guidelines by departing or varying 

from the m in a wide range of cases. 13 Though structured with various elements, this proposal 

fundamentally seeks to alleviate at least some of the excessive harshness of these fraud 

Guidelines by focusing more closely on defendants’ actual intent and directing judges to 

consider mitigating a s well as inculpatory factors. Reforms that better align the fraud Guidelines 

with culpability and other sound sentencing factors will help reduce disparity as judges will be 

even more inclined to follow Guideline recommendations. 

We also propose that mens rea be further incorporated into the Guidelines. Criminal intent is 

fundamental to our justice system. That ideal is not sufficiently expressed in the current 

Guidelines, which too often allow for unintended results to greatly enhance sentencing rang es. 

This proposal would correct that. 

To begin, we urge the Commission to fundamentally rethink and restructure the entire fraud 

Guideline. The fraud Guideline’s Loss Table drives fraud sentences, and it consistently produces 

intolerably unjust sentenci ng recommendations. The Commission should explore amendments 

that could allow the Guideline s to function without a Loss Table in order to put particular focus 

on a defendant ’s mens rea , motive, culpability and the extent to which they deliberately inflict ed 

economic hardship on discrete individuals. If the Commission does not fundamentally rethink 

this guideline, then we propose below that the Commission at least significantly reform and 

simplify the Loss Table in Section 2B1.1. With financial crimes, it is the government’s 

(sometimes fanciful) construction of loss amounts that (too greatly) drives the sentence. All too 

often, loss calculations are built on supposition about intent or resulting harm and they push a 

Guideline sentence to an amount of time that the average person would consider outrageously 

long and a punishment that does not sensibly meet the crime given the defendant’s actual 

culpability. Indeed, the current Loss Table is outdated, creates a false sense of precision, and is 

excessively c omplicated. A million dollars today is not what it was when the Table was created, 

and frauds involving $975,000 and $1,005,000 are not meaningfully different because of “loss” 

amount. The Loss Table currently functions in an arbitrary manner and results in human beings 

often losing their freedom for an overly -excessive amount of time. That is wrong, unjust and  

> 13 David DeBold & Matthew Benjamin. “Losing Ground’ —In Search of a Remedy for the Overemphasis on Loss
> and Other Culpability Factors in the Sentencing Guidelines for Fraud and Theft,” 160 U. Penn. L. Rev. 141 (2011).

22 

must be fixed. Taking away a citizen’s freedom is the government’s greatest power, and thus 

must be done with fairness and with the utmost care. 

See below as well for additional recommendations to improve the Guidelines, including 

streamlining the U.S. Code and placing a greater focus on collateral consequences. 23 

Revision of Section 2B1.1 of the United States Sentencing Guidelines Regarding 

Fr aud & Other Revisions to the Guidelines. 

1. The Loss Table in Section 2B1.1 is outdated, excessive and exceedingly unfair in 

creating a false sense of precision and in being excessively complicated. Moreover, loss 

is only a sound aggravating factor in a Guid eline calculation if a defendant both intended 

and actually caused a significant loss . Importantly, the current Guideline already rightly 

recommends a departure if and when the Guideline “substantially understates” or 

“substantially overstates” the seriou sness of the offense, and so sentencing judges can 

and do have authority to look beyond the crude metric of loss. Assessment of loss should 

be just one component of determining a fair and effective sentence for an economic 

offense, and hence, we propose t hat the USSC revise Section 2B1.1 of the United States 

Sentencing Guidelines by amending and revising the Table in Section (b) to read as 

follows or similar: 

“b) Specific Offense Characteristics 

If the intended and actual loss roughly exceeded $100,000, increase the offense 

level as follows: 

Loss (apply the greatest)  Increase in level 

Loss intended and actual loss is less than 

roughly $100,000 

no loss -specific increase 

Loss intended and actual loss is more than 

roughly $100,000 and less than roughly 

$1,000,000 

add 3 

Loss intended and actual loss is more than 

roughly $1,000,000 and less than roughly 

$50,000,000 

add 6 

Loss intended and actual loss is more than 

roughly $50,000,000 and les s than roughly 

$250,000,000 

add 9 

Loss intended and actual loss is more than 

roughly $250,000,000 and less than 

roughly $1,000,000,000 

add 12 

Loss intended and actual loss is more than 

roughly $1,000,000,000 

add 15. 

2. Respectfully, if the Commission is disinclined to rework the structure of the Loss Table 

as recommended above, we would recommend the Commission revise the loss amounts 

in Section 2B1.1 that is fairer in consideration of current economic conditions and 

factors: 

“b) Speci fic Offense Characteristics 24 

If the loss exceeded $100,000, increase the offense level as follows: 

Loss (apply the greatest)  Increase in level 

$100,000 or less  no increase 

More than $100,000  add 2 

More than $250,000  add 3 

More than $500,000  add 4 

More than $1,000,000  add 5 

More than $10,000,000  add 6 

More than $50,000,000  add 8 

More than $100,000,000  add 10 

More than $150,000,000  add 12 

More than $200,000,000  add 14 

More than $250,000,000  add 16 

More than $375,000,000  add 18 

More than $500,000,000  add 20 

More than $750,000,000  add 25 

More than $1,000,000,000  add 30. 

3. We propose that the USSC advise in the Sentencing Guidelines that for defendants 

previously sentenced, in cases where the prior Loss Table resulted in an enhanced 

sentence, a court shall, on motion of the defendant, impose a reduced sentence as if this 

revised Loss Table were in effect at the time the offense was committed. 

4. We also propose that the USSC revise the Sentencing Guidelines, Section 2B1.1, 

comm entary application note 3 by amending it to read as follows or similar: 

“Loss Under Subsection (b)(1). —This application note applies to the determination of 

loss under subsection (b)(1). (A) General Rule. —Subject to the exclusions in 

subdivision (D), los s shall only be defined as the lesser of actual loss and intended loss 

so that for any loss enhancement to be imposed the defendant must have actually and 

intentionally caused that level of loss. (i) Actual Loss. —“Actual loss” means the 

reasonably foreseeable pecuniary harm that directly resulted from the offense. (ii) 

Intended Loss. —“Intended loss” (I) means the pecuniary harm that the defendant 

purposel y sought to inflict but that may not have directly resulted from the offense. 

(iii) Pecuniary Harm. —“Pecuniary harm” means harm that is monetary or that 

otherwise is readily measurable in money. Accordingly, pecuniary harm does not 

include emotional dis tress, harm to reputation or other non -economic harm.” 

5. We propose that the USSC revise the Sentencing Guidelines by amending Section 

5K2.12 by striking the last sentence. 25 

6. We propose that the USSC revise the Sentencing Guidelines by adding a new Section 

5K2.25 that should read as follows or similar: 

“If the defendant committed the offense because of personal financial difficulties or 

economic pressure or duress due to a trade or business, the court may depart 

downward when and only if the defendant’s cr iminal response to his financial 

difficulties or economic was a sincere but misguided effort to reduce harms to other 

individuals or society. Actions based in avarice should not be the basis of a departure, 

but actions based on largess could be.” 

7. We propo se that the USSC revise the Sentencing Guidelines by adding a new Section 

5K2.26 that should read as follows or similar: 

“If the defendant who committed the offense did not do so for personal financial gain 

and did not receive any personal financial benefit from the offense, the court is 

encouraged to depart downward.” 

8. Consistent with its statutory power to “establish a res earch and development program 

within the Commission for the purpose of ... assisting ... in the development, 

maintenance, and coordination of sound sentencing practices,’ 28 U.S.C. § 995(a)(12), we 

propose that the USSC should undertake a comprehensive rev iew of the U.S. Criminal 

Code to identify unnecessary and duplicative federal criminal laws, those that lack 

appropriate and consistent mens rea elements and proportionate statutory sentencing 

ranges and to recommend to Congress how to best gather all fede ral criminal laws and all 

regulatory crimes into a single title of the U.S. Code organized in a way that is both 

useful to practitioners and understandable by the general public. If the USSC determines 

that a crime would be more appropriate to be a state crime, it should recommend that 

Congress remove that crime from the U.S. Code. This review should be completed 

within four years and should be reported to Congress with specific recommendations as 

to legislation that Congress should consider revising and streamlining the U.S. Criminal 

Code. We propose that subsequent reviews and reports to Congress should occur not less 

than every five years. 

9. Consistent with its statutory power to “establish a research and development program 

within the Commission for the purpose of ... assisting ... in the development, 

maintenance, and coordination of sound sentencing practices,” (28 U.S.C. § 995(a)(12)), 

we f urther propose that the USSC should also review “collateral consequences” and make 

recommendations to Congress and the Department of Justice as to how to mitigate them. 26 

# Mens Rea Reform 

The Honorable Judge Jack Weinstein & Fred Bernstein wrote 14 :

“In the guidelines era, mens rea has been all but eliminated from the sentencing of drug 

offenders. This development is a disastrous departure from the great traditions of Anglo -

American law…It contorts the meaning of mens rea to say that state of mind is irrelevant 

to sentencing. It is at sentencing that mens rea is most crucial…Punishing a defendant for 

facts she ‘reasonably should have foreseen’ is tantamount to punishing negligent conduct. 

This is a substantial departure from 2b1 traditional principles of mens rea . The Model 

Penal Code, for example, permits criminal liability only in cases of extreme negligence, 

and then only rarely. Moreover, punishments are ‘proportional’ to mental states.” 

The Honorable Judge Gerard E. Lynch similarly wrote 15 :

“The guidelines significantly muddle questions of mens rea as applied to factors that can 

have a dramatic effect on culpability…The lack of attention to mens rea issues [means] 

the guidelines totally ignore the question of the level of culpability required wit h respect 

to the quantities of narcotics that determine the severity of sentencing in drug cases.” 

The need for the reform of mens rea is long overdue. Below we recommend the Commission 

address this foundational issue, as well as collateral consequences.       

> 14 Judge Ja ck Weinstein & Fred Bernstein, The Denigration of Mens Rea in Drug Sentencing, 7 FEDERAL
> SENTENCING REPORTER 121 (1994).
> 15 Judge Gerard E. Lynch, The Sentencing Guidelines as a Not -So -Model Penal Code , 7 FEDERAL SENTENCING
> REPORTER 112 (1994).

27 

USSC Mens Rea Review. 

1. Consistent with its statutory power to “establish a research and development program 

within the USSC for the purpose of ... assisting ... in the development, maintenance, and 

coordination of sound sentencing practices,” (28 U.S.C. § 995(a)(12)), we propose that the 

USSC should establish a program to conduct a comprehensive review of the U.S. 

Criminal Cod e to identify overlapping, unnecessary and duplicative federal criminal 

laws, as well as those that lack appropriate and consistent mens rea elements and 

proportionate statutory sentencing ranges , and to assess the feasibility of gathering all 

federal crim inal laws and all regulatory crimes into a single title of the U.S. Code 

organized in a way that is both useful to practitioners and understandable by the general 

public. The USSC’s review should be informed by data concerning the most widely 

applied and most commonly sentenced federal offenses, and the USSC should consider 

making recommendations to Congress about whether certain offenses could and should 

be more appropriately addressed by state criminal justice systems. The review should 

culminate with a report to Congress with recommendations as to legislation that Congress 

should consider revising the U.S. Criminal Code to advance sounder sentencing practices. 

2. We propose that the USSC should review and revise the Sentencing Guidelines to ensure 

the G uidelines properly incorporate and ensure courts properly consider mens rea ,

motive, purpose and personal culpability issues at sentencing. This review and revision 

of the Guidelines should ensure: (a) that aggravating sentencing enhancements are 

imposed only in instances in which the defendant exhibited sufficient mens rea with 

respect to a sentencing factor to justify the corresponding sentencing enhancement, and 

(b) that the sufficient mens rea is adequately proven at the appropriate burden of proof. 

The government should generally be required to prove a culpable state of mind with 

respect to any key offense facts that impact guideline ranges, such as the quantity of 

drugs or the amount of loss involved in the offense, and greater proof of a more culpab le 

state of mind should generally be required for greater sentencing enhancements. This 

review and revision of the Guidelines should also ensure that courts are fully and clearly 

instructed to consider any and all mitigating aspects of a defendant’s mens rea motive, 

purpose, and personal culpability as a basis for a departure under the Guidelines. 

3. We further propose that the USSC should review collateral sanctions imposed by federal 

and state laws to ensure courts properly consider the nature and impact of collateral 

consequences likely to be endured by federal defendants. The USSC should conduct 

research and issue a report within three years concerning the array of collateral 

consequences faced by federal defendants. This report should give special att ention to 

whether and how collateral consequences may undermine or impede the effectiveness of 

the recidivism reduction provisions in Title I of the FIRST STEP Act of 2018 and should 

include specific recommendations to Congress as to how to mitigate the ha rmful impacts 

of collateral consequences, as well as recommendations for courts as to how they should 

adjust sentencing practices in light of the punitive nature of collateral consequences. 28 

# Acquitted Conduct 

In the last amendment cycle, the Commission’s s tated priorities included “[c]onsideration of 

possible amendments to the Guidelines Manual to prohibit the use of acquitted conduct in 

applying the guidelines.” 16 Many observers were justifiably eager for this issue to receive 

Commission attention. Though full criminal trials are relatively rare in the federal system, and 

cases involving acquitted conduct guideline enhancements are even rarer, the doctrines 

surro unding the use of acquitted conduct at sentencing still impacts every indictment and plea 

negotiation in the federal criminal justice system. Federal prosecutors who know that any 

acquittal at trial will not preclude (and may even aid) securing a conteste d guideline 

enhancement will always have more incentives to bring and stack additional indictment charges 

against defendants; federal defense attorneys who know that any acquittal at trial will not ensure 

(and may even hinder) defeating a contested guideli ne enhancement will always have to advise 

their clients that they may likely face a longer prison sentence after a partial trial acquittal than if 

they just plead guilty to all charges. In other words, just the possibility of acquitted conduct 

sentencing enhancements has a profound impact on all aspects of federal criminal case 

processing, not just on the few hundred cases in which such an enhancement could become 

prominent at an actual sentencing. 

With a very full agenda, particularly with respect to urge nt matters dealing with implementation 

of key First Step Act issues, this Commission decided to defer action on acquitted conduct 

sentencing last amendment cycle. This choice may have been particularly sensible during that 

cycle given that the U.S. Suprem e Court had been reviewing a number of high -profile federal 

cases raising issues relating to the constitutionality, under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments, of 

using acquitted conduct in connection with a defendant’s sentencing. 

In addition, in Spring of 20 22, the U.S. House of Representatives in the 117 th Congress passed, 

by an overwhelming bipartisan vote of 405 -12, the “Prohibiting Punishment of Acquitted 

Conduct Act of 2021.” This bill also had bipartisan Senate support; Senate Judiciary Committee 

Chair , Senator Dick Durbin (D -IL), explained why he sponsored this bill this way: “[F]ederal 

law inexplicably allows judges to override a jury verdict of ‘not guilty’ by sentencing defendants 

for acquitted conduct. This practice is inconsistent with the Consti tution’s guarantees of due 

process and the right to a jury trial…If any American was acquitted of past charges by a jury of 

their peers, then some sentencing judge down the line shouldn’t be able to find them guilty 

anyway and add to their punishment. A b edrock principle of our criminal justice system is that 

defendants are innocent until proven guilty. The use of acquitted conduct in sentencing punishes 

people for what they haven’t been convicted of. That’s not acceptable and it’s not American.” 17      

> 16 See Tzedek ’s comment on “Acquitted Conduct” in our previous submission to the Commission, “Public Comment
> to the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Proposed Amendments to the Sentencing Guidelines”, March 2023.
> 17 United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Press rele ase, Durbin, Grassley, Cohen, Armstrong Introduce
> Bipartisan, Bicameral Prohibiting Punishment of Acquitted Conduct Act (March 4, 2021), available at
> https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/press/dem/releases/durbin -grassley -cohen -armstro ng -introduce -bipartisan -
> bicameral -prohibiting -punishment -of -acquitted -conduct -act

29 

Thus, in the last amendment cycle it reasonably appeared that the U.S. Supreme Court and that 

the U.S. Congress might directly address acquitted conduct sentencing in the federal system. 

But it is now summer 2023 and neither the Supreme Court nor Congress has addressed this issue 

on the merits. The 118 th Congress has many other pressing matters to address, and there ’s no 

guarantee this bill will pass into law if taken up again. Congress may also reasonably believe, 

now that the U.S. Sentencing Commission is fully staffed for the first time in nearly a decade, 

that the Commission is the expert body best positioned to address this matter in the first instance. 

Similarly, and critically, the Supreme Court decided earlier this month to not yet take up the 

ra nge of constitutional issues related to acquitted conduct sentencing; in doing so, a number of 

Justices explicitly stated that they expected the Sentencing Commission to “resolve questions 

around acquitted -conduct sentencing in the coming year.” McClinton v. United States , No. 21 -

1557 (June 30, 2023) (statement of Justice Sotomayor); see also id. (statement of Justice 

Kavanaugh, joined by Justices Gorsuch and Barrett) (“The use of acquitted conduct to alter a 

defendant’s Sentencing Guidelines range raises important questions. But the Sentencing 

Commission is currently considering the issue. It is appropriate for this Court to wait for the 

Sentencing Commission’s determination before the Court decides whether to grant certiorari in a 

case involving the use of acquitted conduct.”) 

We recognize, of course, that this Commission can only make amendments to the Guidelines and 

cannot resolve all the constitutional and statutory issues that the Supreme Court and Congress 

might address regarding acquitted conduct. But it is indisputable that Congress and the Supreme 

Court, as well as federal practitioners and the general public, could and would benefit in myriad 

ways from having this Commission actively consider again, in this coming amendment cycle, 

whether and to what extent acquitted conduct should play a role in at a defendant’s sentencing. 

Ultimately, we believe the use of acquitted conduct at sentencing to increase either the 

Guidelines range or the final sentence amounts to an affront to the Fifth and Sixth Amendments 

which guarantee due process and the right to trial by jury. These rights are fundamental to our 

criminal justice system, and so it is no surprise that acquitted conduct sentencing has been 

roundly criticized by practitioners, judges, and scholars (and that nearly a decade ago Justice 

Scalia, joined by Justice Ginsburg and Justice Thomas, lamented that the practice of sentencing 

based on acquitted conduct “has gone on long enough”). 18 

Last amendment cycle, the Commission put forward for c omment a proposed amendment to 

§1B1.3 to add a new subsection (c) providing that acquitted conduct shall not be considered 

relevant conduct for purposes of determining the guideline range unless the conduct was 

admitted by the defendant during a guilty ple a colloquy or was found by the trier of fact beyond 

a reasonable doubt. As the Commission returns to this issue, we advocate that the Commission 

not only put forward a similar proposed amendment but also issue a policy statement to 

recommend to judges tha t acquitted conduct shall not be considered for any purposes that would 

aggravate a sentence (in keeping with the provisions of the “Prohibiting Punishment of Acquitted 

Conduct Act of 2021” that received near unanimous support in the House).  

> 18 See Jones v. United States . 574 U.S. 948 (2014).

30 

# Recommendat ion for Judges and DOJ 

# Officials and Others to Visit Prisons 

The impetus of this proposal is simple: Those involved in sentencing persons to prisons should 

be aware of the conditions of those institutions and have some first -hand knowledge of what life 

in prison is like. The U.S. Sentencing Commission conducts a number of training sessions for 

judges and other court personnel throughout the year, and USSC staff speak at a number of 

circuit conferences and other like events. In line with such sessions, th is comment proposes that 

the USSC should make a concerted effort to make visits to prison an integral part of this training 

and other programming. 31 

Judges and DOJ Officials and Others Should Visit Prisons. 

1. We propose that the USSC recommend Congress to amend 28 U.S.C. §134, as follows or 

similar: 

“Within one year of their initial appointment, and every five years thereafter, all 

United States District Judges, United States Magistrate Judges, United States 

Circuit Judges, United States Suprem e Court Justices, all U.S. Attorneys, 

Assistant U.S. Attorneys, the U.S. Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney 

General, and all attorneys of the Criminal Division of the U.S. Justice 

Department, shall be required to visit at least one federal prison. The Federal 

Bureau of Prisons shall help coordinate these visits and help ensure that these 

visitors shall have access to all areas within the prison and be permitted to speak 

with any prison staff and prisoners. The Federal Bureau of Prisons shall report 

yea rly to Congress the number of persons who visited its prisons and which 

prisons were visited under this section.” 

2. We further propose that the USSC should recommend to Congress to amend 18 U.S.C. § 

4042(a) by adding a new paragraph 8, to read as follows or similar: 

“The Federal Bureau of Prisons shall coordinate visits of judges and attorneys to 

federal prisons, as mandated by 28 U.S.C. § 134. The Bureau of Prisons shall 

ensure that these visitors shall have access to all areas within the prison and be 

pe rmitted to speak with any prison staff and prisoner. The Bureau of Prisons shall 

report yearly to Congress the number of judges and attorneys who visited its 

prisons and which prisons were visited under 28 U.S.C. § 134.”  

> 3.

Even without the above proposed legislation, the USSC should make this 

recommendation to all federal judges (United States District Judges, United States 

Magistrate Judges, United States Circuit Judges and United States Supreme Court 

Justices) to visit at least one federal prison at least once every five years. These judges 

should personally see where they are sending people to for years and even decades at a 

time. 

> ***

VIA PUBLIC COMMENT SUBMISSION PORT AL 

July 14, 2023 

United States Sentencing Commission 

Office of Public Affairs 

One Columbus Circle, NE 

Suite 2 -500, South Lobby 

Washington, D.C. 20002 -8002 

Re: United States Sentencing Guidelines Applicable to the Rodchenkov Anti -Doping Act 

Dear Honorable Commissioners :

I write on behalf of the United States Anti -Doping Agency (“USADA”) to discuss the United States 

Sentencing Guidelines (the “Guidelines”) treatment of violations of the Rodchenkov Anti -Doping Act 

(“RADA”), 21 U.S.C. § 2401 -04 . Because RADA was enacted in December 202 0, when the United States 

Sentencing Commission (the “Commission”) was without a quorum, the Guidelines do not yet address 

RADA offenses. USADA has a n important stake i n the promulgation of guidelines applicable to RADA 

that fairly and effectively punish and deter doping crimes. Thus, in this letter, I set forth USADA’s 

position on RADA guidelines . Before addressing specific recommendations, I will provide a brief 

backgr ound on USADA and RADA. 

About USADA 

USAD A is a not -for -profit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Public 

Law 109 -469, signed into law on December 29, 2006, officially recognizes USADA as the anti -doping 

agency for Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic sports in the United States, and ch arges USADA 

with the responsibility for implementing education, research, testing, and adjudication programs. 

Although USADA is not a government agency, USADA performs functions that are important to the 

government . USADA currently receives a significan t portion of its funding from Congressional 

appropriations administered by the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. In its 

capacity as the Congressionally -recognized, exclusive anti -doping agency for the Olympic Movement 

in the United States , USADA administers the anti -doping program applicable to the United States 

Olympic & Paralympic Committee (the “USOPC”) and its National Governing Bodies, which govern 

Olympic and Paralympic sport in the United States pursuant to the authority granted to them by the 

Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act, 36 U.S.C. § 220501, et seq. (1978). 

Before USADA, the U SOPC and the National Governing Bodies conducted their own anti -doping 

programs. The international perception of this arrangement was that the “ fox was guarding the 

henhouse” because the same organizations that were charged with catching dopers also had a stake 

in those athletes’ competitive success. As a result, it was widely believed that more athletes were 

doping in the United States than in an y other country. To overcome that international perception and 

restore the reputation of American athletes, the USOPC, the White House Office of National Drug 

Control Policy, and the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, during October July 14, 2023 | Page 2 of 7

1999 hearings on the use of performance -enhancing drugs in Olympic sport, all recognized that a 

new independent agency (USADA) must be created to administer the anti -doping program for the 

Olympic Movement in the United States. Because of its independence from sport and its transparency, 

USADA has been able to rebuild the credibility of American Olympic sport. 

USADA has succeeded in its mission in large part due to collaborative relationships with law 

enforcement. USADA has a history of collaborating with federal investigators and United States 

Attorneys’ Offices in doping -related cases that involve violations of both sport rules and criminal 

laws . This collaboration has been based on the common interests that the federal government and 

USADA share in stopp ing illegal doping. Because of USADA’s unique technical expertise, knowledge 

of sport, and experience in the anti -doping area, it has been routine practice for the Department of 

Justice and federal agents to seek USADA’s cooperation in the analysis of pote ntial cases. This has 

included disclosure to USADA of documents (not protected by Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 

6(e) ) to elicit information and facilitate cooperation. After reviewing these documents, USADA has 

shared technical insights with investiga tors that might otherwise have been missed. 

Outside of RADA cases, the government’s authority to share with USADA information not covered by 

the secrecy requirements of Rule 6(e) was formalized by the United States’ ratification of the 

International Convention Against Doping in Sport. The Convention requires State Parties ratifying 

the Convention to adopt appropriate measures and commit themselves to the principles of the Code. 

The Co de clearly provides for the exchange of non -Rule -6(e) investigatory information between 

federal prosecutors and USADA: 

“Article 22: Involvement of Governments. Each government’s commitment to the 

Code will be evidenced by its signing the Copenhagen Dec laration on Anti -Doping in 

Sport of March 3, 2003 [signed by the United States in March 2003 ], and by ratifying, 

accepting, approving or acceding to the UNESCO Convention [the International 

Convention Against Doping in Sport ]. . . . 

[T]he following Articl es set forth the expectations of the Signatories to support them 

in the implementation of the Code. . . . 

22. 5 Each government should encourage cooperation between all of its public 

services or agencies and Anti -Doping Organizations to timely share infor mation with 

Anti -Doping Organizations [USADA has been recognized by Congress as the Anti -

Doping Organization for the Olympic Movement in the United States] which would be 

useful in the fight against doping and where to do so would not otherwise be legally 

prohibited.” 

Over its sixteen -year existence, USADA has worked collaboratively with many federal law 

enforcement bodies , U.S. Attorneys’ Offices , and international law enforcement authorities. By way 

of example: 

• USADA served as an important technical resource for the government in the BALCO cases 

involving MLB, NFL, and professional track athletes. July 14, 2023 | Page 3 of 7

• In 2015, USADA was a key resource in Operation Cyber Juice, an international investigation 

into steroid producers. The DEA noted that law enforcement efforts “comprised of over 30 

different U.S. investigations in 20 states and resulted in the arrest of over 90 individuals, the 

seizure of 16 underground steroid labs” and a large quantity of steroids and money. 

• In 2017, USADA assisted with Operation Total Package, which led to the indictment of five 

individuals and the recovery of steroids and proceeds from an underground steroid 

laboratory in Florida. 

• In 2018, USADA assisted in an investigation that resulted in federal crimi nal charges against 

multiple defendants in the Eastern District of Louisiana, United States v. Natalie Barton, et al .

USADA’s Chief Science Officer, Dr. Matthew Fedoruk, served as an expert for the prosecution. 

As part of the investigation, USADA received customer lists from law enforcement that led to 

the identification of athletes who had made purchases of prohibited performance enhancing 

drugs. 

• In 2021, USADA provided the tip and investigatory resources that led to the first indictment 

under RADA against Eric L ira. 

About RADA 

In the years since the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games, evidence revealed a massive Russian state -

sponsored doping scheme across multiple sports and lasting multiple years . The scheme included 

switching Russian athletes’ dirty urine samples for clean ones within the onsite laboratory in Sochi. 

One of the whistleblowers was Russian laboratory director, Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov, after whom 

RADA is named .

In response to the Russian doping s candal , Congress enacted RADA to criminalize international 

doping conspiracies to hold orchestrators and benefactors of doping criminally responsible no 

matter where they were in the world. Importantly, RADA exempts athletes from criminal liability ,

becaus e sport anti -doping rules are already in place to hold athletes responsible. 1

RADA contains cooperation obligations that identif y USADA by name . The statute requires that “the 

Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Food and Drug Administration 

shall coordinate with USADA with regard to any investigation related to a potential violation of 

Section 2402 of this title, to include sharing with USADA all information in the possession of the 

Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, or the Food and Drug Administration 

which may be relevant to any such potential violation.” 21 U.S.C. § 2404 . The only exceptions to this           

> 1The typical sanction for a serious anti -doping rule violation, like use of steroids, EPO, or human growth
> hormone, is four years ineligibility from sport. A second serious violation can result in an eight -year ban. These
> periods can be increased by two ye ars if aggravating circumstances are established. Reductions to the period
> of ineligibility are also possible and may result in as little as a reprimand depending on the degree of fault of
> the athlete and the type of substance involved. A reduction is also possible for providing substantial assistance
> to an anti -doping organization, criminal authority, or professional disciplinary body. July 14, 2023 |Page 4of 7

sharing requirement are if it is “prohibited by law” or if sharing would affect “the integrity of the 

criminal investigation.” Id. 

Congress has relied on USADA in pursuit of its on -going interest in anti -doping , as evidenced b y the 

numerous Congressional hearings devoted to the topic at which USADA has been asked to testify ,

including: 

- The Joint Hearing of the House Subcommittee on Commerce Trade and Consumer 

Practice and the Subcommittee on Health; 

- The House Subcommitt ee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection; 

- The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation; 

- The House Hearing conducted by the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on 

Commerce, Trade and Consumer Protection ;

- The Senate Committe e on Foreign Relations; 

- The House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer 

Protection; 

- The Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime and Drugs; and 

- The U.S. Helsinki Commission. 

As USADA’s testimony at these hearings confirm, doping involves fraud on clean athletes, sponsors, 

competition organizers, and consumers, all of whom pay to be associated with or watch clean sport. 

Doping also involves the illegal manufacture, distribution, and use of controlled drugs and other 

misbranded substances .

RADA Sentencing Guidelines Analysis and Recommendation 

RADA provides for a maximum sentence of ten years’ incarceration and a $250,000 fine for 

individuals ($1 million fine for entities). 21 U.S.C. § 2403( a)(1). But RADA has not yet been given a 

formal classification under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. 

Although RADA offenses bear superficial similarities to other drug offenses, USADA believes that 

classifying RADA offenses under Section 2D of the Guidelin es (Offenses Involving Drugs and Narco -

Terrorism) would create difficulties from both a practical application and a policy standpoint. Section 

2D of the Guidelines places great emphasis on the weight of the substances involved. But RADA 

violations identify hundreds of prohibited substances and methods , pursuant to the Prohibited List 

promulgated by the World Anti -Doping Agency (“WADA”) , which is updated annually. See World 

Anti -Doping Code, International Standard Prohibited List (2022) (the “Prohibited List ”). The 

substances on the Prohibited List can —in miniscule amounts —undermine the fairness of a 

competition . Indeed, any amount of the substance in an athlete’s sample, which can currently be 

detected down to the trillionths of a gram, is considered a viola tion of anti -doping rules that can result 

in an athlete receiving a four -year ban. 

The vast majority of substances on the Prohibited List (“Prohibited Substances ”) are not classified in 

the Guidelines’ Drug Quantity Table or the Drug Conversion Table. The Prohibited List covers a 

diverse array of substances of differing physical attributes, uses, and effects. Categorizing these 

substances on the Drug Conversion Tabl e would be a m onumental undertaking. Furthermore, anti -July 14, 2023 | Page 5 of 7

doping organizations like USADA are in a continuing cat -and -mouse game with scientists involved in 

doping, as the latter work to formulate n ovel substances and methods to evade detection . Because 

the P rohibited List necessarily undergoes annual updates to stay ahead of those working to evade 

detection , so too would the Drug Conversion tables require continuous amendments. 

An additional complicating factor is the small dosages of many Prohibited S ubstan ces that have an 

out -sized impact on the fairness of a competition . Some substances are administered in doses in the 

tens of milligrams , and multiple agents are often “stacked” as part of a doping program. The effective 

dose of a given substance can also vary widely depending on the weight and other physiological 

characteristics of the athlete and the nature of the athletic competition. For these reasons, assessing 

penalties based on the weight of a particular Pr ohibited Substance is not aligned with how Prohibited 

Substances are used by athletes to cheat. 

Categorizing RADA within the existing rubric of Offenses Involving Drugs and Narco -Terrorism may 

also c reate difficulties in ensuring that offenses involving WADA Prohibited Methods —which do not 

necessari ly involve Prohibited Substances —receive an adequate Guideline Offense Level. RADA 

violations may stem from Prohibited Methods, such as blood doping, gene and cell doping, sample 

swapping, and use of otherwise -acceptable intravenous infusions in quantities that suggest the 

purpose is to mask blood doping. While such methods do not require the use of Prohibited 

Substances, their provision is equally punishable as a felony under RADA, and sanctions for athletes 

are every bit as severe as if they had used Proh ibited Substances. Thus, if the Sentencing Guidelines 

were revised to incorporate Prohibited Substances, the Guidelines should also account for varying 

degrees of severity for violations involving Prohibited Methods .

USADA’s concerns about the use of substance weight as a factor in determining the offense level go 

beyond difficulties of practical application. Placing emphasis on substance weight runs the risk of 

amplifying the importance of a characteristic that is not directly indicative of the degree of se verity 

of any particular RADA offense. Similarly, although doping perpetuates fraud on clean athletes, 

sponsors, organizers, and spectators, categorizing RADA offenses under Section 2B1 of the Guidelines 

(Theft, Embe zzlement, Receipt of Stolen Property, Property Destruction, and Offenses Involving 

Fraud or Deceit) would be misplaced because there is limited ability to gauge the financial benefit 

from doping , a nd the primary harm is to the integrity of sport , which has a global impact. As discussed 

below, USADA proposes several alternative factors that are more relevant, and should be included as 

adjustments to RADA offense -level calculations. 

While USADA contends that the use of the Drug Quantity Table is not an approp riate methodology 

for RADA crimes, USADA nevertheless believes that base -offense levels for drug offenses are 

instructive in determining an appropriate RADA base -offense level. Federal sentencing policy for 

narcotics offenses is largely grounded in protect ing public health and safety. Similarly, a guiding 

principle underlying RADA and other anti -doping initiatives is to ensure that every athlete has a 

chance to compete without compromising his or her health with unsafe substances and methods. 

USADA suggests that a base -offense level of at least 12 be implemented for any RADA violation. This 

is equivalent to the lowest offense level for a drug offense under Guidelines Section 2D1.1. 

Within the Prohibited List, WADA categorizes Prohibited Substances and Methods as either 

“Specified” or “non -Specified.” Pursuant to World Anti -Doping Code Art. 4.2 .2, at n.26, while July 14, 2023 | Page 6 of 7

“Specified” Substances and Methods should not be considered less important or less dangerous, they 

“. . . are more likely to have been consumed or used by an Athlete for a purpose other than the 

enhancement of sport performance.” USADA r ecommends that, for RADA violations involving non -

Specified Prohibited Substances or Methods, the offense level should be increased by 2 levels. 

USADA further proposes that offen ders receive a base -offense level adjustment for the number of 

athletes who r eceived a Prohibited Substance or Method related to the RADA offense . Large -scale 

doping operations that provide Prohibited Substances and Methods to numerous athletes deserve a 

higher offense level than doping activities related to relatively few er athlet es. USADA recommends 

an adjustment of 1 level for each individual recipient of a Prohibited Substance or Method. 

Additionally, USADA proposes that the offense level be increased by 10 levels for any offense in which 

a Prohibited Substance or Method was administered to a person under eighteen years of age. While 

not common, USADA has been involved in cases in which Prohibited Substances and Methods have 

been administered to a minor athle te —with or without the minor’s knowledge. USADA regards these 

cases as especially egregious and deserving of a greater Guidelines offense level. 

USADA also recommends adjustments based on the number of clean competitors who were 

disadvantaged in a RADA -protected competition by the Prohibited Substance or Method. For this 

adjustment, USADA recommends implementing adjustments in lock -step to the “Number of Victims” 

adjustment in Guidelines Section 2B1.1(b)(2). That is, USADA proposes that the Guideline sect ion 

related to RADA offenses include the following adjustment: 

(Apply the greatest) If the offense —

(A) involved five or more competitor -victims , increase by 2 levels; 

(B) involved 10 or more competitor -victims , increase by 4 levels; or 

(C) involved 25 or more competitor -victims , increase by 6 levels 

USADA proposes that for this section, “competitor victim” sh ould be defined to mean an athlete 

directly competing against an athlete determined to have used a Prohibited Substance or Method in 

connection with that competition or, in the case of a team -sport -based competition, “competitor 

victim” sh ould mean a team directly competing against a team on which one or more athletes has 

been determined to have used a Prohibited Substance or Method in connection with that competition .

USADA further contends that RADA violations affecting Olympic and Paralympic Games and World 

Championships are especially serious , as they have a greater potential to impair the integrity of 

organized sport on the world stage. For this reason, USADA recommends that for any RADA offense 

related to the use of a Prohibited Substance or Method in Olympic Games, Pa ralympic Games, or 

World Championships, the offense level should be increased by 10 levels. 

Finally, in recognition of the detriment al impact state -sponsored doping schemes have had on 

international sport and American athletes, USADA recommends that for any RADA offense involving 

a state official the offense level should be increased by 10 levels. July 14, 2023 | Page 7 of 7

I hope the information provided here has been informative and helpful as the Commission continues 

its important work. I also hope this will be the beginning of a continuing dialogue between the 

Commission and USADA on crafting fair and effective treatment of RADA offenses in the Guidelines. 

We would be pleased to provide additional commentary or information, and to make our experts 

available for further questions . We look forward to continuing working with you. 

Sincerely, 

Jeff T. Cook 

General Counsel, USADA DR. Douglas A’Hern 

# Law Group P.L.L.C .

Houston /Galveston –(Principal office) 832.767.3603 

Rio Grande Valley (By Appointment) 281.904.3797 

Facsimile 281 -213 -0628 

Cellular 

16516 El Camino Real # 349 1111 W. Nolana Ave. Suite I 

Houston, TX 77062 -5723 www.dismissed.us McAllen, Texas 78504 

22 JUNE 2023 

United States Sentencing Commission 

Attention: Public Affair s

One Columbus Circle, N E

Suite 2 -500, South Lobb y

Washington, DC, 20002 -800 2

RE:  Public  Comments on Commi ssio n Application of Guidelines Review 2023 -2024 

Greetings, 

My name is Dr. Douglas A'Hern . I am an active federal criminal defense attorney. I am also retired as 

the National Director of Trend Analysis for US Customs and Border Protection. I hold a Bachelor of Science 

in Criminal Justice from the University of Houston -Downtown, a Juris Doctorate fro m South Texas College 

of Law, a Master of Law in International Law, a Master of Law in Intellectual Property and Information Law, 

both from the University of Houston Law Center, a Master of National Security Studies from Angelo State 

University, and a Doct or of Forensic Psychology from Walden University. I teach undergraduate and graduate 

courses for Southern New Hampshire University and Purdue University Global in psychology. 

In my practice, I have provided counsel to a number of defendants charged with trafficking 

methamphetamine . Based on my personal experiences, I have been involved in the interception of 

methamphetamine smugg ling cases since the 199 0’s. I have seen it transform from a novel replication of 

pacific and Asian driven “ice ” to “crank ” pushed and controlled by motorcycle gangs. I witnessed the 

affiliation of those same biker gangs with Mexican drug trafficking organizations such as the original 

Ame zcua brothers. There is a reas on drug traffickers push methamphetamine in pounds and other drugs are 

kiols – because of the history and origin of the drug. Mexico brought in MC cooks to reach their people how 

to make methamphetamine and often traded for American guns. I have made those arrests personally and 

now defend them. The cases were cases of methamphetamine that was not refined nor powerful. The purity 

ranges went from 30% to 90%. The amounts intercepted with half pound (500 grams) to three pounds (1500 

grams ).

Today, the amounts of seizures are 100 pounds to 2000 pounds. They are almost all made in super labs 

that rival what Moderna and other pharmaceutical companies have. The precursors arrive in pacific ports of 

Mexico – primarily from China – every single day . The purity levels are 95% to 100% pure in every load. Page 2 of 2

However, with the new developments and current state of things – especially along the border area –

the sentencing for methamphetamine at the federal level has not changed. 

First, the federal threshold is only 500 grams. I have not seen a case cross my desk in over 5 years that 

was less than three pounds . That case was rare. Most of my cases range rig ht now from 100 pounds to 2000 

pounds. No one is shocked to see 700 -pound methamphetamine seizures. Those amounts are reflected on the 

streets of this country as methamphetamine is exceedingly cheap. I had a call from a potential client charged 

with selling 1 12 grams to an undercover officer for $1200 in Houston. That is $10 a gram. Cases of 

smuggling are coming in at 40 -pound loads and drivers are being paid $100 because the prioces are so low. 

Yet we are spending billions on incarcerating people federally for 500 grams? 

Next , there are enhancements if methamphetamine is imported un der USSG §2D1.1(b)(5). . This 

section of the Guidelines is routinely abused by the Government for sentencing as the as sertion is that ALL 

methamphetamine originates outside the United States. The additional level increase is virtually automatic at 

this stage. When was the last time th e Court s saw a methamphetamine related sentence where the two levels 

were NOT applied? Had the USSC wished to make the base offense level with two additional levels, it could 

have done so. Much like the Government final recognized that the errors for enhancements in crack cocaine 

sentencing disproportionally impacted African Americans, it will not be long before the Government or the 

USSC recognizes that this provision disproportionally i mpacts Americans and persons of Hispanic ethnicity. 

Next , the calculations related to mixed loads in the drug tables under USSG §2D1.1(c)(1). . First, there 

are differences between methamphetamine and methamphetamine actual, with the actual enhanced because of 

the higher purities. Today, they are all actual because of the superlabs. 

Finally, the drug conversion tables “The Drug Equivalency Tables ” for mixed loads where all the 

drugs are converted to marijua na. Say a Defendant was app rehended with what the laboratory has said was 

96% pure. That is only a 4% difference between non -actual and actual. Yet the table show the equivalency of 

1 gram of methamphetamine non -actual to 2 kilos of marijuana, but 1 gram of actual methamphetamine is 

equivalent to 20 kilos of marijuana? A 4% difference in the case at bar compared to a 1000% increase in 

equivalency. It is difficult to see how this was ever the actual intended result of the USSG. 

This glaring disc repancy of the equivalency tables because probation then calculates the total 

equivalency of drugs that the defendant is responsible for should be 151,997 kilos of marijuana for a 7.5 

poun d methamphetamine arrest . I am former narcotics agent who worked for 20 years on the U.S. Mexico 

border. Based on this table conversion, if taken as true, the defendant is being held accountable for some 76 

smuggling ventures via 18 -wheel trucks at the Port of Entry. It is equivalent to some 303 loads of marijuana 

being crossed along the Rio Grande River. That is the equivalent to roughly 1,519 average loads of marijuana 

via car crossing at a port of entry. 151, 997 is equivalent to 30,399 average seizures of marijuana at the 

international airports or cruise liners or 300,000 average marijuana seizures at international mail facilities. We 

have transformed a 24 - year -old kid into a major narcotics kingpin and kingp ins do n’t even receive sentences 

as high as probation is suggesting. 

Respectfully, 

_____________________ 

Dr. Douglas A. A’Hern 7/25/2023 12:35 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Victoria Blanco, IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU 

# Topics: 

1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 3. Simplification/Structural Reform 4. Case Law Relating to Guideline Commentary 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 6. Youthful Offenders 7. Crime Legislation 8. Circuit Conflicts 9. Miscellaneous Guideline Application Issues 10. Research Topics 

# Comments: 

There are far too many wrongfully convicted persons inside prisons. Communities are suffering and America is the land of the un-free. Why does the federal government consistently oppressed it communities? 

Submitted on: July 25, 2023 7/14/2023 11:31 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Gary Devine, Presbyterian 

# Topics: 

1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 3. Simplification/Structural Reform 4. Case Law Relating to Guideline Commentary 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 6. Youthful Offenders 7. Crime Legislation 

# Comments: 

I am especially concerned that the sentencing commission identify effective policies that will replace simplistic incarceration with alternative forms of sentencing, such as home confinement and public service. I'm also concerned that as much as is practical, family and community engagement is increased with those who commit crimes. 

Submitted on: July 14, 2023 7/25/2023 18:45 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Frank Inserni-Milam, Frank D. Inserni Law Office 

# Topics: 

> 4. Case Law Relating to Guideline Commentary 7. Crime Legislation

# Comments: 

The Commission and Congress should definitely amend the acquitted conduct statute and guideline to eliminate the totally discriminatory and subjective power federal judges have in using facts from a 12-0 state or federal acquittal to jack up sentences. It is a total disrespect to the institution of the Jury who decides to acquit or convict. Also, relief for inmates who have been in prison for more than10-15 years with a low recidivism quotient should be able to exit prison and be allowed to be gainfully employed and be ordinary tax-paying individuals. Being in prison that long without any serious incidents of violence and having a good educational and work record should be the parameters for allowing release. The BOP does not have the ability to house so many prisoners and provide true rehabilitation to many inmates. 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023 7/25/2023 15:47 PM

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Susan Lea, Attorney at Law 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 6. Youthful Offenders 10. Research Topics 11. Other Suggested Priorities

# Comments: 

Assuming the incarcerated person was actually guilty and not innocent, many cases need to be assessed on an individual basis to assure that the sentence constitutes adequate protection of the public, punishment, restorative justice, opportunities for recovering a stake in life, education and skills training. Because I know that 99% of youthful offenders will mature, opportunities for a more productive future life should be available to young people who are incarcerated. The dog training programs have been very successful. Farming is a very productive and growth experience. 2nd chances because Rewards work. 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023

The Pennsylvania Association for Rational Sexual Offense Laws (PARSOL) suggested I contact the USSC 

regarding yo ur upcoming session priorities. 

My comments are intended to address serious disparities and discrepancies in sentencing, and where 

existing sentencing laws, guidelines, and/or precedents are ignored (which has become a heated 

national issue as a result of the so -called "Hunter Biden Swee theart Deal"). 

In my own case (in Dauphin County, PA), lies were told (perjury committed), numerous state/case laws 

violated by the prosecution and the judge, the plea was unknowing, and most relevant to this topic, THE 

SENTENCE WAS BOTH ILLEGAL, and IT W AS EXCESSIVE as a result of the judge ignoring sentencing law 

and established case precedent for a first -time offender. The governing guidelines and laws were 

overlooked, ignored, or willfully and negligently violated in numerous ways, and sufficient proof exists 

for confirmation. Mine was a "drumhead trial" at best, and all pro se appeals were either denied on 

technicalities or ignored; at no time was any effort to defend unlawful sentencing actions undertaken. 

My interest in this issue addresses not only the need for sentencing reform to prevent what I 

experienced happening to anyone else, but also establishment of sentencing rules which hold legally 

accountable ANY judge who ignores sentencing guidelines and/or law, imposes illegal or wildly 

disproportion ate sentences, or grants special deals to authority figures (a Comparative Proportionality 

Review will follow under separate cover), which is highly relevant in my personal case, as a part thereto. 

While judges must be granted some latitude in sentencing, steps ought to be taken to insure against 

special deals and abuse of discretion. Mandatory minimums should be abolished for first -time offenders, 

and even though an individual assessment of the alleged offender is mandated, assessments are often 

not perfor med (just as my own was not, despite a court order for it). Recent data from The Innocence 

Project showed that approximately 34% of offenders never receive the Constitutionally -mandated 

individual assessment. 

Regarding laws and sentencing for sexual offend ers, the myth that such offenders are at a high risk for 

re -offense has been repeatedly debunked by both private groups like NARSOL and similar state -based 

groups, as well as government task forces, most notably a recent PA Legislative Task Force which aga in 

proved that myth is indeed a myth. Additionally, the PA DOC 2022 Recidivism Report found that sex 

offenders consistently have - by far - the lowest rate of recidivism of all criminal classes. 

There is voluminous data showing that longer, tougher sentenc es NEVER provide “correction.” Quite the 

opposite is true: the longer the sentence, the more hardened an individual becomes, and the less likely 

that person is to be able to return to society as a productive member thereof. While sentencing and 

prison mana gement and disparate subjects, they are nevertheless inextricably linked. Prisons ought not 

to be “human warehouses,” but more of what their name says: “corrective.” A five -year sentence would 

be enormously more successful at returning a person to a normal life when the prison works to improve 

that person instead of denying them proper nutrition, adequate sleep, and humane conditions, offering 

educational and/or vocational training, than a 20 -year sentence in a brick oven with nothing to do but 

suffer under state -sanctioned abuse and learn how to be a better criminal. 

Summary: 

1. We must eliminate the use of extreme sentences, including mandatory minimums; 2. Ensure prosecutors' offices have ethical charging policies and hold legally accountable those who 

violate; 

3. Give judges more discretion to “look back” in order to adjust excessive sentences; 

4. Remove language used in plea agreements that requires people to waive certain legal rights; 

5. Eliminate "charge stacking," a practice in which police and pro secutors level as many charges at a 

person as possible, heightening an accused’s anxiety and the pressure to settle; 

6. Eliminate “take -it -or -leave -it” offers where people have virtually no time to make a decision, and 

7. Recognize how selective moral out rage can lead to a reduction of logic and rationality, resulting in 

excessive punishment, and take steps to prevent it. One person’s fear does not void another person’s 

rights. 

Opinion: The road from legitimate suspicion to rampant paranoia is a lot shorte r than most people think. 

As a Christian pastor, I must add that the Bible is abundantly clear regarding the tremendous harm that 

is caused by excessive punishment, and why God has expressly forbidden it. We see the results in our 

society of what happens when we choose to apply excessive punishment – it doesn’t age well, does it? 

Respectfully Submitted, 

Rev. Ronald S. Martin, A.CM, BCMMHC EXHIBIT C - Page 1 of 3

## COMPARATIVE PROPORTI ONALITY REVIEW 

The purpose of this review is to establish violations of the US Constitution, Amendment VIII ,

Cruel & Unusual Punishment, and Amendment XIV, Equal Protection Under the Law .

Review is intended to demonstrate that Judge John Cherry imposed excessive sentencing 1) 

compared to other individuals ch arged similarly, 2) compared to those charged with more serious 

physical assault crimes, 3) compared to Legislative intent and sentencing precedent with regard 

to excessive CVCF f ee without reason, and constitutionally intolerable excessive non -mandatory 

fine. 

In addition to the chart that follows, witness these examples: 

1. From The Bedford Gazette (Bedford, PA), 3 rd August 2017: Lee Shomo, 52, was convicted of 

giving his 16 -year -old babysitter alcohol and illegal moonshine ( providing alcohol to 

minors ), making sexual advances on the girl ( corruption of minors ), eventually paying her 

$100 for sex ( engaging minor in prostitution; statutory rape ). When told to stop, Shomo held 

the girl d own when she tried to get away in order to complete the sex act (unlawful restraint, 

rape ). Even with two similar priors, one a 15 -year -ol d girl in 1998, and another, a 7 -year -old 

girl in 1984, this predator received a mere 2½ -5 years in prison. We must consider how a 

man with this record receives le ss prison time (no fine is mentioned in record) than a first -

time offender (the defendant/appellant) who never touched an yone. 

2. William Cosby, convicted of drugging a raping a woman, received a 3 -year minimum in 

prison, same minimum as defendant/appellant. Case overturned for illegal prosecution. 

3. Jeffery Toman, 34, Scranton attorney, was lightl y punished after manipulating at torney/ 

client privilege to gain access to a 14 -year -old girl. He sexted with her, sending her penis and 

masturbation videos, requested bra and panty photos, and asked her to be his girlfriend. He 

was arrested on a mere M -1 corruption charge, pleading guil ty. The PA Supreme Court 

suspended his law license for 3 years on 9 th May 2018 when he went to prison, but he was 

already free from prison by November, 2018. 

4. Brian Meehan, Philadelphia attorney, had a sexual relationship with a 14 -year -old girl in 

2014, ar rested on a sexual assault charge . He received 2 -4 years in prison with no fine. 

5. Rebecca Willis, Poconos region, slaughtered her 6 -year -old daughter while DUI, and 

received only 1½ -3 years in state prison. 

6. Jeffrey Hand, 37, was maintaining a sexual relati onship with a teenage girl. Hand was a 

school employee, thus having authority over the girl. He received 1-5 years in prison. 

7. Michael Folmer, 64 , Pennsylvania Senator from Lebanon County, plead guilty in February 

2020 to four felonies, 3 for possession of child porn, 1 for criminal use of a communication 

facility, trading in child porn. Sentenced to one year less one day to two years less one day in 

county prison – a sentence fashioned to avoid incarceration in a state prison . Sentence 

included probation. E xample c alls Eq ual Protection into question on severity of 

defendant/appellant sentence versus leniency for a politician; i ndividual also received one EXHIBIT C - Page 2 of 3

sentence for four felonies. Folmer was sentenced very lightly to a county prison, whose 

operators benefitted from his political position. 

The following chart shows a number of individuals interviewed by the defendant/appellant. Each 

was interviewed personally by the defendant/appellant, an d each shared their paperwork with 

him. All data contained here in is attested true and correct; all cases occurred and sentenced in 

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Names are on file, but withheld by request for confidentiality. 

INITIALS  MONTH 

SENTENCED 

NATU RE OF CHARGES  PRISON 

TIME  FINE  CVCF 

FEE 

* J.K.  07/2014  6312(d), Poss ession Child Porn , <100 images 

Third Offense, 1 Count 

1-3 yr 

(maxed out)  500  60 

C.K.  04/2016 

6312(d) , <50 images; illegal use communication device; 

Parole violation. 1 count, inclusive 

1-7 yr 

Re -paroled 

02/2019 

NONE  60 

R.C.  08/2016 

6312(d), 100 -500 images ; disseminating; illegal use comm. 

Device Three sentences: 

Resentenced, appealed on illegal enhancement of sentence: 

1-5 yr 

1-5 yr 

consec+ 

2-7 yr 

concur. 

1-5 yr 

NONE 

NONE 

60 

60 

60 

---

R.C. 

Age 68  08/2016 

6312(d), <100 images  3-84 mo 

Parole 

01/ 2020 

NONE  60 

F.P. 

Age 59  10/2016  Ind ecent . Aslt, 16 -y-o girl; Agg Ind Aslt, 14 -y-o girl 

Two sentences , concurrent :

1-9 mo 

2-5 yr  200  60 

G.L.  10/2016  6312(d) (number images not shown); 1 ct. Bestiality (horse); 

online sexual contact with minors  3-6 yr  3,500  60 

* L.G.  01/2017  6312(d) (number images not shown); online sexual contact 

with minors; sexting minors/illegal use comm device  2-4 yr  500  60 

R.L.  01/2017  Corruption of minors , having sexual contact, <13 y.o.  2-4 yr  NONE  60 

J.G.  01/2017  Online solicitation of minors for sexual activity; sexting 

minors  1½ -3 yr  NONE  60 

C.L. 

Age 46  02/2017 

Ind Aslt <13 y.o. (Laid on, restrained 11 -y-o girl, fondled 

vagina skin -on -skin several minutes, stated desire for “power 

and control” over girl) 

1-3 yr 

(maxed out)  2,000  60 

S.D. 

Age 62  02/2017 

6312(d), >10,000 images & videos, file sharing, 11 cts. 

Fined $300/ct 

1½ -10 yr 

Parole 

08/2019 

3,300  60 

N.W. 

Age 42  03/2017 

Indecent Aslt: Maintained sexual relationship, 15 -y-o girl; 

sex contact 17 -y-o girl ; sexting minors 

2-4 yr +

Probation 

Parole 

01/2020 

2,000  60 

R.T.  03/2017  6312(d), 100 -500 images having 1 ct.; illegal use comm dvc/ 

disseminating images , 1 ct Two sentences, concurrent:  2-4 yr  1,000  60 

60 

E.M.  04/2017 

6312(d), 11 cts., disseminating images, illegal use comm dvc  20 -60 mo. 

Parole 

03/2020 

200  60 EXHIBIT C - Page 3 of 3

R.F.  04/2017 

> 6312(d) , 100 -500 images, 1 ct.; illegal use comm device, 1 ct.
> Two sentences, concurrent:

2½ -5 yr 

> Parole
> 01/2020

1,000  60 

60 

* D.W.  

> Age 71

09/2017  6312(d), 11 images, 1 ct.  1½ -3 yr  NONE  60 

A.W.  10/2017  6312(d), >500,000 images and videos, 1 ct.  1½ -3 yrs 

> Parole
> 11/2019

NONE  60 

Ronald S. 

Martin, 

Def endant/ 

appellant 

02/2017  

> 6312(d), 14 images, 14 cts. Four sentences:
> Fined $1,000 per count:

1½ -3 yr 

1½ -3 yr 

1½ -3 yr 

> Concurrent

+ 1½  yr 

> Consecutive
> TOTAL OF

3-6 yr 

14,000  100 

* Refused to participate in mandatory sex offender groups. 

Defendant/appellant contends that the chart above , coupled with text ual information, clearly: 1) 

demonstrates disproportionate sentencing imposed upon Mr. Martin, and , 2) demonstrates a 

violation o f his 14 th Amendment Equal Protection Under Law rights, and , 3) demonstrates a 

violation of his 8 th Amendment Cruel & Unusual Punishment prohibition rights because of an 

A) excessive fine, and, B) excessive/enhanced sentence, and , 4) demonstrates ab use o f power 

and discretion in violation of enhanced sentencing law/standards/doctrine by the trial judge .

The defendant/appellant’s charges do not involve any 1) direct physical contact with , or, 

2) electronic contact with any person, minor or adult, or, 3) buying, selling, creating, trading, or 

disseminating electronic images . Defendant/appellant contends that the data presented in this 

Exhibit should be viewed with those facts in consideration. 7/25/2023 12:44 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Deborah Newman, Baptist Minister 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices

# Comments: 

We as Americans need to look at our sentencing strategies. My son is serving a 75 year sentence he was given when he was 24 years old by a jury that was presented with a narrative and not facts in an emotional setting at the the time. We need laws that will *provide just punishment. *afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct--he did not intend to commit his crime and has a much longer sentence to many others who did intend to commit a crime. Dallas Cowboy Players have received probation for the same crime. *The public protection from further crime from the person should be the focus. *The prison system must be able to provide the proper guards, medical and educational care to those in custody Please adopt the policies set forth in 18 USC 3553 (a). Although my son in in a Texas State Prison, Prison reform in our nation will eventually have a much needed impact. 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023 7/25/2023 12:54 PM

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Dianne Post, Attorney 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs

# Comments: 

I have my BA in correctional administration, during my Masters I did research in CA prisons, and as a lawyer I have worked on criminal justice the world over. People in other countries are shocked at how long our sentences are. We know such long sentences are counterproductive and in fact increase crime not to mention destroy families and communities. Since 1980, we have gone the wrong way on punishment. We need to adopt humane and proven policies that work not punish those we don't like or who are poor.90376 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023 7/25/2023 15:30 PM

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

William Swor, Private Practitioner 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 3. Simplification/Structural Reform

# Comments: 

The Bureau of Prisons is currently incapable of adequately addressing the sentencing goal of providing education and vocational training or treatment in any meaningful fashion. Neither RDAP nor the sex offender programs are administered in a way that they can be effective. 2B1.1 must be restructured. "Loss" should not be the linchpin of the guideline. The dollar amount does not consistently demonstrate the harm caused by the offense. The loss tables are too easily manipulated to to prevent unwarranted disparate sentencing. Sentences in general are too long. Insufficient attention is paid to alternatives to incarceration and diversion. 

> Submitted on: July 25, 2023

Date : July 1, 2023 

To : U.S. Sentencing Commission 

From : G. D’Anne Weise, Ph.D. 

RE : Drug Induced Homicides -Proposed 2023 -2024 Priorities. Item #10 

My son, Scott, is an advanced opioid addict who was arrested in February 2019 for sharing fentanyl (his 

drug of choice) with a friend who overdosed and died. 

Scott was not guilty of being a dealer, but the deceased family believed he was because of some text 

messages on the deceased phone. To force him into a plea deal, the prosecutor charged Scott with two 

random felonies (each requiring a 20 -year sentence). Once he pled guilty to the original charge, the other 

two charges magically disappeared. 

According to Pew Research Foundation , only 2% of federal defendants go to trial and most who do are 

found guilty. 1 That means 98% have a plea deal, which is considered a golden win by the prosecutor. Golden 

because it avoids the cost of a trial. Of the 2% that go to trial, only 1% (or 0.0002) win their case. This 

means pros ecutors win in federal drug cases 99.98% of the time. Worse than Russia. Clearly, Scott is not 

alone in being assumed guilty and forced to take a plea deal. Scott was assumed guilty until he could be 

proved guiltier. There was never an assumption of innoce nce. There was no right to a trial, fair or otherwise, 

as the prosecutor skillfully put Scott is a lose -lose more, situation to force a guilty plea. There was no right 

to due process because strict liability applies to DIH convictions. Motive and state of mind do not matter. 

Drug -induced homicide (DIH) law s were introduced in 1986 as part of the Controlled Substances Act and 

were designed to punish drug traffickers and high -level dealers. However, since 2011, prosecutors have 

been convicting friends, family, lovers, or low -level dealers and imprisoning them for 20 years . These 

people are sitting in prisons, mourning the loss of their loved one or friend and dealing with the pain of 

having their lives destroyed because of misdirected anger. 

A HUGE consideration in DIH cases that is simply ignored is the complicity of the deceased . The deceased, 

in Scott’s case, laid the table for her death with the combined decisions to buy a deadly drug, ingest the 

drug, determine the ingestion method 2, govern the quantity of drugs ingested and regulate any other drugs 

in her system. Despite her multiple confinements in rehabil itation centers for opioid abuse, neither she nor 

her family had any naloxone available, and she died at her aunt’s house . All addicts are victims of their 

drug use and when addicted to a drug as deadly as fentanyl, that often means death will soon follow. Scott 

was close to death himself when he was arrested by the DEA. Ironically, the arrest saved his life. 

Recommendation 

Rather than succeeding in ruining 2 lives, we need a justice system that singles out addicts to send to long -

term TREATMENT facilities. We need treatment facilities not more prisons . When Scott has served his 

20 -year sentence, he will still be an untreated addict with no skills on how to cope with life. That is why the 

U.S. not only has the highest incarceration rate in the world but also the highest recidivism rates.   

> 1Gramlich , John (2019, June 11). Only 2% of federal criminal defendants go to trial, and most who do are found guilty. Pew
> Research Center . https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2019/06/11/only -2-of -federal -criminal -defendants -go -to -trial -and -most -
> who -do -are -found -guilty/.
> 2Fentanyl can be ingested 4 ways: 1. Injection (riskiest), 2. Smoking (very risky), 3. Nose ingestion (snorting, risky), 4. Or ally
> take a pill (least risky). There is no method of intake that eliminates the risk of death.

Our so -called justice system is a global embarrassment. Thank you for your sincere dedication to this 

enormous jo b in front of you. To Whom it May Concern, 

I write to submit a public comment on possible policy priorities for the US Sentencing 

Commission amendment cycle ending May 1, 2024. My name is Melissa Whatley and I hold a 

Ph.D. from the McBee Institute of Higher Education at the University of Georgia. I am currently 

an Assistant Professo r of International and Global Education at the School for International 

Training’s Graduate Institute , where I teach courses in applied statistics and social theory .

Although I write to you today as an individual, my professional role as a researcher in th e social 

sciences provides important background for my thinking regarding criminal justice reform in the 

United States . Most notably, my research often focuses on students enrolled at community 

colleges, which are institutions that provide a much -needed se cond chance for many individuals 

who have encounter ed the criminal justice system. 

My comments in this letter focus on priorities 2, 3, and 10.D listed for this amendment cycle and 

relate to the exceptionally high incarceration rate in the United States, which sits at 664 per 

100,000 people and is the highest in the world. Indeed, the country with the second highest 

incarceration rate is El Salvador, at 562 per 100,000. Incarceration is a significant expense for 

US taxpayers, but this expense is small when compared to the human costs of incarceration, 

which include separation of families, trauma to the children of incarcerated individuals, and 

human rights violations of those currently incarcerated in jails and prisons across the United 

States. Sentence red uctions and consideration of alternatives to incarceration would significantly 

decrease these costs. 

Regarding the second priority, the promotion of court -sponsored diversion programs, such as the 

Pretrial Opportunity Program, Conviction And Sentence Alte rnatives (CASA) Program, and 

Special Options Services (SOS), would represent a significant step in addressing the United 

States’ high incarceration rate. These programs offer a cost -effective deterrent to recidivism that 

would reduce or avoid prison time f or the arrestees that are most likely to benefit. 

In reference to the third priority, I urge the Commission to consider guideline amendments that 

consider technological advances in recent decades. For example, the “use of a computer” 

enhancement is outdat ed for offenses such as sex crimes that , by definition , make use of 

technology. Enhancements that result in additional points added to a defendant’s recommended 

sentence can result in significant increase s in prison time, thus adding to the United States’ 

already high incarceration rate. 

Finally, regarding priority 10.D, I encourage the Commission to continue studies of recidivism to 

assist in determining which offenders should be eligible for First Step Act Time Credits (FTCs). 

My understanding is that un der current eligibility guidelines, some qualifying offenders, such as 

those convicted of drug crimes, are more likely to reoffend compared to other groups of 

individuals, such as sex offenders, who do not currently qualify. While I certainly respect the 

desire to protect innocent Americans from the potential consequences of reoffence, and I do not 

at all endorse drug or sex crimes, I do support the use of data to make informed decisions 

regarding public policy. The First Step Act will not be as effective a s it could be in reducing the 

United States’ incarceration rate if it does not apply to the groups of individuals who are most 

likely to benefit. I am grateful to the  Commission  for considering this comment and am hopeful for 

future  sentencing  reform that both ensures justice for victims of crimes and affords opportunity 

for reform and rehabilitation for those who commit them. 

Sincerely, 

Melissa Whatley, Ph.D. 

Athens, GA From: ~^! ABRAMIAN, ~^!ARNO    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** ABRAMIAN, ARNO, , VVM-B-L
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 2:34:51 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To: Inmate  Work  Assignment:  NA ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** the  sentencing  guidelines  are  designed  for  severe  harsh  commitments  with  no  room  for  alternative  sentence.  its designed  ONLY  for  a direct  trip  to  federal  prison.  bop  policy  has  major  defects  within  itself.  anyone  with  aimmigration  detainer  (civil)  cannot  earn  any  time  of  their  sentence  to  parole/release  early.  no  RDAP,  no  crucial programs  to  better  themselves.  also,  some  immigration  detainers  are  unwarranted.  meaning,  a person  may  have  been deported  or  deportable,  but  not  removable  because  the  country  of  origin  has  NO  diplomatic  relationship  with  united states  of  America.  such  countries  as  Cuba,  Iran,  Vietnam,  North  Korea  etc.  the  BOP  can  engage  in  these  area  and allow  inmates  to  participate  with  crucial  programs  and  allow  the  inmates  to  benefit  with  the  time  of  their  sentence, specially  the  inmates  who  will  be  released  back  into  the  U.S.  just  like  a U.S.  citizen  would.  Not  all  immigration detainers  are  the  same.  Regardless  of  the  division  between  a person  who  just  has  no  papers  is  not  a reason  to  deprive with  earning  time  off.  its  not  a crime  for  not  being  legal.  in  addition,  BOP  has  created  the  PATTERN  score  to  see who  is  HIGH  recividsm  MEDIUM,  LOW  or  MINIMUM.  HIGH  and  Medium  do  not  earn  credits  towards  their release  date.  it  only  banks  it  for  the  future  "if"  it  happens  to  move  lower.  the  sysytem  is  designed  for  it  not  move  or even  move  att  all.  there  is  not  a method  pr  anything  an  inmates  can  do  to  foucus  only  on  that.  Every  inmates  should be  able  to  earn  time  of  thier  sentence  as  an  incentive  to  better  themselves  for  their  release  regardless.  This  all  starts from  the  courts  and  needs  to  be  addressed. From: ~^! AGUIAR, ~^!STEPHEN <    

> Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 2:08 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** AGUIAR, STEPHEN, , DEV-J-B

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: Sentencing Commission 

Inmate Work Assignment: Orderly 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

Dear United States Sentencing Commission: 

I am a prisoner serving a 360 month sentence under U.S.S.G. Sec Ɵon 4B1.1 for a non ‐violent drug conspiracy off ense 

having been convicted in 2011. I wish to propose to this Sentencing Commission the possibility of two amendments to be 

considered for the 2024 year for Career Off enders. It is my view that such an amendment is overdue and pray that this 

Commission will consider it with a provision that implies the amendment to be applicable on a case by case basis: 

***** IMPLEMENT A RETROACTIVELY ‐APPLICABLE AMENDMENT TO THE UNITED STATES SENTENCING 

GUIDELINES ALLOWING A TWO OFFENSE LEVEL DECREASE FOR ALL NON ‐VIOLENT CAREER 

OFFENDERS UNDER U.S.S.G. SECTION 4B1.1; OR 

***** IMPLEMENT A RETROACTIVELY ‐APPLICABLE AMENDMENT TO THE UNITED STATES SENTENCING 

GUIDELINES ALLOWING A TWO OFFENSE LEVEL DECREASE FOR CAREER OFFENDERS CONVICTED OF 

AND SENTENCED FOR NON ‐VIOLENT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OFFENSES UNDER U.S.S.G. 4B1.1 LIMITED 

TO ONLY THOSE PRISONERS CONVICTED OF NON ‐VIOLENT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OFFENES WHO 

WERE PREVIOUSLY PRECLUDED OF RECEIVING THE BENEFIT OF AMENDMENT 782 BECAUSE OF HIS OR 

HER CAREER OFFENDER STATUS. 

Thank you for your Ɵme and considera Ɵon concerning this ma Ʃer. 

Respec ƞully submi Ʃed, 

/s/ Stephen Aguiar 

Stephen Aguiar 

FMC Devens From: ~^! ARCHULETA, ~^!NATHAN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** ARCHULETA, NATHAN, , SHE-B-R
> Date: Wednesday, July 26, 2023 1:19:48 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  whom  it  may  concern Inmate  Work  Assignment:  rec ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I am  writing  this  in  regards  to  the  constant  lockdowns  due  to  staff  shortages  at  FCI  sheridan.  It  not  only  keeps  us  in our  cells  for  un-nessesssayr  reasons  but  out  educationalprograms  and  our  First  Step  Act  (FSA)  classes  are  being affected.There  are  hardly  any  FSA  programs  being  provided  to  us  due  to  lack  of  staff.  The  inmates  taing  G.E.D  or E.S.L  classes  are  not  being  given  a constant  school  schedules  and  are  not  getting  enough  teaching  hours  to  pass these  tests.  All  vocational  training  is  obsolete.This  is  not  fair  to  us  trying  to  further  our  education  or  reduce  our recidivism  levels  so  we  can  return  to  society  with  skills  to  succeed.  They  refuse  to  return  back  to  normal  procedures and  Recreation  hours  are  being  denied  to  us  so  our  right  to  stay  healthy  and  get  sunshine  is  reduced  they  have  done away  with  our  weekend  recreation  cuz  of  staff  shortages  yet  we  still  are  locked  down  during  the  week.  Our  visits  are still  on  covid  protocols  so  we  only  get  one  day  every  two  weeks  to  see  our  families  even  if  they  travel  long  distances to  see  us  , bathroom  and  food  is  denied  by  guards  forcing  families  with  small  children  to  have  to  leave  early  cuz they  are  hungry  or  need  the  rest  room.  There  excuse  for  doing  so  now  is  staff  shortages  or  because  they  cant  get  ahandle  on  drugs  in  the  facility  which  has  more  to  do  with  them  being  horrible  at  there  jobs  and  punishing  everyone and  there  families  for  there  incompentence.  First  FCI  sheridans  excuse  for  violating  our  rights  was  thru  covid procedures  now  the  new  excuse  is  staff  shortages  yet  they  make  no  moves  to  teach  the  classes  that  would  help reduce  prison  population  and  thats  because  they  dont  care  about  rebilitation  only  incarceration.  The  medical  medical department  is  so  understaffed  there  has  been  deaths  due  to  lack  of  staff  and  incompetence  with  there  medical department.  It  took  them  7 months  to  get  someone  to  take  blood  samples  from  people  and  this  slows  down  the process  for  programs  like  the  much  needed  M.A.T  program  thats  helping  people  with  there  drug  addictions.  IT  also makes  it  impossible  for  people  with  cancer  or  blood  deseases  like  HepC  or  other  conditions  that  need  monitoring. We  are  tired  of  not  being  given  to  access  to  the  programs  congress  has  put  forth  for  us  to  us  to  come  home  sooner and  with  the  skills  to  stay  ffree.The  administration  process  for  dealing  with  our  complaints  or  staff  wrong  doings  is  ajoke.  The  facility  doesnt  even  bother  to  respond  to  our  complaints  and  is  only  in  place  to  take  so  much  time  to process  people  give  up  and  thats  what  its  designed  to  do  with  the  BP8's  and  BP9's  being  dealt  with  by  the  same people  ur  writing  up.  Region  is  no  better  they  dont  awnser  our  BP10's  they  dont  follow  there  own  procedures  and time  limits  and  dont  respond  back  half  the  time  either  or  follow  up  on  wrong  doing  by  there  officers.  Our  families call  and  make  complaints  and  there  calls  are  ignored  or  go  un  awnsered.  When  we  address  the  problem  to  the warden  hear  or  the  captain  we  are  retaliated  against  with  our  cells  being  trashed  or  personal  property  being destroyed From: ~^! AVALOS, ~^!JOSE    

> Sent: Friday, June 30, 2023 6:10 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** AVALOS, JOSE, , LEE-E-A

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: 

Inmate Work Assignment: Comment RE:2024 Amendment 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

I am currently serving a 360 month sentence for a possession with intent to distribute 1.3 kilograms of 

methamphetamine (Actual) charge. I had one co ‐defendant, my brother, whom tried to take full responsibility for the 

drugs found in an apartment in my name. I did not live there and no witness tes Ɵfi ed against me. My brother took a plea 

and was sentenced to 168 months for the exact same conduct and in fact was also found guilty for felon in possession 

under 922(g). I on the other hand proceeded to trial that is guaranteed to me by the cons Ɵtu Ɵon but was sentenced to a

term of imprisonment more than twice my brothers. I was deemed a career off ender under a crime that is not qualifying 

under the current amendment that was passed in 2016 (Amendment 798). Although, the guidelines are changing for 

others and I'm happy for that it does people like me no good because they are not retroac Ɵve. 

One thing sƟcks with me today, was how my judge stated that she is a guideline judge and will not deviate from them. 

My guidelines were 360 ‐life. So unless in her eyes they are changed retroac Ɵvely then I will not be released any Ɵme 

soon. Please make some of the past amendments retroac Ɵve, failing to do so is crea Ɵng a disparity in sentencing that is 

no longer warranted. Thank you. From: ~^! AYELOTAN, ~^!OLADIMEJI SEUN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** AYELOTAN, OLADIMEJI, , THP-C-B
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 2:49:40 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: Inmate Companion ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Good Day, 

As an individual serving a 95 years sentence for a non-violence offense (Financial Fraud) and a first time offender, I'll suggest an application note at the very least recommending downward departure from normal guidelines similar to the safety valve in situation similar to mine. 

I will also recommend eliminating the enhancement from intended loss amount in fraud cases as its not based on fact, but rather off of subjective interpretation or "guess work." This could theoretically violate due process, because it implicate a liberty interest, i.e.. Additional prison time from enhancements, for a non existent loss which never occurred. The supreme court has held multiple times that it's not the court's job to litigate theoretical harm which "could have" or "hypothetically" could have occurred. In my case, I received a 22 level enhancement because of this issue. 

Thank you for any consideration and assistance with this matter. From: ~^! BAKER, ~^!HOWARD >   

> Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 5:21 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BAKER, HOWARD, , MEN-A-B

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: carlton w.reeves 

Inmate Work Assignment: n/a 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

ill like to send my comment and sugges Ɵon for the 2024 cycle proposed amendment dealing with the career off enders.. 

my comment: I been in the federal system for 14 years and every year the commission talk about looking into the career 

off ender guideline but nothing never happen so i really hope this will be the year that change may come dealing with the 

career off ender guidelines.. 

my sugges Ɵon: is that the sentence commission look into changing the way the career off ender guideline is use and 

worded this is what i mean.. 

Its states if a person has been convicted of a crime that is punishable with a minimum of 1 year max of 10 years of more 

in jail that case may be use to career a person. But many people have received proba Ɵon and haven't been sentence to 

any jail Ɵme or serve under a year in the county jail, yet that convic Ɵon is able to be use due to the wording of the 

career off ender guideline ‐.so maybe you can implement causes that a person received proba Ɵon can not be use to 

career a person..i think this would solve a really big problem with people being sentence as a career off ender.. I am sure 

the commission know this issue and may have looked into this but nothing has been done to be Ʃer the career off ender 

guideline dealing with this ma Ʃer. If the commission hasn't not ill like to bring it your aƩen Ɵon and if these changes are 

made can you make them retroac Ɵve.. 

Thank you for taking Ɵme to read my message: HOWARD BAKER From: ~^! BALL, ~^!WILLIAM BRINSON    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BALL, WILLIAM, , COL-A-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:34:54 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: A-1 Orderly ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** To the United States Sentencing Commission, Please consider revising the current guidelines for U.S.S.G. 2G2.2. As evidenced in the 2012 report for non-production child pornography offenders, 2G2.2 has shown to be outmoded. The computer enhancement, for example, applies to almost 100% of today's offenders. And due to the advent of increased storage, almost all offenders will cap out at over 600 images. As such, the guidelines as amended (largely by Congress) have been rendered largely irrelevant. To further this argument, and as highlighted in confirmation hearings for Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson, a preponderance of sentencing judges vary downward for first-time, non-contact child pornography offenders. Defense attorneys object to these enhancements at countless sentencing hearings, and published opinions on the matter go back as far as United States v. Dorvee, Second Circuit, in 2010 (comparing 2G2.2 to Kimbrough and crack-to-cocaine disparities). Thus, I respectfully request the Sentencing Commission, to the extent not constricted by Congress, to consider judges' decisions to downwardly depart as additional evidence for the need to revise the 2G2.2 Guidelines. Last, I respectfully request the Sentencing Commission to consider fewer restrictions on the types and classes of offenders that will, prospectively, be considered ineligible to apply USSG amendments. Despite the fact that the November 2023 amendments have yet to be published (and apart from the retroactivity issue), most prisoners understand it is a foregone conclusion that large swaths of offenders will be ineligible for this year's and future amendments. I believe such a wholesale restriction on eligibility goes against the core tenet of criminal justice reform. There are many offenders who do things repugnant to society, and who violate the trust of those they love. Yet society has said there should be no second chances for these people. But what if you were to suddenly find your loved one accused of possession of child pornography? Does everything before their arrest become a lie? Does everything after their incarceration worthless? That is the effect of the term"certain offences." It creates a system that some are more redeemable than others. Thank you for considering my requests. W. Ball From: ~^! BALLARD, ~^!JOHN MARVIN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BALLARD, JOHN, , BUT-M-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 1:19:48 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Carlton  W.  Reeves,  Chair Inmate  Work  Assignment:  ChapOffW  and  OrdMDAW ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Chairman  Reeves, Thank  you  for  giving  us  the  opportunity  to  make  comments  about  the  Sentencing  Guidelines.  I hereby  submit  my comments  and  suggestions  for  the  commission  to  consider. First  off,  since  their  inception,  the  guidelines  have  become  much  more  severe  -- progressively  increasing  in punishment  over  the  years  without  justification.  I suggest  that  the  guidelines  turn  back  the  clock  to  the  levels  in place  when  they  were  devised.  There  is  no  reason  that  they  should  have  become  more  punitive.  All  this  has  done was  fill  the  prisons  with  people  languishing  unnecessarily.  Believe  me,  a sentence  of  one  year  is  no  different  to  me than  20  years.  It  is  still  a deterrent  (at  least  to  me). I also  believe  that  the  guidelines  should  be  simplified.  All  the  enhancements  should  be  unnecessary.  Make  it  simple by  saying  if  you  commit  this  crime,  then  this  is  what  you  possibly  will  get.  Two  levels  here  and  one  level  there,  etc., really  are  irrelevant.  Make  it  based  on  the  crime  -- period. I also  suggest  that  in  the  cases  of  pedophilic  related  offenses,  that  there  should  be  court-sponsored  diversion  and alternatives-to-incarceration  (especially  in  photo  related  offenses)  available  which  focus  on  TREATMENT. Treatment  WORKS!  It  should  be  an  alternative  to  incarceration  (especially  considering  that  many  are  kept  in  acounty  jail  pretrial  for  years).  Prison  doesn't  help.  This  should  also  take  into  consideration  that  the  guidelines OVERSTATE  the  recidivism  rate  for  sex  offenders.  Please  consider  the  latest  evidence  (I  believe  it  is  an  80-year study  on  sex  offense  recidivism  done  in  Canada)  which  shows  that  recidivism  rates  for  sex  offenses  is EXTREMELY  low. I hope  that  the  future  for  this  country  is  much  more  humane  and  better  for  society.  Believe  me,  I am  for punishment,  but  the  punishment  should  fit  the  crime.  We,  as  a nation,  incarcerate  people  for  far  too  long  compared to  other  nations.  Please  consider  my  suggestions  and  make  the  decisions  which  make  things  more  in  line  with  the world. Thank  you  for  allowing  me  the  time. John  Ballard From: ~^! BAUM, ~^!TIMOTHY ADAM    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BAUM, TIMOTHY, , SEA-A-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 6:05:27 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Sentencing Comm. Chairman Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Dear Sir, Greetings!  These comments are really directed generally to all that the Sentencing Commission Does.  It was quite a disappointment as I followed the Sentencing Commissions decisions to finally do something about " Acquitted/Uncharged Conduct" as it relates to sentencing enhancements. From the outside looking in it appeared to be a game of "hot potatoes between the Sentencing Commission and the Supreme Court. Honestly, how hard is it to recognize that adding points and the corresponding time in prison to someone's sentence based upon something that person has been acquitted of, or never charged for, is a Constitutional violation.  Are you familiar with "due process" and what that entails.  When a sanctioning body uses a relatively non existent standard of proof, that violates a persons right to be sanctioned only for what they have been lawfully convicted of.  In this case, this minimum standard of proof takes away the very right to liberty that is supposed to be sacred and protected by the U.S. Constitution. The bottom line is this.  Those members of the Sentencing Commission are charged with keeping the playing field as fair as possible.  Allowing this practice to continue completely negates the purposes of your organization.  Then, after convincing the Supreme Court to hold off  taking up the pending cases that address this matter, the Sentencing Commission tables it for the year.  Here is how it appears.  The Sentencing Commission knows that this practice is wrong and Constitutionally unviable.  The Sentencing Commission knows that this practice has affected a great many cases, and therefore they do not want to invite an avalanche of paperwork that will surely flood the District/Appellate Court System. The bottom line is this.  We have a Supreme Court that is very much interested in righting many of these policies that have been birthed into a system of overzealous and politically motivated politicians.  My whole comment today revolves around one request: SENTENCING COMMISSION, STOP BEING  POLITICALLY MOTIVATED.  DO WHAT IS RIGHT AND JUST FOR A CHANGE!! Sincerely, Timothy A. Baum From: ~^! BERGER, ~^!JOSEPH PAUL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BERGER, JOSEPH, , PHL-D-S
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 2:05:42 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Current guidelines do not allow for a downward variance or departure for a history of community service or philanthropy.  I believe this is contrary to title 18 U.S.C. subsection 3553(a) which stipulates that the "history and characteristics of the defendant" should be taken into account during sentencing.  The sentencing guidelines should be updated to allow for a downward departure or variance for a history of community service. From: ~^! BEST, ~^!MICHELLE RENEE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BEST, MICHELLE, , HAF-K-A
> Date: Wednesday, July 26, 2023 1:05:51 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  USSC Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Medical ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I am  currently  serving  a 30  year  sentence  for  something  i should  not  have  been  held  liable  for.  I was  allegedly involved  in  a drug  conspiracy  and  was  charged  with  a distribution  that  caused  an  overdose  death.  The  supply  chain went  like  this  A(My  supplier)  B (me  in  SC  at  time)  - C(codefendant)  - D ( perpetrator  who  served  victim)  E(victim). So  out  of  this  supply  chain  the  only  one  who  was  indicted  on  the  bodily  injury  was  me  person  B.  I had  nothing  to  do with  it  nor  did  they  find  anything  linking  me.  The  prosecutor  said  at  sentencing  because  i was  3rd  in  supply  chain  iwas  most  culpable,  but  wouldn't  that  make  person  A more  liable  then  me  if  that  was  the  reasoning.  All  3 others  in supply  chain  did  2-4  years  i am  still  in  prion  with  a outdate  of  2044.  My  criminal  history  was  a 2 when  i got  this charge  lower  than  the  others  involved.  Prison  serves  no  purpose  but  to  recycle  govt  money  so  it  is  legal.  There  is  no work  programs  here,  the  classes  are  a joke.  I could  thrive  being  on  home  confinement  and  save  the  tax  payers  over  amillion  dollars,by  doing  so.  If  the  others  involved  are  not  a threat  to  society  there  is  no  possible  way  i am.  But  yet  iam  here  still.  The  BOP  refuses  to  send  me  to  a camp  even  though  my  recidivism  is  a minimum  as  well  as  my security  level  but  because  of  my  time  they  keep  me  here  and  do  not  follow  BOP  policy.  I think  the  commission should  focus  on  more  of  home  confinement  for  people  with  lower  criminal  history  and  lower  recidivism.  I am  48 years  old  and  have  no  plans  involving  myself  in  any  criminal  activity  when  i get  released.  Being  here  does  nothing for  anybody.  I know  my  actions  were  wrong  but  they  were  no  more  worse  than  others  involved,  actually  was  less involved  or  not  involved  at  all.  I think  the  commission  should  also  not  be  able  to  give  enhancements  for  dismissed charges,  or  able  to  give  them  if  not  found  by  a grand  jury.  I also  think  that  ghost  dope  should  not  be  allowed.  I have been  at  SFF  Hazelton  for  over  4 years  and  have  no  incident  reports  worked  continuously  and  programmed.  The  BOP is  actually  bigger  drug  dealers  then  i ever  was.  I don't  know  the  exact  statistics  but  pry  90%  of  inmates  receive medication  from  medical  and  sell  it  once  they  get  it  monthly. From: ~^! BIGELOW, ~^!GORDON    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BIGELOW, GORDON, , JES-A-B
> Date: Friday, July 14, 2023 9:19:57 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: U.S. Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: Safety ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** BAC2210-40 Hello, Referencing Priority #3, please consider removing the "use of a computer" enhancement that is attached to most Sex Offense cases.  This would help bring the guidelines more in line with the current practice of Federal District Court Judges Also, removing the enhancement for the number of pictures.  One download could easily have more than 600 pictures, especially if one video = X number of pictures. Referencing Priority #10, please research recidivism and then compare it to the 67 offenses excluded from receiving First Step Act Time Credits (FTCs).  Most of the excluded offenses have a significantly lower recidivism rate than those approved for FTCs.  Also, in it's current state, it violates the Due Process Clause of the 5th Amendment to categorically exclude those offenders from equal treatment by the justice system. Presenting a report to Congress and the Public on rehabilitation and recidivism of those incarcerated for offenses under the 67 sections relative to those incarcerated for FTC eligible offenses would provide useful data-driven information to lawmakers, actors in the state and federal legal systems and the public to know Thank you for your time. From: ~^! BOLTON, ~^!BENJAMIN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BOLTON, BENJAMIN, , MCK-D-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 10:05:19 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Carlton  Reeves Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Compound ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Pursuant  to  the  recent  posting  about  United  States  Sentencing  Commission  amendments  for  this  cycle,  this  email includes  ideations  regarding  policy  changes  that  need  to  occur.  The  scope  and  purpose  of  such  amendments  is  based on  the  judicial  philosophies  pertaining  to  our  criminal  justice  system's  goals;  which  are  deterrence,  rehabilitation, incapacitation  and  retribution.  The  difficult  to  accept  truth  by  Congress  et  al.  is  that  the  Sentencing  Reform  Act  of 1984  is  atrocious  when  it  comes  to  distributions  of  justice.  Case  in  point,  the  Sentencing  Reform  Act  of  1984  is  way too  punitive  and  outdated.  Legal  recourse,  especially  in  our  courts  and  correctional  services,  is  based  on  the evolution  of  law.  Apparently,  Congress  and  many  entities  in  the  private  sector  have  mistaken  this  or  forgotten  about it  altogether. The  following  suggested  amendments  are  general  and  specific: Amend  the  definition  of  violent  crimes.  Violent  crimes  ought  to  be  behavior  that  results  is  physical  harm  or  death. Threatening  language  is  not  inherently  violent  and  excited  utterances  without  actions  are  simply  words  that  may  hurt people's  feelings. Amend  the  United  States  Sentencing  Guidelines'  Chapter  4 and  Chapter  5.  The  career  offender  and  armed  career offender  system  is  way  too  broad  and  punitive.  The  fact  is  that  most  offenders  and  lay  people  can  be  considered  to be  career  offenders  given  the  structure  of  society.  Also,  the  use  of  the  prior  criminal  history  is  outrageous  when  it comes  to  acquiring  justice.  Using  a lousy  mathematical  scheme  to  place  a person  in  a category  suggests  that  an individual's  past  can  be  calculated  to  understand  who  they  are  at  the  time  they  were  sentenced  for  a current  offense. Additionally,  it  says  terrible  things  about  our  justice  system  when  people  finish  sentences  and  still  have  them  used against  them  in  a court  of  law  and  while  in  prison.  The  criminal  history  points  and  categories  in  Chapter  4 needs  to be  eliminated  entirely  from  the  Guidelines. Amend  the  Chapter  5 sentencing  chart.  Whoever  thought  that  a chart  could  be  better  than  Presidentially  appointed and  Senate  confirmed  judge's  discretion  is  out  of  place  when  it  comes  to  their  understanding  of  justice.  The  chart needs  to  be  eliminated  in  its  entirety  and  the  discretion  of  judges  needs  to  be  the  main  utility  when  sentencing occurs. Supervised  release  is  something  else  that  needs  to  be  restructured.  Double  sentencing  an  offender  is  double jeopardy  is  some  sense.  The  lengths  of  sentences  are  too  long  and  the  probation  officers  are  mostly  incompetent people  who  strive  to  be  law  enforcers  rather  than  social  workers  who  want  to  help  offenders  transition  into  society. Case  in  point,  the  supervised  release  system  is  an  enormous  waste  of  money  and  needs  to  be  taken  out  of  the  federal system  altogether  as  well. Mandatory  minimums  are  extremely  punitive  and  need  to  be  removed  from  the  Guidelines. 

The  Bureau  of  Prisons  currently  offers  little  to  no  programming  that  is  effective.  Most  of  the  programs  have  little incentive  to  participate  in  and  the  ones  that  do  exist  and  appear  to  be  made  for  elementary  children  or  some  disabled person  who  has  cognitive  issues.  Moreover,  the  people  who  work  in  federal  prisons  tend  to  be  inept  to  the  laws  that they  are  upholding  and  purpose  of  their  position.  Many  prisons  these  days  simply  serve  as  places  of  employment because  the  automobile  and  other  manufacturing  jobs  barely  exist.  Thus,  causing  a unnecessary  reliance  on  punitive outputs  of  justice  in  the  United  States. Residential  Reentry  Centers  need  to  give  out  more  time  for  offenders,  a minimum  of  six  months,  that  is,  and  actually employ  social  workers  who  can  achieve  reentry  goals.  Again,  these  places  appear  to  serve  as  only  places  of employment  for  the  public  at  large. Thank  you, Benjamin  J.  Bolton,  M.S. From: ~^! BRADDY, ~^!JOSEPH    

> Sent: Sunday, July 16, 2023 5:44 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BRADDY, JOSEPH, , FTD-W-C

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: U.S. Sentencing Commission 

Inmate Work Assignment: Unicor 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

I am very pleased to be able to provide public comment on the upcoming policy priori Ɵes for the amendment cycle 

ending May 1, 2024. Like last year, I feel you have a very good list of priori Ɵes and are focusing in the areas that have 

opportuni Ɵes for posi Ɵve change. 

The priority that I want to focus on and provide public comment is on priority number 5. Priority #5 is the con Ɵnued 

examina Ɵon of the career off ender guidelines. I believe this is an area that seems to be a moving target and has wide 

ranges in sentences with people that have the same crime. Furthermore, whenever there is a case that has a poten Ɵal 

posi Ɵve impact on inmates with career off ender status, they make sure the case is not retroac Ɵve. All of this creates a

very large opportunity for the sentencing commission to real in these guidelines and create consistency throughout this 

country. As you do this, I do have a request. Please make sure you make sure that "non ‐violent" criminals gets the 

breaks on the guidelines. If someone is a career off ender with violent crimes, I understand the need of protec Ɵng the 

public. However there are far too many non ‐violent "career off enders" that are su ff ering. This includes me. Thank you 

for listening and I look forward to see how this progresses. From: ~^! BRADSHAW, ~^!JOSEPH    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BRADSHAW, JOSEPH, SST-F-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 8:49:50 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: warehouse ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** To whom it may concern. Can you address "Aquitted conduct" next year.  It's unconstitutional and has been going on too long.  Please and thank you. 7/19/2023 16:54 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Betty Brady 

# Topics: 

> 3. Simplification/Structural Reform

# Comments: 

It has come to my citizen attention that "state guidelines for incarcerated individuals" received credit to their sentencing due to covid restrictions while in prison "yet" federal guidelines for federal incarcerated "did not receive" credit to their sentencing due to covid restrictions "which were just as harsh", federal and state prisoners should have equal footing in reduction of their sentencing across both prison guideline systems. Please look into this unfair covid situation and correct the situation. You are the Sentencing Guideline Commission and should be aware that all inhumane covid conditions were present in both prison atmospheres.     

> Submitted on: July 19, 2023 From: ~^! BURNS, ~^!JACOB RICHARD
> Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 4:07 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BURNS, JACOB, , GRE-A-A

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: Whom It May Concern 

Inmate Work Assignment: HVAC 1

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

I was sentenced under the "Career Off ender Guidelines" in 2018. I was a low level meth dealer that was caught with 

169.7 grams and the Judge even commented in my "Statement of Reasons" that I was not a big player and was only 

involved for a short period of Ɵme. I was "Careered" because of two very low level priors, which one of them should 

never have been able to be used to catagorize me into the Career catagory which was suppose to be used to get big Ɵme 

cartel bosses or drug lords. There are so many of people incarcerated for obscene amounts of Ɵme for small amounts of 

meth that cost literally close to nothing on the streets. 50 Grams of meth triggers a 10 year mandatory minimum 

sentence and at a street level the price of that is literally $300 to $500. Over the past 15 years something that will 

automa Ɵcally get you 10 years isn't much more than a user amount. I feel like simple drug addicts that use meth have 

been unjustly sentenced. How is it that I would have to get caught with 16,970 grams of cocaine to be in the same 

amount of trouble? If I was a mul Ɵ‐ million dollar coke dealer I'm in the same amount of trouble as if I get caught with a

couple hundred dollars worth of meth? Please look at the lives that these guidelines have destroyed due to someone 

saying "This drug is worse than this anything else" Heroin I would have to get caught with 5,000 grams to trigger the 

same minimum as the li Ʃle bit of meth that I got hit with. Please look at how full the system is of meth off enders that 

aren't a danger to society. I just want another shot at life and to have a family before it's too late. Thank you for your 

Ɵme and I hope that you understand how horribley broken the system is when it comes to meth. The "Crack Law" was 

the same as meth is and the Sentencing Commission found the error in that why not this? Thank you for your Ɵme. From: ~^! BURTON, ~^!JOHN MOSES IV    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** BURTON, JOHN, , ELK-G-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 7:34:39 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Jennifer Dukes, Senior Public Affairs Specialist Inmate Work Assignment: . ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Attn: Public Affairs...  Priority Comments For the forthcoming 2024 guideline priorities for consideration, I respectfully draw your attention to the outdated section 2G2.2.  In December 2012, the Commission proposed changes to the guidelines because of the sentence disparities.  With these long pass overdue changes, I hope the Commission may reintroduce some of these proposals and/or update it further..  including the report you offered previously (https://bit.ly/3B7XPzX) (https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/news/congressional-testimony-and-reports/sex-offense-topics/201212-federal-child-pornography-offenses/). In 2021, the Commission re-examined the above mentioned report and issued a new report entitled "Federal Sentencing of Child Pornography: non-production offenses" (2021) that reintegrated similar findings from those of nearly a decade prior.  (https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-publications/2021/20210629_Non-Production-P.pdf] {https://bit.ly/3m9O8gh}. External research examined these guideline also and made their own recommendations which includes Brent E. Newon conclusions published as "A Partial Fix of a Broken Guideline: a Proposed Amendment to Section 2G2.2 of the United States Sentencing Guidelines" 70 Case W. Rsrv L Rev 53 (2019).  This paper establishes a pathway that the Commission could be effective in making certain changes to the guidelines to be more equitable and reduce sentence disparities across the nation. With this being a difficult subject but with a lot of accreditated research including this commission, I hope it is high time to impliment changes to these guidelines...  and specifically, removing the Use of a Computer enhancement, and convert the number of images enhancement into a more reasonable storage range, such as gigabyte of material... Thank you in advance for your considerations. Respectfully John Moses Burton F.S.L. Elkton P.O. Box 10 Lisbon, OHIO  44432-0010 From: ~^! CLARK, ~^!DARRELL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** CLARK, DARRELL, , BEN-A-B
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:20:26 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: any Inmate Work Assignment: compound ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** im writting to comment on the sentencing guideline for fraud where the intended loss is calculated with the actual loss i think that the sentencing should only be calculated with what was actually taken in the crime because to intend to do something is like almost doing sometheing there is no way you can intend to take something if it was not taken , i think the system is designed unequal in this matter becasue the intended loss is and will always be higher then the actual loss and that is what will give the person the most time i was given 192 months for a fraud scheme where 300,000 was my intended loss From: ~^! CLARK, ~^!MICHAEL DENNIS    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** CLARK, MICHAEL, , ENG-E-L
> Date: Monday, July 17, 2023 7:50:11 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: USSC Comments Inmate Work Assignment: Compound ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** The exclusion of all non-terrorism and national security convictions from receiving FSA credits runs counter to the general purpose of the law.  Namely, to encourage inmates to participate in evidence-based recidivism reduction programs and activities, with a focus on giving convicts a stronger chance at avoiding subsequent prison sentences. 

The hodgepodge of enumerated offenses (gun cases, arson cases, sex offenses, etc) lacks any coherent rationale. 

Rather, it seems to be purely based on "politics of the moment," instead of verifiable statistical analysis.  For example, individuals convicted of federal arson crimes or sex-related offenses, have some of the (if not, THE) lowest recidivism rates when compared to the first 3 years after release from prison with the numerous various drug-and gun-related offenses.  The USSC can rectify this politically motivated bias that is driven primarily, as mentioned, by the "politics of the moment," by adjusting all the the non-terrorism and national security convictions that do not receive FSA credits downwards to reflect the true scope of these convictions. From: ~^! CONGRESS, ~^!CURTIS    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** CONGRESS, CURTIS, , CAA-B-B
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:20:20 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** A big issue with the sentencing guidelines is being that we are being punished for crimes that we have already been convicted for (Our Criminal history)There should be some type of correction to that. The sentencing point system doesn't help with rehabilitation. Yet, it help to give us more time than the actual offense might carry. So, my request would be to re-consider the way we are sentenced as far as the guideline/point system. Thank You From: ~^! COOK, ~^!SANDRA    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** COOK, SANDRA, , CRW-I-S
> Date: Monday, July 17, 2023 3:50:01 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Public Comment Inmate Work Assignment: Suicide Watch ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Dear USSC, I would like to suggest making the public comment forum available to inmates via a survey on TRULINCS. Most inmates do not understand the importance of their voice and the impact on their sentence. Also, most inmates do not believe that their voice will be heard. A survey would alleviate the difficult reading of the announcement. References to legal authority and code also make the reading confusing. A survey could drill down and narrow in on applicable comments as well as target the intended population demographic. In response to the USSC request for comment, the commission enumerated eleven issues (numbered 1-11). I will number my comments to correspond with the commission's numbers. #1. 3553 (a)(2) has four subparagraphs, numbered "A", "B", "C", and "D". I believe that subparagraphs "B" & "C" are accomplished when the detainment of the accused takes place and therefore can be included in solving paragraph A. When a person is detained so long that their entire livelihood, no matter how it was maintained, is annihilated, B & C naturally occur. Therefore I am going to comment on subparagraph "D".  As you know, inmates are being warehoused and the staff to inmate ration is at a critical low that educational and recreational programs is almost non existent. An alternative to this could be more correspondence studies for higher education, a college release program and a work release program. Inmates are held decades without paying into social security, are disqualified from all types of social federal funded programs, housing, etc.. because of their crime. Once they have lived in a violent, bullying, oppressive environment, it is unrealistic for them to be placed in a halfway house and "bounce" right back into society. Prison is an unhealthy environment that is conducive to making someone worse coming out then they went in. PRISON as it is NOW, is not the answer. Especially for women. Taking away childbearing years is cruel and unusual punishment, anyway you look at it. Perhaps release programs from a different section of the prison, like honor units would be better. Halfway houses are setup for failure. It's too much of a change going from one environment to another. The digital divide alone can be overwhelming. Most inmates are drugged to maintain their sanity. Unknown to the public is how many suicides are attempted and how many inmates are drugged, just to maintain some type of sanity while living in this environment. Do not let the authorities tell  you otherwise. Prison is not conducive to a normal life afterwards. #2 See #1 #3 A sentencing table and guideline range listed per enumerated offense of group of enumerated offenses #4 Clarify the meaning of "otherwise extensive" in the aggravating role of manager leader three point enhancement #5 N/A #6 N/A #7 Making the elderly early release program available with good time and FSA credits #8 This would be especially helpful #9 Relevant Conduct that was known before trial should not be used at the sentencing guidelines when the government had the chance to prove or disprove such conduct. This is a work around of the guidelines From: ~^! COOK, ~^!ZACHARY    

> Sent: Thursday, July 13, 2023 8:16 AM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** COOK, ZACHARY, , OKL-C-B

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: Charmain 

Inmate Work Assignment: N/a 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

I was sentenced to 168 months for possession of 23 grams of Meth. A Career Off ender Enhancement was placed on me 

for a possession of Marijuana (1.5 ounces) in 2015 and a Ba Ʃery 2nd in 2011. I feel that Marijuana off enses should not 

be considered a serious drug charges being that its legal in some states and used for medical in most. without this 

enhancement my guidelines would have been much less. That is my opinion. Honestly the en Ɵre career off ender should 

be done away with its horrible. Thank you. From: ~^! COON, ~^!FRANK W    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** COON, FRANK, , TRM-B-A
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 11:19:50 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Carlton W. Reeves Inmate Work Assignment: SLAVE ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Bureau of of prison continues to evade questions about abuse and sheer disregard for human dignity . Striped of right , failure of BOP to respond to medical need, confinement and treatment regarding the seriousness of condition. BOP administrative misconduct will not take disciplinary action against BOP employees. Prison guard Sevilla acted unethical and unprofessional, want other prisoner to beat me up when I would not fight him. Guards collaborating with gangs , harassing, threatening use of physical force to cause bodily injury , threat to physical safety. Misconduct and wrongful action of correctional officers has condemn me to life of chronic pain and deteriorating mental health. From: ~^! COURTNEY, ~^!ROBERT RAY    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** COURTNEY, ROBERT, , ENG-E-U
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 5:49:31 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Mr.  Carlton  Reeves,  Chair Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Unicor ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Mr.  Reeves: In  the  Commission's  effort  to  "simply  the  Guidelines"  I suggest  that  the  Commission's  new  effort  to  "reduce  by  2levels the  guideline  level  for  first  time  offenders"  be  made  simpler  by  using  the  same  criteria  as  what  The  First  Step  Act dictates  in  its  determination  of  Eligibility  for  the  accumulation  and  redemption  of  FSA  "Time  Credits." Congress  thoroughly  studied  the  eligibility  requirements  for  "Time  Credits"  before  implementing  the  "ACT."  The eligibility  does  not  permit  violent  offenders,  sex  offenders,  etc...to  receive  FSA  Time  Credits.  Now  that  the  USSC  is making  its  determination  for  2-level  reductions  for  first-time  offenders,  and  since  the  USSC's  goal  is  to  make the  Guidelines  simpler  to  use  and  understand,  I urge  the  Commission  to  adopt  the  same  eligibility  criteria  for  both programs,  the  FSA  and  the  2-Point  Reduction  for  First  Time  Offenders. Please  consider  the  confusion  our  families  encounter  when  confronted  with  two-standards  being  used  for  their Inmate loved  ones  to  receive  FSA  Time  Credits  or  to  receive  a 2-level  guideline  reduction  for  being  a first-time  offender. It  has  taken  the  Bureau  many  months  to  implement  FSA  rehabilitation  programs,  to  implement  the  FSA "Calculator",  and to  use  their  FSA-directed  PATTERN  SCORING  program. With  the  USSC  developing  and  implementing  a new  2-level  reduction  for  first-time  offenders,  it  makes  much  since for  the  USSC  to  use  the  same  guidelines  for  the  2-level  reduction  for  first-time  offeners,  as  what  Congress (Implemented) and  passed  for  usage  in  the  FSA.  Not  only  does  this  suggestion  make  it  easier  for  families  to  understand,  it  also makes it  easier  for  defense  counsel  and  the  Government  to  use  and  implement  when  calculating  a defendant's  time  that  will be  spent  in  the  Bureau. Thank  You  Very  Much  for  considering  my  idea. 7/17/2023 10:54 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Johnny Crabtree, Parent 

# Topics: 

> 11. Other Suggested Priorities

# Comments: 

A majority of the drug trafficking offenses involve prosecutors who charge low level drug addicts who are mostly just users with offenses designed to punish "King Pins". Many of these people are struggling, addicts who are most often homeless and selling small amounts of drugs to support their own habits. How could a homeless and struggling addict receive a sentence similar to those given to drug "King Pins" selling millions of dollars of contraband? Most of these defendants are people who had no assets or property of their own and yet they are deemed to be "King Pins" and punished with harsh sentences of 20, 30, 40, 50 years and even life sentences. Is this fair? My son, Jeremy Lee Crabtree, is such a person. Despite the fact that he is a first time non-violent offender and the fact that his pre-sentence report stated that he was only known to buy "user amounts", he was charged as a "King Pin" and given a sentence of twenty years. We are asking the sentence commission to correct this injustice for my son and those like him by implementing changes to lower the sentences of low-level, non-violent, first-time drug offenders. Further request that the Commission, consider home confinement for non-violent, first-time drug offenders. Jeremy Lee Crabtree is and American Veteran who loves his country. I would like to see a fair and impartial judicial system that is not rigged and that preserves the rights of defendants and victims while providing justice. I humbly request that the Commission consider promulgating reforms to eliminate this systemic corruption. I would like to thank you for your time and consideration.     

> Submitted on: July 17, 2023 From: ~^! DANNON, ~^!MAHDE
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** DANNON, MAHDE, , THA-J-A
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 1:34:52 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: REC YARD ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I ask that the U.S sentencing commission takes a careful and progressive look at chapter 3 of the U.S sentencing guideline manual, specifically the chapter 3A1.4 enhancement (Also known as the "Terrorism enhancement"), the section of the enhancement calls that if the offense was calculated or intended to promote a crime of Terrorism, 12 points should be added to the original offense level and also that the criminal history category goes to VI regardless of the offenders criminal history. I see that the enhancement is overly broad and cruel, offenders with possibly no criminal history automatically graduate to what is looked as "Career offenders" regardless of their criminal history, also the 12 points added to the offense level has been referred to as "Draconian" by multiple U.S District judges across the country. Also to note the "Intended" language of the enhancement is overly broad and vague in some ways where the Prongs of the enhancement call for a sentencing judge to establish a factual background on applying the enhancement to include what is referred to as the "mens rea" of the offense to see if the crime was in fact committed to influence or change government conduct by intimidation or coercion. The enhancement has affected a multitude of individuals across the country including myself and the matter is simply being overlooked where harsh sentences are being imposed, mostly reaching the statutory maximum of the offense. I ask that the commission take a deeper approach into the enhancement and uses their discretion to fix the miscarriage of justice afflicted by the "3A1.4" enhancement. Thank you, If further questions needed feel free to contact me, Mahde Dannon FCI Terre Haute, IN. From: ~^! DAVIS, ~^!JOSEPH HOWARD    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** DAVIS, JOSEPH, , MCK-C-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 2:06:02 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: plumbing ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** ive been waiting for years on this acqitted conduct and you all along with the courts keep making it impossoble for people such as myself to get any help. im in here on 53grms of meth and was given 22 years this isnt justice when i was found not guilty and given this much time. thank you for the help and stuff you all are doing i know your jobs are not easy but theirs people who really need a lot of help From: ~^! DELGADO, ~^!JONATHAN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** DELGADO, JONATHAN, , THP-C-B
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 10:34:29 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: U.S. Sentencing Commision Inmate Work Assignment: suicide watch companion ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** They say you can tell a lot about society by how you they treat their youth/kids. In this country , our history shows us that we have failed when it comes to the issues of our youth. We put restrictions on them and tell them their to young to make decisions to smoke cigarettes, to consent to sex, to buy and drink liquor  or to even own a credit card under their own name but when they commit a crime whether in an emotional state, through peer pressure or even due to past trauma and the history of their upbringing and family circumstances that they should know better. That if they could make those decisions then they should be treated like everyone else, like adults. 

I've been incarcerated since the age of 23. After a trial for Rico crimes, Drug conspiracy and firearm charges I was convicted and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole.  The crimes which I was convicted of were crimes I committed as a juvenile. In 2020 after an appeal , my sentence was overturned due to Miller v. Alabama and Montgomery v. Louisiana and I was resentenced to the excessive sentence of 50 years with 5 years super release. That means by the time I walk out of prison I would be in my late sixties and wont be off of supervised release until I am 70. That will also mean that I have spent two times more years incarcerated then I was free. 

I have shown through my rehabilitation and  the attempt to better myself that I am not the same person I was when I was a juvenile. I have shown that my past immaturity and poor decisions does not define the man I am today. Since being incarcerated I have jumped at opportunities to make sure I am better then I was when I first came in. On my journey I have obtained my G.E.D. , completed the Life Connections program(faith based program), Challenge program(cognitive behavioral therapy program), Non residential D.A.P.(drug and substance abuse program), Completed over 50 + ace courses form plumbing to victims impact to money management. I have been a member of the sucice watch companion cadre program for 5 years. I created an youth outreach program which I pray I can implement one day with the hope that another youth doesnt repeat the same mistakes Ive made. Im also currently in enrolled in the Blackstone paralegel course. I have demonstrated that I am more than my past mistakes and that if given a chance(one that is more releastic) I can truly make a difference in the world. 

Currently in the federal system there is no provisions for juvenile offenders. After 15 + years of cases like Miller V Alabama, Montgomery v. Louisiana, Roper v. Simmons and Graham v. Florida and contless states with protections in place for the reentry of juvenile offenders through a demenstration of rehabilitation, the ferderal system has yet to implement any such provisions that can hel aid the juvenile offender reenter society. I beleive it has been long enough and the federal system should create such a provision whether its through the parole system ir through an amendment in the Guidelines. I hope one day that the federal sytem can be more than a sytem of punishment but also a system of redemption and second chances. Please takt this into consideration. Thank you for your time and hearing my story. From: ~^! DONNELLY, ~^!CORY S    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** DONNELLY, CORY, , POL-A-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 8:50:08 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** i believe that the criminal history should be revised. We have already served our time in state prison for our crime and some have even completed their parole for whatever they have done. why should we be judged twice for it and keep us in prison again and waste tax dollars further? The sentance we would recieve without criminal history is already stiff for us. please take into account there are people stealing millions of  dollars from countless tax payers like yourself and recieve the same amount of time if not less time then someone like me who sold drugs. neither one is a victimless crime but the difference in them is the drug dealer never ment to take or hurt anyone. they were consumed in their addiction and unaware of their affect on the community. The other targeted you and your family and elderly to take what wasnt theirs. this is just one example of the unfair treatment of a drug crime compared to other types. please help us to recieve some slack somewhere in our sentancing because we desperatly need relief from extensive sentances. thank you From: ~^! DREW, ~^!ANDRE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** DREW, ANDRE, , MAR-D-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 7:50:04 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: "Chairperson Inmate Work Assignment: P.M. Rec. ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Two things about your latest notice cought my attention in particular: 1] reviewing sentencing as compared between sentencing issues as a result of a plea, and that as a result of trial.  Even you should know that there is a significant difference in the two processes: The Courts penalize individuals who dare to go to trial by giving a defendant the maximum sentence for doing so as was done in my case.  Better that this, you should consider how prosecution tips the scale in its favor by depriving a defendant of the ability to establish a defense and how they coach witnesses to insure convictions, again, as was done in my case; and the court aiding prosecutors in this effort. 2] If the Commission is serious about capping the prison population, it should consider promoting alternative programs to prison for sex offenders, as well as the amount of time sex offenders are given.  Sex offenders, today, are by far the largest population in federal prisons, and the only population who get no benefit from anything the Commission or First Step Act has thus heretofore proffered; yet they are forced to participate in programs with no significant incentives as are given to others of the inmate population.  A 'Blanket Excuse' for this discriminatory provision is 'Social Safety' as a mean to deny sex offenders 'Equal Treatment of the Laws'.  Prison officials benefit from FSA sponsored programs more than the inmate do in that they get extra pay  through the funding of each program offered to the inmates, programs that consist of inmates getting a tablet with questions to fill and that being the limit of official assistance in a program that would ordinarily last a number of weeks.  It makes no sense to have programs just for the inmates to sign up for in order to get FSA benefits, if the programs aren't really going to benefit the inmates upon their release.  This is not helping to institute healthy society or the inmates affected.  We need REAL PROGRAMS THAT ARE DESIGN FOR SUCCESS AND NOT FOR FAILURE as are the current FSA programs. 

Inmates are being place of program list so as to allow funding for a particular program.  What you should add to your agenda is looking into this. From: ~^! EDGER, ~^!JOE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** EDGER, JOE, , THP-C-B
> Date: Monday, July 10, 2023 6:49:43 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: U.S. Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: C2 Orderly ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I would like for this commission to resolve a conflict with the definition of the phrase "offense of conviction" as there is a conflict of that definition between the United States Probation Office and the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals. The U.S.P.O. relies on the definition supplied by this agency in Section 1B1.2(a) U.S.S.G. which states that offense of conviction means i.e. (that is) "the offense conduct charged in the count of the indictment or information of which the defendant was convicted". That is in my PSR. The 8th Circuit erroneously concluded that offense of conviction "encompasses more broadly the offense conduct giving rise to the conviction, and the court may refer to the entire record of the case to determine whether a firearm is cited in the offense. The 8th Circuit did not end with "offense of conviction" on that sentence, only "offense." United States v. Edger, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 40388, at 4 (8th Cir. 2019) or 924 F.3d 1011, 1014 (8th Cir. 2019). I believe that the U. S. Sentencing Commission should resolve this conflict as it will impact others in the future and changed my sentencing guideline range from 41-51 months to 360 months-Life. I ended up with 360 months because the court could not give me a longer sentence. this all resolves around the phrase "cited in the offense of conviction" in Section 2K2.1(c)(1)(B) U.S.S.G. I believe if it was not cited in the indictment or information, of which I was convicted, then it does not apply. this requires the intervention of the United States Sentencing Commission. Thank you. 7/12/2023 16:16 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Abraham Escobar 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs 3. Simplification/Structural Reform 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 7. Crime Legislation

# Comments: 

To the United States Sentencing Commission, I, Abraham Escobar, am writing to express my deep concern regarding the unfair sentencing practices and the subsequent impact on families, specifically related to prison placement by the Bureau of Prisons. I believe it is crucial to address both the issue of unjust sentencing and the challenges posed by significant distances between incarcerated individuals and their families. My father, Eduardo Castelan Prado, was recently subjected to a sentencing decision that many, including myself, perceive as unfair. The severity of the sentence imposed does not seem to adequately reflect the circumstances surrounding his case, his character, and his potential for rehabilitation. While I understand that sentencing decisions are multifaceted and complex, it is disheartening to witness the devastating consequences of what appears to be an overly punitive approach. Moreover, the situation has been exacerbated by the Bureau of Prisons' decision to place my father in a facility that is located three hours away from our family. The significant distance has made it incredibly challenging for us to maintain regular contact and provide the support he needs during his time in prison. The long travel times and associated financial and logistical burdens have placed a tremendous strain on our family. Studies consistently highlight the vital role of strong family connections in an individual's successful reentry into society. Regular contact with loved ones and the provision of support significantly contribute to reduced recidivism rates and positive behavior changes. Unfortunately, when incarcerated individuals are placed far away from their families, these 7/12/2023 16:16 PM 

essential connections are severely hindered. I, therefore, urge the United States Sentencing Commission to address the issue of unfair sentencing practices and prioritize family proximity in the Bureau of Prisons' placement decisions. While I recognize the importance of maintaining security and utilizing available resources efficiently, it is crucial to consider the impact on families when determining prison placement. Placing incarcerated individuals closer to their families would enable more frequent visitation, enhance family support, and facilitate successful rehabilitation and reintegration into society. In light of these concerns, I recommend that the Bureau of Prisons establish policies and procedures that take into account the proximity of families during prison placement decisions. By doing so, the Bureau can help alleviate the negative consequences of long-distance placements and ensure that families can play an active role in their loved ones' rehabilitation journey. This approach aligns with the principles of fairness, justice, and the goal of fostering successful reentry into society. Thank you for your attention to this matter. I trust that the United States Sentencing Commission will thoroughly evaluate the impact of unfair sentencing practices and prioritize family proximity in Bureau of Prisons' placement decisions. It is my hope that these efforts will contribute to a more equitable and compassionate criminal justice system. Sincerely, Abraham Escobar     

> Submitted on: July 12, 2023 From: ~^! FABRICANT, ~^!DANNY JOSEPH
> Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 6:02 PM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** FABRICANT, DANNY, , VVM-D-L

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the organiza Ɵon. DO NOT click links or open aƩachments unless you 

recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

To: Public Comments 

Inmate Work Assignment: Med Unass 

***ATTENTION*** 

Replies to this message will not be delivered. 

***Inmate Message Below*** 

Re: Your request for public Comments about your current and future Priori Ɵes: 

As to Item 5(B) and (C), Career Off ender de fi ni Ɵons. 

The current de fi ni Ɵon of "serious drug off ence" should be changed from the current "punishable by more than one 

year" to the new de fi ni Ɵon in 21 U.S.C. sec Ɵon 841(b)(1)(a) and (b) enacted by the First Step Act of 2018; 

" .. punishable by ten years or more .. "

" .. must have served more than one year .. " and 

" .. must have occurred within 15 years .. "

If you're serious about reducing prison popula Ɵons, this change should be made fully RETROACTIVE. 

Another WAY OVERDUE change/amendment would be another RETROACTIVE two ‐level drop in the Drug Weight Chart, 

like the fully retroac Ɵve Amendment 782. 

Another sugges Ɵon that the Commission should make to Congress would be to RETROACTIVELY change the current 

weights of methamphetamine triggering mandatory minimum sentences from the current 5 and 50 grams to what crack 

was changed to in 2010 (and fi nally made retroac Ɵve by the First Step Act of 2018): 28 and 280 grams. From: ~^! FAHS, ~^!ULYSSA MARIE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** FAHS, ULYSSA, , ALI-A-B
> Date: Thursday, July 13, 2023 6:19:29 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: UNICOR ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Hello. I'm writing you today on behalf of the public addressing the Proposed priorities for Amendment Cycle. First the public comment period needs to be open for 2 months not just one, due to time for public awareness and weather/mail processing time. 

Our answer is :YES to all proposed priorities#1,#2,#3,#4,#5(A)(B)(C),#6,#7,#8,#9<310(A)(B)(C)(D)(E),#11; and the Public petitions for the following Amendments: 1. Home Confinement, Ankle Monitor, or alternatives-to-incarceration programs for first time offenders, low recedivism level inmates, and minimum recidivism level inmates. 2.All mandatory minimums cut ih half. 3.Youthful offenders serve no more than 3 years. Capped at 3 year sentence of incarceration, also recieve programs with therapy treatment and help recieve housing in society away from abuse. 4.All amendments retroactivity, effective immediatly for both inmates already incarcerated in the prison system and new inmates to be sentenced. Reasons: The public sees an extreme need to reduce costs of incarceration and the mass incarceration causing overcapacity of prisons. On proposed priorities #2 and #3: We petition for home conefinement, ankle monitor, or alternatives-to-incarceration programs for first time offenders, low recedivism level inmates, and minimum recedivism level inmates. This will drastically reduce costs of incarceration and overcapacity of prisons. Thus solving many National issues. As of May 27,2023 B.O.P. has placed 13,204 people into Home conefinement under CARES act. As of May 1,2023 only 22 people of the 13,204 re-offended. That's a very clear answer, it is an effective tool that has proven to have worked over the past 2 years since the enactment of the CARES act. The average housing cost of a single inmate per year is $50,000. That is far too much, especially with the nations failing economy verses the average home confinement cost of a single inmate per year is only $5,000 per year. Switching to home confinement for first time offenders, low recedivism level inmates, and minimum recedivism level inmates will save the nation millions possible bollions of dollars. The home confinement inmates will be able to work jobs to support themselves and pay taxes. They will be contributing to helping our nation and being productive members of society. Too much money is poured into the prison system causing mass incarceration because the officials see more prisoners as more money in their pockets (Greed). How do we fix it? By placing more inmates on home confinement, anabling them to make amends by paying taxes, community service, working a job, and recieving the much needed therapy/reform proggrams through re-entry services offered for recently released convicted felons helping them further lower their risk of recidivating. Many prisons are falling apart. The answer is not fixing them all but putting the money towards hame confinement. That will fix the problem foever, prisons will always have to be repaired. Cut our losses now, just put first time offenders, low and minimum recidivism inamtes on home confinement. Then condense the prisons and fix those. 

Also, allowing high and medium recedivism levels available space to programming. A more effective plan for cost and national crisis. We petition for all mandatory minimums be cut in half for already convicted inmates and future inmates. Do to judes/officials often seeing more prisoners serving more time as more money in their pockets(bonuses,job security,pay offs by wardens/officials with stock in prisons, and their own stock in prisons). Judges often give the maximum and over the guidelines to imates when not needed. This is not acceptable. To the public it points to the end times, whre there will be buying and selling lives. On proposed priority#6. We petition for youthful offenders to be realeased on home confinement or ankle monitor, and their sentences reduced to no more than 3 years. We need to change before it's too late From: ~^! FELICIANO, ~^!RUBEN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** FELICIANO, RUBEN, , COM-A-A
> Date: Sunday, July 9, 2023 3:05:59 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: ATTN:TO ALL THE POWERS OF THE COURTS!!!!!! Inmate Work Assignment: COMMISSARY STOCK CLERK ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I have been in the custody of the FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS,SINCE 1999  and has maintained i clear record as to my conduct,education,no violence,mentoring others within the prison system and more importantly leading many inmates to become more productive within their lives within these facilities so when they get a second chance or in fact finish their sentence they will be role models within their communities. I have a life sentence and i have done nothing but greatness within my time.I have seeked in the will towards my rehabilitation and stand on the rule of law.I have changed my life within all the areas where i was week in.I love my Country and America has not failed me but i have in fact failed it.I stand on reality and made all of the proper choice within my life in prison and seeked all of the treatment that i needed within my dysfunctional state of mind.I plead to you that men can change no matter what the circumstances could ever be and i was told that i was a drug abuser,a murderer,a menace to society,a monster a violent person who is a risk towards human life! well time only tells what a person is because they have only known me within that time and its was for a few weeks but here i stand over 25 years latter and i have a better record while in prison that i had within society because i had no help,no programs to seek,my mental state from a youth who was in the streets since 16 years old all by myself.I don't agree that's the case of my down fall in life and i had made some very wrong choices when it comes to friends and the direction my life will face.I understand the word ownership and accountabilities and i took them and started looking in the reflection of myself as to where i start (CHANGE)i plead to this U.S. SENTENCEING COMMISSION that i know what i will do if given that second chance to be a proud AMERICAN and a respected member of society who wishes to help our falling youth within the hands of gangs and guns.I am a MENTOR here at FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL COMPLEX,COLEMAN MEDIUM IN FLORIDA! in the A1-SKILLS PROGRAM UNIT! its a modified therapeutic community where low functioning inmates who are mentaly retarted and other illnesses.I help them rise within the tools learned here and this programs base is in WASHINGTON DC,i am a man who has been healed from all the traumas of my childhood years!!! i stand for my flag! the red,the white and the blue!!! i also am a proud member of the mental health companion program here as well,doing trainings and suicide watches in helping others by saving lives.I have been a peace maker within the system to the point of keeping from staff and inmates from being hurt within gang wars in our prison systems!!!!! i am no monster!!! time will only tell and let the records reflect as to all my accomplishments.I see men given these chances and come back to prison because they do not see the beauty within it.I am not a (RISK-FACTOR) i am a changed man.I ask that you all see that we have many men in these prisons with (LIFE) based on he said and she said,cases.I pray that the powers that be will remember men like me!!!! i will do nothing more but greatness nor will i ever do any harm to no one from my past life no matter the circumstances that got me here in the first place,i thank you and my the grace of this U.S. SENTENCING COMMISSION i plead for lifers!!!!!!! thank you and (GOD-BLESS-REHABILITATED-AMERICANS) AMEN! From: ~^! FOSTER, ~^!JASON RAY    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** FOSTER, JASON, , BIG-S-C
> Date: Saturday, July 1, 2023 10:19:32 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  To  whom  it  may  concern, Inmate  Work  Assignment:  GM5/Carpentry ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I am  writing  in  regards  to  the  reduction  of  my  sentence  & possible  early  release. As  of  June  21,  2023  I have  been  incarcerated  (7)  seven  of  my  (10)  ten  year  sentence  (with  (4)  four  here  at  FCI  BIG SPRING- as  of  Sept.  2019)  I have  been  incarcerated  during  the  COVID  epidemic,  and  the  great  freeze  of  2021  here in  Northwest  Texas,  in  that  year  we  lost  our  Chapel  and  lower-rec  due  to  a busted  water  pipe  and  it  was  condemned due  to  black  mold.  Then  in  2022  the  Dinning  Hall  was  condemned  due  to  a water  leak  that  caused  a sink  hole  to formed  under  it. I am  still  being  charged  a 30%  mark-up  on  my  commissary  purchases  that  have  also  gone  up  due  to  inflation  even though  we  have  no  lower  rec  and  no  longer  have  a movie  program  or  late-night  tv  time. All  this  on  top  of  being  in  a facility  that  is  over-crowded  and  in  major  disrepair.  The  RO  water  doesn't  work  most  of the  time,  bathroom  has  mold  & urinals  overflow,  AC  doesn't  work,  fire  extinguishers  are  locked  & inaccessible  and due  to  the  dinning  hall  being  closed  we  are  having  to  stand  to  eat  or  sit  on  the  floor,  or  eat  on  our  bed  (I  am  50  yrs old  & have  a top  bunk). It  would  be  nice  if  this  place  were  closed  and  I was  transferred  to  a facility  that  I had  more  opportunity  to  take  VT classes  or  work  in  UNICOR  but  this  place  cant  keep  staff  because  it  is  managed  by  the  incompetent  or  ignorant  or visa  versa. I would  be  better  off  if  I could  obtain  early  release  so  I can  find  a real  job  and  be  better  able  to  return  to  society. Something  needs  to  happen  to  fix  this  place  & also  the  system  in  general. From: Jon Frey    

> To: Public Affairs
> Subject: [External] U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) Comments
> Date: Friday, July 28, 2023 12:39:01 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

I respectfully submit the following comments to the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) on the proposed priorities for the May 1, 2024 amendment cycle. 

1.  The following aspects of the BOP are not effective in meeting the purposes of sentencing as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2) and need to be addressed by Congress: The prevalence of racial discrimination and segregation in BOP facilities The prevalence of criminal enterprises within BOP facilities The proliferation of contraband and substance abuse The inadequacies of medical and lack of dental care The lack of resources and direction for inmates' re-entry preparation Housing units are run down 

I request the USSC to recommend the following remedies to Congress: Re-brand FCI Low facilities as rehabilitation institutes Replace the word "inmate" with "resident" in BOP literature and material pertaining to defendants in custody Rebalance prison staff with more psychologists, educators, case workers, and life counselors in place of traditional "corrections officers" Expand offerings of 12-step programs Provide means for residents to have access to distance learning academic programs including graduate and post-graduate programs. Provide mandatory classes on the American system of law Host job fairs twice a year at all BOP camp and low facilities Require participation in programs focused on racism, segregation and discrimination Develop new policies that forbid racism, segregation and discrimination in BOP facilities Employ motivational speakers such as crime victims and ex-felons to speak about the impact of crime Adopt a program structure modeled on a college-prepatory system with rigid structure for all residents to promote education, rehabilitation, fitness and teambuilding activities 

2. I request the USSC to recommend the expansion of court-sponsored diversion and alternative to prison programs to include non-production child pornography offenses. This recommendation is supported by a 2014 study from the University of Massachusetts Law Review entitled "The case for extending pretrial diversion to include possession of child pornography". There are compelling reasons to rehabilitate these offenders outside of prison. According to a 2022 study by the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, these offenders have a high rate of success and the lowest rate of recidivism. 

3. I recommend to the USSC to fully implement Executive Order 14074 which states that "no individual should serve an excessive prison sentence". Many prison sentences are excessive and provide no benefit to the community. According to 2012 statistics, it cost $79.16/day to house a 

defendant compared to $9.17/day for that same person to be supervised by U.S. Probation. Tremendous cost savings can be achieved through rational sentencing standards and a greater use of community supervision for non-violent/non-contact offenders. 

4. I recommend the following items for integration into the Commission's discussions for the May 1, 2024 amendment cycle: a. End the practice of incarceration for technical violations of supervised release. Amend statutes such as 34 USC 20913(e) and 18 USC 2422 for registry requirements and replace mandatory prison terms with summary offenses similar to 18 USC 402.9 Contempt of Court constituting a prison term of not more than 6 months and a fine paid to the U.S. government. 

b. Amend the sentencing guidelines to allow downward variances for sex offense defendants with diminished capacity and qualify as an aberrant behavior under USSG 5K2.13 and 5K2.20 which were removed for sex offenders under the PROTECT Act. Many judges are already varying downward to get around the PROTECT Act prohibitions. Removing the statutory prohibition restores a judge's ability to sentence a defendant accordingly. 

c. Amend 18 USC 3585(b)(2) to award credit for time served under pretrial home confinement where conditions are equal to the terms of home confinement during an inmate's last 6 months of sentence under the Second Chance Act. 

Respectfully submitted, From: ~^! GAFFNEY, ~^!MAXWELL JOSEPH    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GAFFNEY, MAXWELL, , BIG-R-B
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2023 9:06:15 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Inmate ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Dear  U.S.S.C, 

I helped  one  of  my  best  friends  buy  $20  worth  of  heroin  and  unfortunately  he  overdosed  and  died.  My  judge  was unable  to  sentence  me  under  20  years  due  to  it  being  my  mandatory  minimum  sentence.  I have  never  been  a violent person  or  hurt  anyone  but  my  crime  is  classified  as  violent  and  I am  not  eligible  for  FSA  or  Residential  Drug Program  incentives.  My  severity  in  the  BOP  classification  system  is  Greatest  which  means  I am  unable  to  reach minimum  custody.  I made  a huge  mistake  over  6 years  ago  and  not  only  I,  but  my  family  is  suffering  every  single day  because  of  it.  It  baffles  me  that  drug  kingpins  convicted  of  selling  hundreds  of  kilos  of  heroin  get  half  the sentence  length  that  I received.  Our  current  system  stipulates  that  even  though  I was  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  drug totem  pole,  that  I should  receive  the  maximum  sentence  length  because  I was  the  last  person  to  distribute  the  drugs to  the  deceased.  But  mid  and  high  level  drug  dealers  that  distributed  the  drugs  to  me  go  unpunished  to  say  the  very least. 

In  my  opinion  it  would  make  more  sense  when  sentencing  an  individual  under  a resulting  in  death  enhancement  to include  the  amount  of  drugs  sold  into  the  sentencing  guidelines.  It  is  a mitigating  factor  in  my  opinion  but  currently it  doesn't  matter  if  you  sold  1 gram  or  1000  kilos.  The  sentencing  guidelines  are  the  same  which  is  a mandatory minimum  of  20  years  in  prison.  I'm  no  expert  but  it  seems  the  current  sentencing  guidelines  are  a bit  tedious.  Lets fix  this  before  it's  too  late. 

Thank  you  for  your  time.  It  means  a lot  to  myself  and  my  family. 

Sincerely, 

Maxwell  Gaffney From: ~^! GARCIA, ~^!BREANNA    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GARCIA, BREANNA, , ALI-B-D
> Date: Sunday, July 16, 2023 8:05:23 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Commissary ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I am  writing  in  regards  to  the  upcoming  amendment  cycle.  I am  in  the  penal  system  so  I am  able  to  tell  you  from experience  what  it  is  like  on  the  daily  for  an  inmate. Rehabilitation/Class  availability/Staffing: From  the  very  first  day  we  walk  into  the  gate,  rehabilitation  is  supposed  to  have  started  for  reentry  back  into  the community.  From  my  experience  many  classes  are  offered  on  the  FSA  guide  and  it  may  even  say  the  class  is  offered in  the  prison  I am  at,  however  the  classes  hardly  appear.  They  are  so  under  staffed  where  I am  at  that  there  is  atremendously  long  wait  list  to  even  get  into  a very  much  needed  class  like  drug  education  or  NRDAP.  Sure,  I am now  getting  programming  credit  while  waiting  to  get  into  the  class  but  I need  to  be  learning  the  tools  to  actually rehabilitate  and  cope  with  everyday  life  while  making  better  choices  and  rebuilding  a better  Me  for  my  family, daughter,  and  a better  Me  for  society.  I have  experienced  that  when  staff  doesn't  show  up  to  work  we  are  locked down  or  confined  to  our  units  because  they  don't  have  enough  people  available  to  work  the  job.  How  about  bringing in  the  national  guard  to  fill  these  positions  so  people  are  able  to  program  and  rehabilitate  and  by  bringing  the national  guard  I could  have  more  classes  offered  to  me  to  rehabilitate  so  I do  not  reoffend. DrugTreatment: Rdap  is  offered  48  months  to  the  door.  This  means  for  the  first  2/3rds  of  my  sentence  i am  receiving  no  daily  or even  weekly  drug  treatment.  This  makes  absolutely  no  sense.  I need  help  and  even  though  I am  off  the  street,  I still have  a lot  of  access  to  drugs  here,  if  i were  to  choose  to  make  those  bad  decisions.  I need  the  tools  right  now  to prepare  myself  for  the  world  inside  and  out  to  learn  how  to  cope  with  out  drugs.  Drug  sentences  tend  to  be  longer sentences  than  others  in  federal  prison  and  therefore  there  are  people  struggling  10,  15,  20,  years  before  they  can even  get  into  a detailed  drug  program  to  teach  them  to  be  better  people.  I need  to  be  able  to  start  drug  treatment  right away  .MAT  Program They  are  offering  synthetic  Herion  now  in  the  prison  systems.  This  is  given  to  someone  that  comes  out  of  county jail,  that  has  been  clean  from  herion  and  just  because  they  have  an  opiate  addiction  on  the  streets  they  now  are  given it  in  prison  to  cope  or  from  becoming  sick  without  it  even  though  they  have  been  with  out  it  for  months  and  months . But  yet  again,  I would  like  to  be  be  able  to  take  a treatment  class  for  meth  and  i have  to  wait  8years  to  the  door? Past  charges Our  past  charges  are  put  into  a category  called  custody  points.  The  higher  the  custody  points  the  longer  my  prison stay  is.  If  I have  already  served  the  time  in  state  as  it  was  a state  charge,  why  am  I having  to  pay  for  it  again  in  my federal  bid? District  VS.  District  in  sentencing 

One  district  may  say  one  thing  is  allowed  where  the  very  next  district  says  something  different,  then  that  has  to  be disputed  in  court  or  taken  to  a higher  level  in  the  supreme  courts.  That  is  like  saying  one  person  can  drive  through  aredlight  with  no  reprocautions  and  another  person  gets  the  death  penalty  for  the  offense.  This  shouldn't  be!  it  should be  the  same  penalty  straight  across,  thus  saving  time  and  money  in  the  courts  .From: ~^! GARDNER, ~^!ADAM FRANCIS    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GARDNER, ADAM, , FLP-D-A
> Date: Monday, July 3, 2023 11:49:59 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To: Inmate  Work  Assignment:  cp  pm ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** please  consider  the  following: 1,  the  meth  guidelines  are  absurd.  it  doesnt  reflect  the  reality  of  a narco-state  on  our  southern  border.  the  guidelines should  be  more  in  line  with  marijuana  due  to  the  extremely  cheap  cost  of  the  drug  on  the  streets.  i was  given  89 months  for  $250  worth  of  meth.  before  i was  indicted,  the  state  of  california  offered  me  6-months  for  the  same arrest.  street  prices  were  $10  a gram  for  90%+  pure  meth  when  i was  last  out  5 years  ago.  ounces  were  $100.  you should  never  be  looking  at  a 10yr  mandatory  minimum  for  $200  worth  of  dope,  no  matter  how  pure  it  is. 2,  the  career  offender  guidelines  are  all  wrong,  specifically  prior  controlled  substance  offenses  should  not  count, only  violent  crimes.  there  should  NEVER  be  a scenario  where  non-violent  drug  offenders  are  facing  life  sentences (or  even  15-20  yrs).  addiction  is  hard  enough  on  the  family  of  the  addict,  unless  your  EL  CHAPO,  no  drug  crime should  ever  result  in  a sentence  longer  then  5-10yrs.  a decade  is  an  awful  long  time  for  a mistake  committed  by  adrug  addled  brain,  especially  where  there  is  no  violence  at  all.  most  of  the  so-called  dealers  i see  in  the  feds  were just  addicts  playing  the  role  of  middle  man  to  feed  their  habit.  were  talking  grams  and  ounces,  not  pounds  and  kilos-yet  time  after  time  i see  these  same  people  with  10-20+  year  sentences  and  its  destroying  poor  families most  of  us  do  drugs  to  make  us  feel  better,  to  escape  the  misery  of  poverty  and  crime.  this  needs  to  be  treated  as  the public  health  crises  it  is,  not  as  a criminal  issue.  accross  the  board,  all  drugs  should  be  de-criminalized  in  amounts  of 1 oz  or  less.  also  there  should  be  a mechanism  that  allows  judges  to  suspend  a sentence  and  let  career  offenders  go to  rehab  instead  of  prison.  despite  my  addiction  i was  working  full-time  and  going  to  college  when  i was  arrested  for meth.  IF  the  judge  could  have  suspended  my  sentence  and  allowed  me  to  complete  an  intensive  1-2yr  drug  rehab,  in all  likelyhood  i would  be  out  in  the  community  right  now  as  a college  graduate,  employed  and  with  my  family. instead  ive  now  missed  my  sons  entire  childhood  and  despite  my  attempts  i havent  been  able  to  take  a single  college class  towards  finishing  my  degree,  i cant  affoed  the  cost  of  the  correspondance  courses  and  thats  all  thats  available to  me  at  this  time. so  in  reality,  im  going  to  hit  the  streets  in  worse  shape  than  when  i left.  so  much  for  rehabilitation From: ~^! GONZALEZ, ~^!MICHAEL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GONZALEZ, MICHAEL, , ALM-C-B
> Date: Wednesday, July 26, 2023 6:19:56 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  United  States  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  UNICOR/FS ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Dear  USSC: I thank  you  for  your  time,  and  patience  in  reviewing  this  brief  email.  Changes  to  retroactivity  will  provide  fairer sentences  that  are  currently  being  given  by  the  Courts.  In  fact,  most  mandatory  minimums  and  lenghtier  sentences for  certain  crimes  opens  the  door  for  sentence  manipulation  (shaded  in  forms  of  entrapment)  that  the  prosecutors  are often  employing  to  give  trigger  more  time.  The  problem  in  the  FBOP  is  that  they  are  NOT  complying  with  anything. The  FBOP  institutions,  as  this  one  (Allenwood  FCI)  has  many  flaws-- starting  with  the  Medical  Department  who tells  inmates  that  they  are  ok,  just  buy  it  from  commissary  or  sleep  it  off.  Many  times  inmates  with  medical complications  go  to  sick  call  and  staff  just  sends  inmates  back  to  the  unit  (sleep/rest  and  buy  from  commissary). Medical  Department  refuses  often  to  continue  with  medications  that  certain  inmates  were  on  for  many  years-- this happen  to  me.  Another  example  is  that  they  often  refuse  to  refer  an  inmate  to  specialist  and  psychiatrist  and  P.A's act  as  Doctors  prescribe  and  analyze  a patients  issues  via  google  or  a FBOP  clinical  site  for  them  ( this  I know  for  afact  because  this  happen  to  me,  my  P.A  saids  I have  to  check  the  site  for  this  or  for  that-- I cant  help  you).  if  anyone reports  any  symptoms  of  COVID-19  they  say  its  just  a cold  right,  you  dont  want  to  be  lock  down?  Inmates  have reported  certain  issues  and  they  said  "they  are  just  faking  it,  he  will  be  ok". Dental  delays  are  irrational,  in  this  institution  they  are  doing  routine  care  for  2017  patients,  they  are  not  treating caries  -- only  pulling  teeth,  since  they  lack  staff. Education  is  not  running  all  the  programs  that  should  be  running  because  they  lack  staff,  and  dont  have  training from  Central.  Many  of  the  FSA  programs  and/or  others  are  not  running.  Units  A/C's  are  often  down,  sink  water  is often  brown,  water  fountains  dont  work,  toilet  paper  is  scarce. Laundry,  issues  a small  bottle  of  body  wash  that  only  lasts  1-2  days,  SHU  razors  (small)  are  the  only  thing  they  gave you. Food  Service,  is  always  without  the  menu  supplies  because  of  shortages  in  warehouse.  Portions  are  very  small because  they  dont  have  enough  food  being  cook  for  the  entire  population. Commissary  prices  are  so  high  it  beats  Target/Walmart. Psychology  programs  have  a long  list  and  they  dont  see  patients  as  often  as  they  supposed  to.  Infact,  when  I asked for  my  records  I seen  staff  wrote  that  I didnt  request  to  be  seen  and  this  was  not  true,  in  another  facility  I was  on weekly  treatment  here  it  all  changed.  They  often  tell  you  "what  you  want?  we  cant  do  nothing  for  you!"--prettymuch  they  are  often  discouraging  inmates  from  talking  to  them. 

Lock  downs  are  always  in  effect  for  no  reason. Unit  teams,  tell  you  that  they  dont  know  anything  and  that  Central  havent  trained  them  on  FSA.  Also,  that  you  cant transfer  to  lower  custody  facilities  because  of  management  variables.  In  addition,  to  not  bother  them  and  they  often send  you  in  a ping  pong  game  for  most  of  the  things  and  dont  file  administrative  remedies  because  you  will  become a target  or  simply  they  will  recommend  less  RRC/half  way  house  and/or  request  management  variables  to  keep  you in  this  facility.  Counselors  dont  provide  any  information  of  value,  same  with  case  managers  whom  are  more interested  on  other  things  that  their  work. Staff  are  always  using  force  on  inmates  and  creating  false  incidents  to  justify  their  use  of  force.  Majority  of  the bathrooms  have  low  or  no  toilet  papers,  and/or  soap.  There  are  barely  jobs  for  inmates,  see  staff  labels  inmates  to certain  jobs;  However,  none  of  those  inmates  actually  work  for  those  areas  e.g.  it  can  be  300  workers  for  food service  but  only  about  100  work  there. The  conditions  in  this  intitution  makes  it  hard  to  do  time.  There  are  no  efforts  to  assist  inmates  rehabilitate  and  do positive  activities.  Thank  you  for  your  time. From: ~^! GRIFFITH, ~^!VIRGIL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GRIFFITH, VIRGIL, , ALF-B-B
> Date: Sunday, July 16, 2023 5:05:21 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: USSC Inmate Work Assignment: USSC ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Dear USSC, In Residential Reentry Center / Halfway House (HH) hearings at our facility, LSCI Allenwood Low, it is difficult to get more than scraps of HH time.  For example, when an inmate qualifies for up to 12 months of half way house, it is common, even *typical*, for the inmate to receive ~3 months.  When asked about the discrepancy, the standard reply is, "The USSC has not issued a recommendation on Halfway House time, so we are being conservative." I request that the USSC issue a formal recommendation on Halfway House time.  And if that means inmates get more HH time, more Halfway Houses get built, or that some HH times are put into Home Confinement to make space for new arrivals, so be it. Thank you for your time, Virgil Griffith From: ~^! GUNDERSEN, ~^!JEFFERY SCOTT    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** GUNDERSEN, JEFFERY, , OXF-D-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 10:20:35 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  Sentencimg  Comm. Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Labor  a.m. ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** There  is  no  oversight  on  the  FBOP  when  it  comes  to  FSA  Credit  assessment,  nor  will  FCI  Oxford  Reassess  FSA Credit  points  when  disagreements  occur  within  FSA  Scoring  and  Calculation  Assessments  are  incorrect  or  changed when  inmate  completes  his  FSA  Classes  and  doesn't  receive  credit  for  classes  he  completed.  Often  goes  unchecked and  unsupervised  to  where  inmates  don't  receive  proper  and  fair  consideration  in  a timely  manner  for  time  off because  of  lack  of  any  authority  or  oversight  in  making  sure  Unit  Team  actively  updating  FSA  Assesment  Scoring. Inmates  are  just  told  that  there  is  a shortage  on  FCI  Oxford  Staff  members  and  no  fault  of  their  own,  which  probably correct  but  unacceptable.  There  needs  to  be  more  staff  and  more  oversight  on  how  inmates  FSA  Assessment  Scoring and  update  inmate's  programming.  Lastly,  FCI  Oxford  is  not  implying  15  to  10  month  of  inmate's  sentences  either. Inmate's  often  have  to  file  28  USC  2241  to  make  the  Warden  Keyes  comply  with  FSA  Credits  towards  inmate sentences. From: ~^! HAAS, ~^!DALTON    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HAAS, DALTON, , GIL-Q-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:35:11 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: U.S. Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** To whom it may concern, I have a few changes that should be made to the sentencing guidelines. 1. Because of the amount of money that was fraudulently taken in my case, I was ineligible for another 3 point deduction in the federal sentencing guidelines and because of the amount of money, that was 20,000 instead of 16,000 I was 1 point above only receiving 0-4 months of prison time. The amounts "lost" are extremely long ranged, and need to be updated. Basically, if you take more money, you are rewarded with a another 3 point deduction for "taking responsibility." 2. In the sentencing guidelines, the point structure needs to be updated tremendously for prior convictions, whether its local, state, or federal. If a plea agreement is met at the state level for a 1,000 dollar fraudulant scheme, and I receive 1 year probation, I am automatically in a totally different zone on the guidelines for 1,000 dollars. This makes zero sense. 3. If restitution is paid in full before sentencing or within so many days of being sentenced, there should be a major point reduction especially if there was no real harm to the victims life, or if the victim was the government. (covid relief) 4. A judge should not be able to sentence a defendant on pending cases outside of the federal court, or cases that have nothing to do with the current one the defendant is being sentenced on. I was sentenced on the long range of the guidelines because I was on a diverson plea where if I fixed the problems, paid restitution, and didn`t break the law, then the case was dropped. However, I was sentenced to 10 months because of other "pending" cases (that were on diversion) and not because of the federal crime itself. 5. If a defendant has no history of drug activity, no history of violence, and especially if this is the defendants first federal crime, the defendant should be first be given the opportunity of home confinement or house arrest if the defendant has a stable home and address. I have 10 months and was shipped all over the country before arriving to my camp. It not only is a waste of time and resource but does not help the defendant get back on his or her feet. From home confinement, work release, or community confinement can be looked at . 6. If the amount of a non violent crime is at a certain amount, and even if it is paid back, there should be no prison time at all and just allow the defendant to be on probation. If the person is a bad person, they will break the law again, and then you can put them away in prison or jail. 7. The court should not be allowed to bring in people that have nothing to do with the case, is not a government 

witness, and is not a victim, to come and speak against the defendant just because they don`t like him or her, or don`t agree with them. Just a few thoughts, thank you for taking the time to read them. Sincerely, Dalton Haas 7/4/2023 0:38 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Jessica Hagar 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 10. Research Topics

# Comments: 

1. BOP meeting the purpose of sentencing: After the court hands down a sentence, it is the responsibility of the BOP to have practices, policies, and procedures in place to meet the purpose of the sentence. 18 U.S.C. 3553(a)(2) states the sentence needs to "...to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense..." There need to be more policies in place for those who are incarcerated to be treated respectfully by correctional officers. Current conditions only create a divisive, distrustful environment for both parties. It is clear the purpose of incarceration in this country is punishment only, not rehabilitation, as it is so plainly stated in the guidelines (and above). The BOP should also have, in addition to the "educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment" offered, actual drug treatment/therapy programs NOT prioritized for individuals closest to their out date. That very much sends the message that the BOP doesn't care drugs are being done in prison, and they don't care about the people suffering from addiction themselves (likely why they are in prison to begin with). It sends the message that drugs are okay in prison, but God forbid inmates be strung out when they leave-can't have that statistic- how bad would that look on the BOP. Get them real mandatory drug treatment/therapy/detox/psychology at the beginning of their sentence, and save everyone stress down the road. Not a pamplet of info, real help. Mental health treatment absolutely needs to be core and essential as well. Mandatory therapy - one hour a week at least - with a qualified psychologist or psychiatrist who can prescribe medications, really needs to be a must. 5. Three drug charges makes someone a career offender? That's it? Doesn't that seem like not very much? 50% of people incarcerated are there on drug charges, and now I'm wondering if it is because they have been designated as career criminals when they aren't. That's not what any modern lay person would consider a career criminal. That seems out of touch with society. Getting non-violent drug offenders out of prison (and reducing the costs of prisons in doing so) should be a priority. 10. VERY interested in the disparity of sentences handed down through trial versus pleas. Reading a plea deal actually makes me physically ill. Americans should NOT be forced to sign 7/4/2023 0:38 AM 

away their rights to receive a lesser (more humane) sentence. Going to trial, which is absolutely their right, should not be something that is punished by excessive and higher sentences, which is exactly what happens. Thank you for reading. I try to keep my comments short and to the point.     

> Submitted on: July 4, 2023 From: Pat Clarey
> To: Public Affairs
> Subject: [External] comments and facts for consideration in the Commission"s Review of Sentencing Guidelines for the Federal Courts (amendment cycle ending 05/01/24)
> Date: Tuesday, August 1, 2023 5:50:20 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

My purpose in addressing the Commission relates to the incredible disparity in methods used by the courts as it relates to the 1:167 ratio that is used to determine the THC to marijuana ratio in determining sentences that are imposed by the courts. There appears to be no reason behind the ratio. 

In reviewing individual cases, the experts all seem unable to provide  a reason for this ratio, which has major implications in the determination of the Base Level Offense.  The 1:167 ratio appears to have been included in the first set of Guidelines in 1987, with no published explanation.  While a sentence mst reflect the seriousness of the offense to provide just punishment, a sentence based on a range that has no cognizable basis is most certainly not just. It is extremely important for the courts to understand that THC vaping cartridges contain the same psycotrophic element that gets a user "high" when consuming marijuana:THC.  In other words, the drug inside a THC vape pen is made out of marijuana.  The difference in effects between the two drugs are linked to how much THC is consumed, in either marijuana or THC concentrates.  To make the vaping pens, the manufacturer extracts THC from marijuana.  This foundation helps explain what exactly the district court's task is - determining a ratio of THC to marijuana from which it is made. Whether guidelines should be followed at sentencing is a significant issue.  I argue that the 1:167 ratio should not be followed and that the court should have a policy disagreement with the guidelines in accordance with Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U.S.85, 101 (2007). The evidence presented at the sentencing hearing indicated that there is no basis for the Guidelines treating 1 gm of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) to 167 gm of marijuana.  It is inaccurate from a chemical perspective, from how it is produced by a manufacturer, and by how it is used by the consumer. There has been considerable testimony by "expert" witnesses that one puff on a vape pen of THC is like smoking a puff of a marijuana joint, and that the only difference in the user using a vape pen versus a joint is convenience. Rather than write page after page citing specific case after case that document huge disparities in sentences that have been imposed, I'd like to bring this to a more personal level and demonstrate the terrible consequences that result from sentences being imposed by some of the courts that are using the 1:167 conversion ratio for which there is no credible basis. My son is serving a 192 month sentence due to the court having used the totally absurd 1:167 conversion ratio that puts him at a total offense level of 35. His expert witness at trial, testified that depending on which scientific approach you use to some up with a conversion ratio , you could use a 1:4 ratio, a 1:5 ratio, a 1:8 ratio or at most a 1:10 ratio.  In another case that he reviewed in the prison law library, the sentencing judge said his research found a 1.7 ratio to be appropriate. I am humbly pleading for the Commission to take every bit of information they have available 

and to use every possible resource that is available to them to find the appropriate and common sense conversion ratio.  The inaccurate, totally absurd 1:167 ratio must be amended. 

Using that ratio is totally unfounded and is total destroying a countless number of lives. And all for something that is already legal in at least 23 states in the United States of America. 

I am a 77 year old man who is nearing total deafness and will, at some point, be legally blind due to the macular degeneration for which I am currently being treating.  I have five surviving siblings, ranging from 79 to 92 years of age. This unjustified  conversion ratio is having a devastating affect on all of us. When my son, Sam, was sentenced, most of us likely received a "life sentence". Most of all, my son, Sam, has a son Kade who turned 11 years old today. Yes, Kade has a tremendous amount of extended family support but he needs his dad.  I do my best to be the most supportive and loving grandpa possible, but it's his dad that should be out there tossing the baseball to him and helping with his training for all his sports and watching him grow up on a daily basis.  He is a very intelligent boy and an honor student.  But, how in the world does anyone explain to him that his dad won't be home until well after he has graduated.  The last few years have been difficult and he has only been able to visit his dad once.  For some unknown reason, Sam was sent to prison in Mississippi, 1,000 miles from home. Visits from anyone will be few and far between. Yes, Sam needed to accept responsibility for and pay for his crime.  He has done that.  What can possibly be gained from keeping him imprisoned until he will likely be too old to pursue a good, productive career?  He has a college degree and, given the opportunity, he could still succeed in being a solid, productive citizen.  Many more years of imprisonment could likely destroy that opportunity.  And all because of an erroneous, unjust conversion ratio having been used in calculating the term of his sentence. How many, many more individuals and their families are suffering untold hardships because of this issue.  I cannot imagine, but it has to be a huge number. I apologize for my very lengthy plea and ask that the Commission please act as expeditiously as possible to amend the Federal Sentencing Guidelines to establish a reasonable, common sense and fair THC to marijuana ratio to be used in determining offense levels. Lloyd Hansen From: ~^! HANSMEIER, ~^!PAUL R    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HANSMEIER, PAUL, , SST-F-A
> Date: Saturday, July 1, 2023 11:49:11 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: U.S. Sentencing Commission Inmate Work Assignment: Indus. Warehouse ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** As for sentencing guideline priorities, please revise guidelines for white collar offenders. The existing guidelines do not clarify whether intended loss or actual loss should be used in calculating the base offense level. There are significant disparities across sentencing courts about whether actual loss or intended loss should be used, resulting in signficant sentencing disparities among white collar offenders. See the Third Circuit's recent decision in Banks for more information. The better result is that actual loss be used versus "intended" loss. "Intended" loss is a subjective standard that lacks obvious definition. Actual loss better reflects harm to society and is eminently more measurable. From: ~^! HARVEY, ~^!DANNY MICHAEL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HARVEY, DANNY, BIG-S-E
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 6:34:53 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  SS  Unasign ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Shalom! I am  writing  in  regard  to  the  request  for  public  comments  on  the  upcoming  sentencing  review.  I have  a couple  of comments: First,  if  you  are  truly  interested  in  "reducing  costs  of  incarceration  and  overcapacity  of  prisons,"  serious consideration  should  be  given  to  shutting  down  (or  giving  over  to  INS)  of  all  low- and  minimum-security  BOP facilities  and  allowing  the  inmates  to  be  placed  on  home  confinement.  This  would  save  the  DOJ  a lot  of  money! And,  there  is  an  apparent  need  for  more  INS  facilities,  as  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  the  inmates  here at  FCI  Big  Spring,  TX,  are  illegal  immigrants.  Home-confinement  for  lower  risk  inmates  is  an  excellent  alternative to  incarceration! Second,  in  considering  whether  a crime  should  be  considered  a "crime  of  violence,"  two  specific  items  should  be considered:  1)  if  the  crime  is  a "victimless"  crime,  it  should  not  be  considered  a "crime  of  violence";  2)  if  the  crime is  an  "attempt"  crime,  it  should  not  be  considered  a "crime  of  violence."  Both  of  these  criteria  have  affected  my  case, and  because  my  "crime"  is  considered  a "crime  of  violence,"  though  my  conviction  was  for  an  "attempt"  to  commit  acrime  and  it  was  a "victimless"  crime,  as  I was  entrapped  by  an  ICE  Special  Agent,  I have  been  banned  from  using the  TRULINCS  e-mail  service  available  to  most  inmates  in  the  BOP.  This  alone  seems  unfair  to  me,  as  e-mail  can be  monitored  for  security  as  easily,  or  more  easily,  as  postal  mail  or  phone  calls. Thank  you  for  your  time  and  consideration  in  these  matters.  May  Yah  bless  us  all! Respectfully, Dan  Harvey From: ~^! HELDSTAB, ~^!GARY L    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HELDSTAB, GARY, , SST-F-A
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 5:49:12 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: construction 5 ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** To whom it may concern, would you please address the acquitted conduct next year. It is unconstitutional...thank you From: ~^! HENDERSON, ~^!JEFFREY PAUL    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HENDERSON, JEFFREY, , LOM-C-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:20:15 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: Gym PM ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I would like to see three issues addressed: The failure of the BOP to properly implement the First Step Act, specifically, the denial of application of FSA ETC towards additional RRC/HC placement. The BOP considers it entirely up to it's discretion if an inmate gets ANY time in RRC/HC and does not consider itself obligated to apply these credits. This leads to inmates spending many additional months to years in a prison environment that Congress has clearly determined is not necessary. This exposes them to additional mental anguish, time away from family, and more time where they have to adapt to "prison culture" to survive instead of working to put that behind them while they reintegrate into society. The second issue is the use of purity as a factor in methamphetamine cases. Multiple studies have determined that while this may have been relevant in the past it is clearly not a factor in how high a person is in the drug distribution network and now just leads to significantly longer sentences for anyone involved in meth cases. The third issue is the amounts of drugs to trigger higher sentencing ranges. These should be dramatically higher so that federal resources can force on actual high level drug distributors and leave the street level crime where it should be, local state courts. Thank you. From: ~^! HENRY, ~^!DREW JOSEPH    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HENRY, DREW, , LOS-G-N
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 9:20:24 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: Orderly ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Priority 1 (BOP Practices): Pretrial detention centers appear to be designed as short-term facilities when in reality it is not uncommon for people to spend years detained pending trial. As such, pretrial facilities should be required to offer FSA programs. I have been detained for four years and people in situations like mine will have longer effective sentences (contributing to overcrowding and creating perverse incentives for prosecutors to oppose bail and for defendants to shirk their due process rights) and miss out on programs that could have been beneficial to us. In effect, I am being punished for choosing to take the necessary time to go through all the steps that are needed to ensure that my case concludes with a just outcome instead of signing a plea agreement quickly. If I must be detained pending trial then let me at least use this time somewhat productively. Priority 10(B) (Sentences for Distribution Resulting in Death): Base level 38 goes against the SRA objectives of providing certainty and fairness, and of avoiding unwarranted disparities, in sentencing. Level 38 is a HUGE disparity from homicide sentences generally in which the act did not involve malice, intent, recklessness, foreseeability, or proximate causation. Moreover, distribution cases which consider the death in a 5K2.1 departure from a drug quantity table base level generally result in sentences much lower than those which start from base level 38. Mikkel McKinnie, 21 F.4th 283 (4th cir. 2021), was sentenced to only 10 years despite numerous aggravating factors. Michael Watley, 46 F.4th 707 (8th cir. 2022), received only a 7-level upward departure per 5K2.1. Because the base level was set in accordance with the 20-year mandatory minimum sentence for the distribution resulting in death statute which conflicts with sensible notions of culpability and traditional legal conceptions of homicide, distribution resulting in death sentences depend substantially on the sentencing judge and the mechanism chosen to incorporate the death (base level 38 or a drug quantity table base level with a 5K2.1 departure). The appropriate resolution would be to drastically lower the distribution resulting in death base level, or to defer to the drug quantity base level, and allow sentencing judges the freedom to depart when warranted by the facts of the case. It should also be noted that the same sentence is mandated/prescribed (both statutorily and per the guidelines) for cases in which an overdose occurred but did NOT result in death. Subject: Alterna Ɵves to Incarcera Ɵon and Court Diversion Programs 

To whom it may concern, 

I hope this le Ʃer finds you well. I am wri Ɵng to express my deep interest and support for the 

implementa Ɵon and expansion of alterna Ɵves to incarcera Ɵon and court diversion programs within our 

criminal jus Ɵce system. As a concerned ci Ɵzen, I strongly believe that such programs can significantly 

contribute to a more equitable and rehabilita Ɵve approach to dealing with offenders. 

In recent years, there has been growing recogni Ɵon of the limita Ɵons and drawbacks of tradi Ɵonal 

incarcera Ɵon as a means of addressing crime and promo Ɵng public safety. While incarcera Ɵon may be 

necessary for individuals who pose an immediate threat to society , it o Ōen fails to address the root 

causes of criminal behavior and can perpetuate a cycle of reoffending. Moreover, our prisons are 

becoming overcrowded, and the financial burden of maintaining these facili Ɵes is substan Ɵal. 

Alterna Ɵves to incarcera Ɵon provide a more holis Ɵc and restora Ɵve approach to jus Ɵce. These programs 

encompass a range of ini ƟaƟves, including diversion programs, community -based supervision, 

restora Ɵve jus Ɵce prac Ɵces, and substance abuse treatment. By diver Ɵng individu als away from the 

tradi Ɵonal court system and into these alterna Ɵve programs, we have an opportunity to address the 

underlying factors that contribute to criminal behavior and foster posi Ɵve change. 

Court diversion programs, in par Ɵcular, offer an effec Ɵve means of reducing recidivism and promo Ɵng 

rehabilita Ɵon. Through diversion, eligible individuals can be redirected from the criminal jus Ɵce system 

to community-based interven Ɵons tailored to their specific needs. These interven Ɵons may include 

counseling, educa Ɵonal programs, voca Ɵonal training, or community service. By providing offenders with 

the necessary support and resources to address the root causes of their behavior, court diversion 

programs can help break the cycle of crime and promot e successful reintegra Ɵon into society. 

Furthermore, alterna Ɵves to incarcera Ɵon have proven to be more cost -effec Ɵve than tradi Ɵonal 

imprisonment. The financial burden of maintaining prisons and correc Ɵonal facili Ɵes is substan Ɵal, and 

the funds saved through the implementa Ɵon of alterna Ɵve programs can be reinvested in educa Ɵon, 

healthcare, and other vital social services. By redirec Ɵng resources toward preven Ɵon, interven Ɵon, and 

support, we can address the underlying issues that contribute to crime and foster safer and more 

resilient communi Ɵes. I urge you to consider the significant benefits and poten Ɵal of alterna Ɵves to incarcera Ɵon and court 

diversion programs. By embracing these approaches, we can move toward a jus Ɵce system tha t values 

rehabilita Ɵon, reduces recidivism, and promotes fairness and equity. I encourage you to explore the 

successful models implemented in other jurisdic Ɵons and collaborate with experts and community 

stakeholders to design and implement effec Ɵve pro grams tailored to our local context. 

Thank you for your a Ʃen Ɵon to this cri Ɵcal issue. I believe that together, we can work toward a more just 

and compassionate criminal jus Ɵce system that not only holds individuals accountable but also supports 

their transforma Ɵon and reintegra Ɵon into society. 

Yours sincerely, 

Daniela Hernandez 7/13/2023 15:55 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Mirtha Hernandez 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs

# Comments: 

To whom this may concern, I would like to take this time to comment on alternatives to incarceration. I believe that there are more holistic ways of handling crimes of those who do not pose a threat to society. Those who do not pose a threat to society should be allowed to have a less harsh punishment as prisons cause many individuals mental health issues and a difficult time reintegrating back into society. Additionally, 2020 proved that the cost per prison was incredibly high. I see it is fit to have prisoners who are not a threat to society complete their sentence through some type of educational program that cost far less than what prisons cost now. Lastly, those prisoners who are not a threat to society can benefit from being enrolled in an educational program to not commit such crimes and therefore can do this alongside the support of their family and further continue to pass the lessons to their kids/ family members. All in all, I appreciate you taking the time to reach my comment and hope this helps the future of those prisoners who are not a threat to our society.     

> Submitted on: July 13, 2023 From: ~^! HERRERA, ~^!JOAQUIN
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HERRERA, JOAQUIN, , TCP-A-B
> Date: Monday, July 17, 2023 9:05:58 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: maint 3 ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** -First, I would like urge the sentencing commission to Actually visit, on a regular basis, the Bureau of Prison Institution - especially the Penitentiaries and FCI's that house inmates serving 30+ years. Such visits would allow the commission to see the delays in programming opportunities for prisoners. -Second, with such knowledge, the commission should re-examine the policy that grants Judges the discretion to ignore characteristics that could be indicative of the likelihood that a particular inmate will engage in future criminal behavior. In other words, Recidivism should be a main policy concern taken into consideration when judges impose lengthy, defacto life sentences of 30+ years. -There are, and have been, alternatives available when imposing a sentence besides always employing incarceration. Particularly in sex offense cases, it should be appropriate for the sentencing Judge to consider the defendant's age, sex, and family situation, especially when deciding whether to depart from sentencing guideline range. -First time sex offenders automatically face a life sentence of incarceration under the current guideline scheme. this should not be so. Even deductions for acceptance of responsibility and cooperation rarely alter such an extremely brutal sentencing calculation that often includes enhancement for computer, age of victim, distribution and a pattern of conduct. -Section 3553 seems to supersede any regard for alternatives to sentencing and if that remains the case, then making comments about the current and future changes that the Sentencing Commission plans to implement are futile. -In sum, a humanistic approach should carry more weight than a mechanical and robotic assessment of how much imprisonment a human being deserves. Minimizing the idea of excessive punishment should be the goal of the Sentencing Commission, as well as offering realistic alternatives. Thank you and I hope this be take in consideration. From: ~^! HILL, ~^!WILLIAM JOSEPH    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** HILL, WILLIAM, , OKL-C-C
> Date: Friday, July 28, 2023 12:19:58 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  SENTENCING  COMMISSION Inmate  Work  Assignment:  N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I would  like  to  say  that  the  time  a lot  of  men  and  women  are  getting  for  these  Methamphetamine  conspiracy's  is  very harsh.  The  AUSA'S  can  make  a very  simple  drug  case  seem  very  extreme  by  using  ghost  dope  and Pseudoephedrine  logs  to  make  a person  seem  like  they  were  doing  a lot  more  than  they  really  were.  I think  you should  consider  making  some  sort  of  change  where  ephedrine  logs  cannot  be  used.  I also  feel  like  there  should  be something  done  to  exclude  ghost  dope  in  calculating  drug  weight.  I was  sentenced  to  175  months  for  a little  less than  1000  grams  When  there  was  never  any  actual  methamphetamine  caught  on  my  person.  My  brother  was sentenced  to  480  months  for  double  that  when  he  was  only  ever  caught  with  one  thirtieth  of  what  he  was accountable  for  at  sentencing.  I would  like  for  you  to  understand  that  people  will  say  anything  a lot  of  the  times  and say  whatever  certain  agents  want  them  to  say  or  the  us  attorney  want  them  to  say.  Just  so  they  do  not  have  to  go  to prison  or  do  not  have  to  stay  in  prison.  I have  been  incarcerated  since  2012  and  during  this  time  I have  seen numerous  people  that  have  committed  or  participated  in  murders  and  executions  and  actually  committed  them, receive  less  time  than  my  brother,  and  in  a few  cases  myself.  My  brother  was  23  when  he  received  40  years  for basically  something  that  should  of  been  simple  possession.  What  I am  really  trying  to  say  to  the  men  and  women  of the  commission  is  these  laws  and  sentencing  calculations  used  for  methamphetamine  cases  are  overly  harsh.  People commiting  violent  murder's  are  getting  less  time.  I wish  you  would  consider  this  when  considering  any  amendments to  the  guidelines.  Thank  you  for  your  time. WIlliam  Joseph  Hill From: ~^! KOWALEWSKI, ~^!STANLEY J    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** KOWALEWSKI, STANLEY, , FTD-C-C
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 8:49:46 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Comment Inmate  Work  Assignment:  GM  E4 ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** One  area  that  the  Commission  highlighted  for  amendment/change  that  I think  is  crucial  is  the  disparity  between sentences  of  those  who  chose  to  plea  bargain  and  those  who  chose  to  go  to  trial. Personally,  I have  experienced  this  firsthand  as  I was  offered  a plea  in  2014  that  would  entail  pleading  to  one  count of  wire  fraud  and  receiving  a sentence  of  one  year  and  one  day.  I chose  to  go  to  trial,  as  I have  always  maintained my  innocence  and  have  demonstrated  innocence  in  court  filings/appeals  that  have  gone  ignored.  I lost  at  trial  and was  sentenced  to  17  years  and  5 months.  Quite  a disparity! This  needs  to  be  corrected  and  people  who  are  charged  with  crimes  should  not  be  intimidated  in  order  to  have  their day  in  court,  especially  when  they  know  and  truly  believe  that  they  are  innocent.  Also,  regarding  my  own  case, there  was  a co-defendant  who  plead  guilty  to  conspiracy  and  was  sentenced  to  2 years  probation  and  no  jail  time versus  what  I received  for  going  to  trial  on  the  same  charges. This  needs  to  be  addressed  and  by  correcting  it,  you  will  discourage  US  attorneys  from  fabricating  evidence, witnesses,  making  false  statements  to  the  media,  using  "jailhouse  snitches"  and  many  of  their  other  well-known tactics  that  they  have  engaged  to  encourage  plea  bargains  rather  than  trials. Your  first  round  of  amendments  were  well  done  and  are  a nice  first  step  to  rectifying  the  criminal  justice  system which  has  so  many  disparities,  they  are  too  numerous  to  address. Sincerely, Stan  Kowalewski 7/31/2023 21:40 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Charles Lander, Retired Local Criminal Court - Town Justice 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices

# Comments: 

Charles W. Lander July 31, 2023 United States Sentencing Commission One Columbus Circle NE Suite 2-500 South Lobby Washington, DC 20002-8002 Re. United States vs. Ryan C. Lander 13-CR-00151 Distinguished Members, My Name is Charles Lander and I am the father of Ryan C. Lander who is currently serving a 22 year sentence handed down by Western District of New York Judge Richard J. Arcara. Ryan was sentenced on August 8, 2019, for one count of 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2251(a) and (e) and has been serving his sentence, with time served for the six years it took to adjudicate him, at FCI Allenwood Low Pennsylvania in an exemplary manner! For the sake of background; Ryan was arrested March 15, 2013 by Homeland Security agents who arrived at night in sheep's clothing. They scanned and seized items without a warrant stating that if Ryan objected they would "take him to jail". They then took him into the custody of their car and continued to question him while on route to the jail. After 30mins of the 60min trip, the supervising officer said "leave him alone now". At that point, they read Ryan his Miranda rights. When the US Attorney was questioned about the unconstitutional behavior of these officers he said, here is a plea agreement, sign it, because if you go to trial you will get 60 years! After six years of court appearances and being shuffled from one jail to another, my son was finally broken and signed the US Attorney's Plea Agreement for 15 years of incarceration. Then at sentencing, that same attorney asserted that the six year long adjudication was due to my 7/31/2023 21:40 PM 

son "dragging his feet and not accepting responsibility", and he urged the judge to sentence Ryan to 22 years instead of the 15years which had been agreed upon. As a result, the judge sentenced Ryan to 22 years. In a nut shell, the "ends justify the means" malfeasance of United States vs. Ryan C. Lander is appalling. I understand that the Commission cannot express opinion over the actions of arresting agencies, or the manner of federal prosecutors, and certainly not the federal courts themselves; I simply wanted to give you a look at where I am coming from. On a related topic, I also appreciate, along with countless others, that the prison system needs repair. I recently read that the Sentencing Commission is requesting ideas to cut the costs of incarceration and relieve overcrowding. Respectfully, here are a couple ideas that I have had for the past ten years that my son has been serving; roughly 50% of his sentence completed thus far. Incidentally, ten years is the average sentence for convictions of this type when prosecuted by most of the 50 states. Wondering why that is causes me to have such an antagonistic manner in this letter; please forgive me. Most successful individuals on the outside agree that incarceration should accomplish more than simply protecting society from wrongdoers. Incarceration should also provide training to reduce recidivism. The question is where the higher cost lies; the cost of the training up front or 2 of 2 the costs associated with re-arresting, re-prosecuting and re-housing those who re-offend. Obviously there is more cost in the revolving door of recidivism. Therefore, it stands to reason the BOP, as well as the inmates themselves, would benefit from any strategies conducive with cutting costs and reducing over-crowding. One such strategy is to begin differentiating inmates according to the level of education they received prior to conviction. I would venture a guess that a college-degreed inmate would be less likely to re-offend than a high school dropout. Inmates with prior college education should be allowed to serve their sentences in institutions that leverage their skills towards the day-to-day needs of the whole. Then following a reasonable, uniform sentencing protocol, utilized nationwide, these individuals would be given credit, for their cooperation, which they can use towards early release. Furthermore, those individuals, having been formally trained and having spent their sentences honing their skills rather than becoming obstinate, fat and lazy, be recognized for yet another form of reward that, incidentally, benefits both the inmate and the BOP. That reward would be the opportunity to pay a fine that shortens their sentence. I'd like to point out here that inmates with degrees are not only more disciplined and responsible but also far better equipped to earn money and consequently pay that fine. Now I'm not so naïve to think that there aren't risks here. I'm simply offering suggestions that have a lot going for them and thus merit some trial runs. In conclusion I will recap and offer my final pitch. I'll use my son Ryan as an example. Here is a college-educated individual who has never been in trouble with the law before his mistake ten years ago. Despite the grossly unconstitutional nature of his adjudication Ryan was given a great opportunity at FCI Allenwood Low because someone at that institution recognized that he was not only gifted but also willing to give back un-begrudgingly to benefit the group. And Ryan is not the only one there that shares this characteristic. I am aware of this because of the two phone calls we've shared each week. So to be brief and to the point; I advocate a two-pronged approach which firstly provides training for those who lack higher education, and who are 7/31/2023 21:40 PM 

motivated to take advantage of such training. If they successfully complete the training it becomes coupled with a reward of earned credits towards shortening their sentences. Secondly, recognize those individuals already college educated, who are also willing to use their education to benefit the group. These individuals should certainly receive earned credits too and in addition these more diligent, disicplined individuals should also be offered an opportunity to pay a fine in lieu of portions of their sentences. These two approaches directly address the BOP's desire to relieve over-crowding and at the same time reduce incarceration costs by actually generating funds in the process. Simply put … money coming in while jail cells empty. Sincerely and apologetically for my candor, Charles W. Lander     

> Submitted on: July 31, 2023 From: ~^! LANIER, ~^!SAMUEL THOMAS
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** LANIER, SAMUEL, , LOM-A-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 3:06:09 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  US  Sentencing  Commision  Public  Comment  team Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Grounds ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Hello  USC  Public  Comment  Team, I am  responding  to  the  request  for  Public  Comment  as  it  relates  to  amendments  to  the  USC's  priorities  for  the  May 2024  Priority  Amendment  Cycle. Areas  of  primary  concern  for  those  incarcerated  at  Lompoc  Federals  Corrections  Facility  revolve  around  the  unequal application  of  sentencing  guidelines  as  it  relates  to  release,  rehabilitation,  and  anti  recidivism  programming.  The Lompoc  Prison  Camp  for  example  has  not  had  any  Anti  Recidivism  programming  courses  scheduled  since  the  new education  staff  took  over  in  March  of  2023. The  largest  problem  when  it  relates  to  recidivism  from  the  ACLU  Prison  Project  revolves  around  the  lack  of rehabilitative  efforts  and  programming  to  reduce  recidivism.  In  California,  there  are  state  funded  programs  available to  any  person  who  has  been  previously  incarcerated  or  system  impacted  that  helps  them  attend  higher  education.  The program,  Project  Rebound,  has  been  around  since  1969  and  has  seen  a 0%  recidivism  rate  since  2018.  The  program has  tried  to  gain  access  into  the  federal  prisons,  but  the  mindset  of  the  Prison  Staff  is  not  to  help  people  prepare  for re-entry. The  US  Sentencing  Commission  should  focus  attention  on  limiting  the  number  of  people  who  go  to  a Minimum Security  Prison  camp  by  increasing  the  opportunities  for  people  in  the  minimum  risk  category  to  work  in  community based  programs  through  home  confinement.  Project  Rebound  is  a great  program  that  would  enable  every  person  in BOP  custody  in  California  to  attend  Public  University.  The  Solitary  Project  has  shown  that  people  who  have opportunities  available  to  themselves  post  release  reduce  return  to  prison  by  nearly  eight  times. The  US  Sentencing  Commission  has  a mission  to  reform  sentencing  and  to  increase  the  use  of  Home  Confinement and  Diversion  programs.  As  a first  time  offender,  zero  opportunities  were  extended  to  me.  And  the  US  Attorney's office  has  done  their  best  to  assure  I never  return  to  viable  employment.  However,  I have  taken  it  upon  myself  to combat  the  US  Attorney's  office's  attempts  at  smearing  me  from  public  image  and  continue  to  push  for  higher education  by  obtaining  my  Bachelor's  degree,  and  am  currently  enrolled  in  a MBA  Program  as  a Graduate  Student. These  opportunities  were  not  made  possible  by  the  BOP  or  the  US  DOJ.  They  were  at  my  own  finding.  Which should  have  been  something  I was  made  aware  of  by  the  courts  and  through  anti  diversion  programs.  When  the judge  sentenced  me,  she  departed  substantially  from  the  USC  and  the  Prosecutors  suggestion  because  she  saw  aperson  that  was  not  a criminal  but  who  had  made  a mistake.  And  she  even  commented  that  she  was  not  happy  to sentence  me  to  prison  as  she  didn't  see  it  being  beneficial.  But  that  she  was  required  by  the  USC  and  Constitution. These  types  of  situations  should  not  force  a judge  to  sentence  someone  to  a term  of  imprisonment,  just  because.  But 

the  judge  should  have  the  ability  to  place  first  time  offenders  in  a position  that  they  can  succeed. I was  on  my  way  back  to  my  prior  employment  as  a Firefighter/Fire  Captain  for  the  State  of  California.  But  the  job offer  was  redacted  because  the  State  required  a "Certificate  of  Rehabilitation".  After  spending  7 months  in  prison,  Iam  frankly  disgusted  by  the  complete  lack  of  rehabilitative  efforts  any  person  within  the  BOP  puts  for  to  help people.  The  current  system  does  not  allow  people  to  receive  a "Certificate  of  Rehabilitation"  and  thus  removes people  from  several  opportunities  to  re-enter  society  and  succeed. The  Federal  Prison  System  is  very  broken.  And  needs  revamp  to  more  closely  align  with  rehabilitation  first.  One specific  incident  I will  report,  I am  dyslexic.  And  I know  it.  I took  the  Dyslexia  screening.  And  answered  truthfully in  the  survey.  Like  in  questions,  do  you  often  mix  up  numbers  and  have  trouble  with  simple  addition,  yes! When  I was  screened  by  the  current  Education  staff,  a group  of  us  were  called  to  his  office.  He  explained  to  us  that we  had  all  scored  low  on  the  Dyslexia  Screening  survey.  And  explained  to  us  that,  "You  don't  want  to  take  a stupid person  class,  so  re-do  the  survey,  and  check  no  to  almost  everything,  or  else  you  will  have  to  take  class  for  stupid people!"  As  a person  with  mental  health  disabilities,  and  am  part  of  the  Disabled  Student  Services  program  at CalPoly  Humboldt  (Undergrad),  and  Chico  State  University  (MBA),  I was  blown  away  at  this  person's  disregard  for educational  needs. And  if  furthers  my  statements,  the  BOP  needs  to  be  revamped,  retrained,  and  educated  on  why  people  recidivate. Educational  opportunities  around  rehabilitation,  and  advancing  knowledge  only  better  help  people  re-enter  society and  be  prepared  to  succeed.  Having  Directors  of  Education  who  call  out  an  entire  group  as  "Stupid  People"  is  aviolation  of  the  ADA  and  HIPPA  for  that  matter.  And  we  were  encouraged  by  a Federal  Official  to  falsify  a Federal Document  so  he  didn't  have  to  help  us,  or  put  on  a class  and  make  him  do  work. The  US  BOP  is  not  an  organization  that  is  focused  on  reducing  recidivism.  It  is  a system  that  is  focused  on  further inflicting  damage,  and  returning  people  to  prison.  The  statistics  from  the  DOJ  show,  the  US  BOP  has  one  of  the highest  levels  of  recidivism.  And  is  that  because  of  the  people  who  are  incarcerated,  or  is  it  because  the  people  who are  hired  to  reduce  recidivism  feel  it  is  more  important  to  discipline  and  reticule  than  it  is  to  follow  models  like California  where  they  have  continued  to  reduce  prison  population,  offer  Certificate's  of  Rehabilitation,  and encourage  public  education  for  every  previously  incarcerated  individual. The  USC  needs  to  put  focus  into  policies  that  divert  people  from  Prison  on  first  time  offense.  Never  enters  them  into custody,  and  requires  them  to  receive  higher  education  through  programs  funded  at  the  US  Dept.  of  Education.  The programs  should  focus  on  allowing  people  to  receive  programing  that  qualifies  them  for  Certificates  of Rehabilitation.  The  Prison  System  should  be  a "Technical  College"  of  sorts  where  the  staff  become  educators,  rather than  captors.  But  that  is  a positive  world.  Where  we  reduce  recidivism,  and  re-enter  people  better  than  they  got  here. But  isn't  that  what  the  BOP  is  supposed  to  do? I know  my  comments  will  likely  not  be  read.  And  will  likely  be  disregarded.  Because  that  is  what  the  BOP  has shown  as  a standard.  But  for  once,  it  would  be  good  if  the  voice  of  those  who  do  want  to  improve  their  lives  is heard.  As  it  stands  now,  all  my  job  opportunities  I had  have  been  removed.  I screwed  up.  But  at  the  same  time,  I also dedicated  23  years  of  my  life  as  a public  servant.  And  I created  a company  that  built  technology  for  the  Federal  and State  Government  to  assist  with  Wildfire  Response.  Now,  that  is  all  a moot  point  because  the  Federal  BOP  and  DOJ feel  I can  never  be  a pillar  of  society  ever  again. I am  not  going  to  let  this  5 year  experience  define  my  future.  A mistake  is  to  be  forgiven.  I served  my  time.  I am paying  my  debt.  But  the  BOP  and  DOJ  don't  believe  that  is  enough.  Time  for  you  to  make  that  change  to  help  us  not ever  return  to  this  god  for  shaken  place! From: ~^! LOFTIN, ~^!COREY JAMES    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** LOFTIN, COREY, , TCP-E-B
> Date: Saturday, July 8, 2023 5:49:22 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: n/a ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Hello!  I am an inmate at the federal penitentiary in Tucson, Arizona.  Thank you for accepting comments from convicted persons; I sincerely hope our words can help you with moving towards common sense, progressive sentencing reform. 

I would like to suggest that the U.S. Sentencing Commission examine possibilities in reduced sentences for first-time offenders.  A large number of inmates, including myself, committed their first, and in many cases only, crime in their early twenties, when studies show that the brain has not yet fully developed.  I can tell you with some confidence (and experience) that twenty-something year-old men are far from the wise, good decision makers they will some day become.  This is not to excuse them from breaking the law, of course - but I think that it does warrant consideration when sentencing is concerned if it is their very first time breaking the law.  It is stunning to me how many inmates I meet on a regular basis who received life sentences or effective life sentences in their twenties - I find myself wondering where the government plans on housing them all as they age and new, like inmates come in! 

I wish I had the resources to research and prepare a more thorough statement, but I hope this paragraph is at least helpful to you.  Thank you for your time, and for working towards sentencing reform both for convicted persons and for those who will be convicted. From: ~^! MATTES, ~^!BRIAN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** MATTES, BRIAN, , SEA-A-A
> Date: Friday, July 14, 2023 10:05:26 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: NA ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** ....I've seen staff escorted off the premises for smuggling (tobacco, cell hones, drugs, etc.), for allowing an inmate full and unrestricted access to her Bureau computer so he could conduct illegal activities, and for stealing food and equipment from Food Service, to run their own restaurants. FCI Seagoville has been the worst while, even now, Food Service inventory is short food and two brand new ovens ("air fryers"). ....The biggest problem in the BOP is what's called "prison politics", and the apathetic staff who now only allow it to continue, but who encourage it. Their claim is that "politics are just going to exist in prison, and there's nothing we can do about it", but that sounds like staff surrendering their power and control to inmates, which is far from acceptable. It's known that FCI Seagoville is a protection yard, where sex offenders go for safety, and to get treatment. This is also a yard for gang drop-outs but, even though they may have dropped out someplace else, they get here and realize that there are no wolves. So they all want to step up and be a wolf, and form up into active gangs again. Tango Blast is the worst, extorting other inmates, and I cannot fathom why they are here at al. Instead of being safe, these Low-custody facilities are rife with gang activity, and many of the inmates are only concerned with staying safe by staying out of the way, and letting the gangs get rich. Staff needs to take control of the prisons back from the gangs because, only then, can they call any of them safe. ....Cells are not owned or controlled by the BOP staff, but by gang "shot callers", who can buy and sell them at will. If an inmate lives in a room that the gang wants, they just force that inmate out. Gang members can pay to have a two-man room to themselves (having a "ghost cellie" who doesn't really live there), or a cell with their "significant other". All room moves are controlled by inmates who staff never questions. The Main TV Room and the Small TV Room are the only areas in the housing unit inmates have access to that have AC, and they are owned by gangs. The cleaning chemicals are owned and sold by gangs. Free haircuts are not free. There is a price list, with different prices for different gangs. It has become so bad here that even the sex offenders had to form a gang, as protection against the abuses of the other gangs. This to me, is ridiculous, but sex offenders have decided that they need to show the other gangs that they are not weak. Other sex offenders are punished for not wanting to be a part of this gang. ....Promotion of this gang mentality has become a tool used by lazy and apathetic staff, so that they only have to deal with one inmate "shot caller" for each group, instead of treating each inmate as an individual. This dangerously empowers the shot callers and the gangs, while inhibiting inmates' chances of a successful reintegration into society. This inmate shot caller is provided personal and sensitive information about other inmates, which causes conflicts and physical altercations. Worse ye is when staff tells the shot caller to "handle it", knowing full well what it means , that the inmate being "handled" will be assaulted by several gang members. Staff-sanctioned assaults like this will sometimes become knife fights, but always result in significant injury. ....Allowing gangs to operate with impunity this way facilitates the introduction and distribution of contraband, utilizing gang networks to easily hide and/or transport said contraband without detection. These gangs cleverly obtain certain positions for their members, ones that are advantageous to their enterprise, like the construction crew that hollows out hiding places. One member of Tango Blast boasts an income of $30,000 per month from all of his illicit activities. Another has the maximum amount of $10,000 on his Trust Fund account. A black gang member, a Gangster's Disciple, claims that, every years that he is incarcerated, he makes enough to purchase another house, 

owning several already off the proceeds from his drug sales in prison. ....This gang activity adversely impacts the safety, security and orderly running of the institution, putting staff and inmates in harm's way. Methamphetamines are prevalent, and so is "meth rage", where an addict will get disproportionately angry for no apparent reason. When this same addict is unable to secure another dose of this very expensive drug, he is violently ill for three days. Staff claims that they are unable to hit the brakes on gang activity, but iit's actually quite simple. The solution is two-fold, with staff having to first accept a closer scrutiny (or body cameras) to weed out the bad apples that spoil the bushel. Then, for any gang that is "active" or "online", round up the shot callers and transfer them. Make it known that the BOP does not 7/17/2023 18:33 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Patricia Mckeehan 

# Topics: 

> 2. Alternatives to Incarceration and Court Diversion Programs

# Comments: 

Dear Sir: Sentencing of Non Violent Offenders should be considered from the time of sentencing even if they can not be put in their Jail location or immediately. Sentences need to also run concurrently if there's more than one sentence.     

> Submitted on: July 17, 2023 From: ~^! MILLER, ~^!JUSTIN WILLIAM
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** MILLER, JUSTIN, , GRE-B-B
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 9:50:30 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: REC2 ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Prioritys, dealing with sentencing should be the issues reguarding career offender desigination... and criminal history scoring... the career offender desigination is often misplaced, its used to enhance sentences on federal levels using state level offences for "crimes" that often dont even exist on federal levels... the career offender desigination should only apply to past federal crimes... it shouldnt be involved with state level offences.... criminal history yet again when using state level offences and " record keeping practices" of county clerks which are to say less a bit of a cluster....  and yet again people dealing with state level offences often taking pleas to get out of jail reguardless of actual guilt... but it gets a person out to resume normal life sooner than a trial would.... but as with me i have 17 criminal history points... ive been to prison 1x for less than 1 year in total before this... i was scored as category 6 and labled a career offender... for crimes that included me getting beat up in a county jail. ... total injustice 7/11/2023 7:26 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Renae Miller 

# Topics: 

> 7. Crime Legislation

# Comments: 

using acquitted conduct is wrong and that it violates the due process and legal principles of going to trial.     

> Submitted on: July 11, 2023 From: ~^! MOIS, ~^!EMANUEL
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** MOIS, EMANUEL, , SHE-B-L
> Date: Monday, July 17, 2023 3:50:00 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I am writing to comment on some point regarding the sentencing commissions notice for commendation. My first comment is on : 3.) Guidelines Manuel - that should be thrown out because "one-size-fits-all" is not justice that is blind or impartial, it's not based on facts and circumstances, but rather inconsiderate of them, therefore making correct judgement void. Recently many district judges have noticed the flaws in fitting the sentence of a crime on a case-by-case basis, so if amendments were to be made it should review the judgements of district court's and make adjustments based off the average time that others were sentenced to for specific cases. That would be more fair and just. 5.) Career Offender Sentencing Enhancements - in my opinion are redundant, it's serving more time for a past crime that could have been many years ago, and in my case i am serving twelve times more time in years for a past charge in my state of California, which i think is not right or fair. The definition of a "career offender" should also be changed if it is not the same crime committed, such as a person who was arrested for a firearm but had a past felony for burglary, yet was counted as a "career offender", because they are bot the same thing, yet they would still be categorized as a "career offender" and be sentenced to extra time. 6.) Not all "Youthful Offenders" are the same, as i am/was a "youthful" offender, but i was never a member of any gang or group, or violent, or had a bad family up-bringing, i just made poor choices in my young age and now want to better my life and i have been doing so even while in custody, yet i wont be able to prove that betterment for many years because i was over-sentenced, in part due to my youthful age, which is not fair or considerate of my circumstances or life history. Thank you for reading my comments and i hope that they will be helpful to make positive changes in the future and to restore fair justice in the court system. From: ~^! MUCSARNEY, ~^!JAQUON H    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** MUCSARNEY, JAQUON, , FLF-P-B
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:20:23 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Commission Inmate Work Assignment: Education ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Consider doing away with 'The Intended Amount" Offense level enhancement, & only calculate the offense level for the amount 'Actually stolen" stolen for theft; fraud, electronics device, including sophisticated means. From: ~^! OWENS, ~^!GREGORY    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** OWENS, GREGORY, , CAA-C-B
> Date: Saturday, July 1, 2023 8:34:52 AM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To: Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Tutor/EDU ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** To  the  Chair  of  the  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission Sir  or  Ma'am What  concerns  me  is  the  disparity  between  sentences  for  the  same  crime  when  you  accept  a plea  deal  or  choose  to exercise  your  constitutional  right  under  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  to  a trial.  If  you  believe  you  are innocent  of  the  charges  and  choose  to  go  trial  you  will  automatically  receive  an  "Upward  Departure"  from  the sentencing  guidelines,  if  you  testify  in  your  own  defense  and  the  Federal  jury  finds  you  guilty  (Fed  Juries  convict 99%  of  the  time,  I did  not  know  that  then.)  If  you  are  found  innocent  by  a Fed  jury  the  Prosecution  will  continue  to charge  you  over  and  over  under  different  statutes  until  a jury  convicts  you.  You  will  also  receive  an  enhancement  for perjury  (upward  departure  from  the  sentencing  guidelines,)  as  the  judge  explained  to  me  you  "Testified"  the  jury found  you  guilty  so  you  "Had  to  have  LIED  under  oath." So  an  individual,  with  no  criminal  record  received  a life  sentence  for  a crime  which  involved  no  deaths  because  Iexercised  my  right  to  a trial.  I felt  as  if  I was  being  punished  for  exercising  my  right  to  a trial  and  for  making  the system  do  it's  damn  job.  If  I had  known  then  what  I know  now  I would  have  accepted  the  7-10  year  plea  deal  I was offered.  If  I had  I would  be  free  right  now. Sincerely, Gregg  Owens Sergeant  Major  (Retired) U.S.  Army From: ~^! PAGE, ~^!SHAQUAN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** PAGE, SHAQUAN, , SCH-B-A
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2023 8:20:18 AM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: unicore ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** im writing in reference to the sentencing reform specifically in regards of the youthful offenders section. A crime committed as a child and recognized as a prematurely bad decision in life by the youthful offender adjudication should not be something that is used against someone who has gotten into trouble as an adult. The part of the brain that humans use to make decisions (Frontal lobe) isnt completely developed until the age of twenty one, and to use the poor decision making that took place as a child against an adult  is equivalent to using a handicap against them because theres a reprensentation of temporary mental incapability because of the age. Also A youth offender adjudication is something that is supposed to be sealed so its not used against a person that has been a youthful offender in life yet the federal system has been comfortable with using it to add time which is completely unjust. this needs to stop and the people who have been wronged by the system with these mishandlings of the law should be treated. Thank you for your time. 7/10/2023 15:47 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Kelly Perkins, ? 

# Topics: 

5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach 

# Comments: 

How far back can you go when sentencing someone? And How is drug crimes considered violent crimes for certain people? 

Submitted on: July 10, 2023 From: ~^! PETERSON, ~^!CARIN ANN    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** PETERSON, CARIN, , PEK-F-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:34:52 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  ANYONE Inmate  Work  Assignment:  EDU  PM ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I believe  someone  should  look  into  the  fact  that  first  time  drug  offenders  are  not  being  offerd  a drug  treatment program  or  drug  court  before  being  sentenced  to  mandatory  minimums.  I myself  am  a case  in  point  I believe  if  I had been  offered  that  in  my  situation  it  would  have  helped  me  better  than  being  sentenced  to  a federal  prison  camp  in which  there  is  no  help.  I had  been  on  pretrial  for  almost  2 yrs  and  the  whole  time  I had  been  working  on  my  drug problem  extensivly  and  it  was  not  even  takin  into  consideration  at  the  time  of  my  sentencing  and  instead  of  being able  to  continue  working  on  my  drug  problems  I was  sentenced  to  a prison  camp  that  has  a problem  with  drugs getting  in  and  no  help.  I was  on  pretrial  for  almost  2yrs  doiong  good  workin  hard  on  my  drug  addiction  and  my  life was  better  than  it  had  ever  been  and  I believe  I could  have  done  great  out  there  on  my  ankle  monitor  continuing  my drug  education.  There  for  I believe  something  needs  to  be  done  for  first  time  drug  offenses  and  the  stuff  they  do during  pretrial  takin  into  consideration  instead  of  putting  so  many  people  in  prison  camps  with  access  to  drugs  with no  help.  These  prison  camps  need  to  be  shut  down  and  people  with  such  a low  custody  classefecation  should  be home  on  monitors  working  to  better  their  lives. From: ~^! PHILLIPS, ~^!JOE ERNEST    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** PHILLIPS, JOE, , FOR-W-B
> Date: Tuesday, July 4, 2023 7:20:17 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  GM2 ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I'm  not  sure  if  the  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission  has  anything  to  do  with  the  First  Step  Act's  Earned  Time  Credits  or not,  but  I thought  I would  let  the  Commission  know  what's  going  on  in  the  BOP.  I have  been  down  for  almost  16 years.  I am  First  Step  Act  eligible  for  Earned  Time  Credits.  The  BOP  has  taken  a year  off  of  my  Supervised  Release for  time  credits  that  I have  earned,  but  they  are  refusing  to  apply  any  of  the  extra  400+  Earned  Time  Credits  that  Ihave  earned  towards  Residential  Reentry  Center  or  Home  Confinement.  I am  being  told  by  FCC  Forrest  City administration  that  it's  "too  late"  to  apply  these  time  credits  to  place  me  in  an  RRC  because  I have  MORE  First  Step Act  credits  than  I have  time  left  on  my  sentence.  What  sense  does  that  make?  What  is  the  point  of  programming  and working  for  all  of  these  First  Step  Act  credits  only  for  me  to  not  be  able  to  use  them?  This  is  infuriating.  I have  been in  prison  for  16  years  and  I am  being  withheld  First  Step  Act  time  credits  that  I have  earned.  The  BOP  is  violating my  rights  under  the  First  Step  Act  to  these  time  credits.  The  BOP  is  violating  the  law. If  there  is  anything  that  you  can  do  to  help  me  get  these  First  Step  Act  time  credits  applied  to  get  me  to  RRC/HC  Iwould  be  very  grateful.  Thank  you. From: ~^! PINEDA, ~^!JAIME M    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** PINEDA, JAIME, , ALD-A-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 5:34:18 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: Administration ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Changes should be made to Career Offenders either needing a a crime of violence as well as a serious drug offense or add drug quantity to the offense to be considered. drug users that are low level "drug dealers" i.e. 2 grams or under are considered career offenders instead of rehabilitation or federal drug court...lengthy sentences take away a lot from inmates and really is not a good way to solve the problem... From: ~^! PRIDE, ~^!ANDRAE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** PRIDE, ANDRAE, , OXF-A-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 12:19:58 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Im  not  sure  after  reading  the  memo  what  specifically  i should  write  if,  it  was  my  oppinion  as  to  addressing  my  take on  sentencing...  but  in  2023  i was  sentenced  to  12  years  and  a big  part  of  my  sentencing  was  my  criminal  history. One  of  my  prior  offenses  was  PWID  marijuana,  an  offense  that  I've  submitted  to  my  govenors  office  to  have removed  from  record  due  to  the  decriminalization  in  my  state...despite  my  pending  determination  of  relief  i was  still sentenced  to  career  offender  status.  More  importantly  with  my  case  comming  from  the  3rd  circuit  two  districts  in  my circuit(the  Middle  District  and  the  Eastern  District)  ruled  that  during  federal  sentencing,  determining  a sentence relying  upon  a prior  state  conviction,the  governing  law  at  the  time  of  the  federal  sentencing  is  to  looked  upon,not  the law  upon  the  time  of  the  state  conviction.  The  Western  District  of  Pennsylvania  made  the  decision  that  due  to  the fact  that  no  cases  came  out  of  the  district  establishing  how  the  district  should  rule  my  judge  decided  to  career  me despite  the  fact  the  entire  circuit  could  decide  to  rule  differently.  I feel  as  though  inmates  in  this  perdictament  should not  be  time  barred  from  filing  for  relief...i  feel  as  if  inmates  in  this  perdictament  should  have  their  sentencing  dates placed  on  hold  until  a decision  is  made  within  the  entire  circuit  not  be  sentenced  within  the  district's  decision  and then  be  left  to  simply  figure  out  a way  back  into  the  courts. From: ~^! RIOS, ~^!FRANKLIN ANTONIO    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** RIOS, FRANKLIN, , EDG-C-B
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2023 12:06:01 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: 2024 Sentencing Guidelines Inmate Work Assignment: C2 Orderly ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Dear Sir/Madam My name is Franklin Rios and I am currently incarcerated at FCI Edgefield, in South Carolina. The inmates here were recently informed of the Sentencing Commission's 2024 focus for any possible amendments, and I wanted to write with a couple of comments. First, I would like to thank the Commission for the work they are doing.  I believe that what you are doing is the only way inmates can be given the proper education, rehabilitation and drug treatments that they desperately need to return to the Community, realizing Congress' efforts. Inmates are people and not just words or statistics. Second, you may not be aware, but the Supreme Court recently announced that it was NOT going to look at "acquitted conduct" and passed this back to the Sentencing Commission.  I think this is a number one priority for most inmates, and it affects literally every single inmate I know.  Inmates are confused ( as I think most people are) between "acquitted conduct" and "relevant conduct".  I believe anything you have never been found guilty of is acquitted conduct, and as such you should not be doing time for something you've never been found guilty of.  Ibelieve the constitution says "innocent until proven guilty" not "guilty regardless of whether you're convicted or not". I'd also like to say that a lot of the changes don't affect me personally, but they do affect, and help, a lot of people and seeing them have hope for the first time in a long time is refreshing and, well, hopeful. The BOP needs to be taken to task and removed from the equation as far as possible, when it comes to inmates.  On a daily basis, their goal seems to be "keep as many inmates as possible in prison for as long as possible".  At every turn, they show contempt, for Congress, the Courts - many's the time that inmates have brought something to their attention, say that the Commission has amended, or the Courts have ruled, or Congress has made law, or the Courts have ordered - and every time, words to the effect of "well they aren't here are they?" are used to justify they indifference and incompetence of the custody staff.  Inmates have nowhere to turn and nowhere to go. The COVID-19 Pandemic was a horrific experience for the world - but none more so than Federal Inmates.  We were basically forgotten about, with little hand-outs like "Why am I locked in this cell?".  We were locked up for 24 hours a day - with no access to showers, phones, email, family, education - nothing.  For months and months and months.  A day spent in prison can feel like a week, especially locked in your cell fearing for your life,.  Yes, I know some people feel "well it's prison, what do you expect"?  I expect to be punished, to be cut-off from my family somewhat and to learn the error of my ways.  I don't expect to be treated like something other than human, with no rights whatsoever and screamed at on a daily basis. The treatment of inmates is barbaric and inhumane, especially 

during something like COVID.  That rests on the arrogance and indifference of the BOP - who I believe have taken the 13th Amendment to the Constitution to it's extreme, ensuring that prisoners are treated as "slaves" with phrases like "I run this place" and ""You will do as your told". Prison is not the military either, and should not be run like one.  Inmates are routinely punished for other inmates infractions, locked down as group and, in effect, told to take care of our own if we don't want to be locked down again.  How is this legal?  How can punishing an entire unit, up to 128 inmates, for one person's infractions be valid?  This is NOT what Congress or, I believe, the Sentencing Commission intends. I also believe that the zero criminal history points and alternative's to prison should be fully investigated and expanded.  Regardless of the crime committed, if it's someone's first Federal offense, they should not be put in prison.  What happens is people are turned into the very thing you are trying to avoid - criminals. Thank you for you work so far and for your work to come. Sincerely Franklin Rios From: ~^! RITCHOTT, ~^!JOSHUA J    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** RITCHOTT, JOSHUA, , LEW-K-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 2:34:49 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Sentencing  comission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Gar  1***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I am  requesting  that  the  comission  look  at  FSA  sentencing  credits  for  consecutive  ineligible  offenses.  An  inmate should  be  able  to  still  earn  FSA  credits  for  the  eligible  portion  of  their  sentence  where  an  ineligible  offense  is consecutive  to  an  eligible  offense.  For  example  an  inmate  who  is  sentenced  to  consipracy  to  distribute Methamphetamine  (841  & 846)  (an  eligible  offense  to  earn  time  credits)  and  sentenced  to  120  months  in  federal prison,  and  also  convicted  of  Possession  of  a firearm  in  furtherance  of  a drug  trafficing  crime  18  USC  924(c)(1)(a) and  sentenced  to  60  months  consecutive,  An  ineligible  offense.  The  inmate  would  be  excluded  from  earning  any FSA  credits  towards  their  release  becasue  they  have  a conviction  for  the  924(c)  offense.  When  in  reality  the  inmate is  actually  serving  two  seperate  offenses  that  can  be  distinguished  from  being  able  to  earn  FSA  credits.  An  inmate should  be  allowed  to  earn  FSA  earn  time  credits  towards  the  120  months  sentence  for  the  drug  trafficing  crime,  but the  Bureau  of  Prisons,  "for  administrative  purposes"  runs  the  sentences  together. 6/20/2023 19:42 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Brian Robinson 

# Topics: 

> 1. Bureau of Prisons Practices 10. Research Topics 11. Other Suggested Priorities

# Comments: 

As someone who has a federally incarcerated family member, it pains me to see the degree to which the BOP is so dysfunctional on an institution by institution basis. There are obviously some hard working and compassionate BOP employees, but there are also people going through the motions and not providing any dignity whatsoever for incarcerated individuals. With that said, some incarcerated individuals probably do not deserve any because they do nothing to try to earn it back. However, there are individuals in the Federal system who are inherently good people who did something bad that put them there. My family member deserves to be in prison for what he did. What I do not agree with is that some non-violent first-time offenders are precluded from participating in First Step Act programs with a chance to earn fractional reductions in their sentences. If we want the best chance to effectively re-integrate offenders back into society at some point, then they need to feel like they have something to work towards. Design and apply programs that can empower inmates to strive toward making themselves better. Allow them, on a equal basis, to at least have that opportunity. The worst of the worst are going to fail regardless of what opportunities are afforded to them. Those that have a low risk of recidivism and are motivated to working toward something positive will mostly succeed. In turn, this will make the lives of BOP rank and file easier as well. With the input of institutional level case managers, it "should be" pretty easy to identify individuals who accept responsibility for what they did and work every day to try and make themselves better. Individuals like this should have the opportunity through programming to work towards a better future.     

> Submitted on: June 20, 2023 From: ~^! ROSAS, ~^!BRENDA JEANNET
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** ROSAS, BRENDA, , WAS-B-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 3:49:49 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Proposed  Priorities Inmate  Work  Assignment:  cc ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Please  review  the  FSA  eligibility  criteria  for  sentences  that  are  running  concurrent.  I have  a 135  mo.  sentence  that IS  eligible  and  a 15  mo.  sentence  that  isn't.  Because  of  the  15  mo.  non-eligible  sentence  I am  not  able  to  earn  FSA credits  for  any  of  the  total  150  mo.  since  the  sentences  are  being  run  concurrent.  This  shouldn't  be  the  case  as  I was sentenced  to  the  135  mo.  prior  to  FSA  and  therefore  when  FSA  began,my  situation  should  have  been  re-evaluated  to be  sure  I was  able  to  participate. Thank  you  for  allowing  me  to  comment.  I'm  looking  forward  to  your  coming  changes. Kindest  Regards, Brenda  Rosas From: ~^! RUBINSTEIN, ~^!JACOB MATHIAS    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** RUBINSTEIN, JACOB, , MIL-H-A
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2023 6:05:30 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: U QA 1234 ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** In response to the United States Sentencing Commission's Request for Comments, in the interest of reducing the cost of incarceration and overcapacity of prisons, I respectfully submit the following: Regarding Priority 1 and the BOP's effectiveness in meeting 18 USC 3553(a)(2), specifically 3553(a)(2)(A) regarding providing "just punishment for the offense," the BOP should be directed to grant sentence credit for pretrial restrictions on individual liberty, including home confinement, home detention, house arrest, or otherwise as directed by the court.  BOP CPD 5880.28 should be updated accordingly.  Such restrictions, being put in place to protect public safety, especially in cases where they are mandatory, are by definition punitive in nature. As such, subjecting a citizen to punishment beyond the sentence duly ordered by the court violates the 8th amendment.  The sentence handed down by the court is considered just punishment.  The BOP is responsible for administering that sentence.  By not granting credit for pretrial liberty restrictions other than full incarceration, the sentence they are administering is greater than what the court ordered and is, therefore, unjust. Regarding Priority 2 and alternatives to incarceration, implement programs like the Pretrial Opportunity Program or Conviction and Sentence Alternative Program for first-time, non-violent sex offenders.  By seeking treatment for sexual behavior problems, followed by a prescribed time period of supervision to remain free from problematic behaviors, defendants have the opportunity to show sentencing judges their capacity for rehabilitation and that they do not pose a danger to the community, similar to those with substance abuse disorders. Regarding Priority 7 and legislation changes, I propose the following: 

1.  Amend 18 USC 3585(b) by adding "or under significant liberty restrictions as condition of release" after "official detention." 

2.  Amend 18 USC 3142(c)(1)(B) by removing the mandatory conditions imposed by the Adam Walsh Child Protection Safety act of 2006, as they are unconstitutional.  See United States v Smedley, 611 F. Supp. 2d 971 (2009). 

3.  Amend 18 USC 3632(d)(4)(D) by eliminating all non-violent exclusions, increasing the number of defendants eligible for time credits to reduce their sentence. 

4.  Reinstitute parole and provide greater consideration for defendant behavior and programming activities as a means to reduce their sentence or period of incarceration. 

5.  Abolish all mandatory minimum sentences.  As each criminal case is unique, so their sentence should be, as well.  Two acts that meet the same letter of the law may still be very difference in circumstance and context, thus any standard, minimum punishment is inappropriate. 

6.  Legalize the possession and licensed manufacture/distribution of all Schedule II through Schedule V narcotics under similar provisions as alcohol and tobacco.  Not only would legalization do away with all of those direct crimes, and the enormous prison population associated with them, but also the secondary crimes associated with them such as robbery, assault, and gang violence would be drastically reduced.  We have lost the war on drugs, as 

evidenced by the ever increasing violence, addiction rates, and militarization of law enforcement.  Read "Chasing the Scream" by Johann Hari. Regarding Priority 9, I recommend changes to the US Sentencing Guidelines as follows: 

1.  Update Chapter 5 part H to allow for a greater downward departure for first time offenders after 1) consideration of rehabilitative effort on the part of defendants conducted pre-trial and/or pre-arrest; 2) consideration of the time that has elapsed since the instant offense and defendants' behavior over that time, and 3) consideration of the impact of incarceration on defendants' families and communities.  Apply these also in consideration of alternatives to incarceration. 

2.  Do away with the 2-level increase for use of a computer, e.g. 2A3.1(b)(1).  Everything is done with a computer, and in fact to commit the offenses without using a computer would be more difficult, and more heinous.  This is an antiquated guideline. With deepest thanks for your time and consideration, Jacob Rubinstein Criminal Justice Reform 

By: Abraham Schwartz 

## LIBERTY, FREEDOM, AND INCARCERATION 

All Americans agree, liberty and freedom are the very essence of our nation. Liberty and freedom gave 

us the moral right to secede from the British Empire. They are ingrained in our culture, and they control 

every aspect of our daily life. Each stanza of o ur national anthem ends with the phrase “the land of the 

free”. This is the reason, that since our nation’s founding, immigrants from across the globe, have 

teemed our shores. One of the most cherished landmarks is named the Statue of Liberty. On its 

pedes tal, is mounted the new colossus. Therein, is the phrase “Give me your tired, your poor, your 

huddled masses yearning to breathe free.” 

Liberty and freedom are inherent rights to every American ; i ncluding those convicted of various crimes. 

Since society h as a compelling interest to incarcerate criminals for either retributive or utilitarian 

reasons and/or goals, individual freedom can be revoked, if deemed necessary for any sentencing goals. 

But! It must be viewed as two competing interests , a right to fre edom, and a government interest. That 

right can be impinged only if the government has a compelling interest in incarceration and no other 

way or means of accomplishing that. 

The free exercise clause in the first amendment of the Constitution, may be used as an example. The 

strict scrutiny test is applied when free exercise of religion and a government interest come into conflict 

with each other. T he government must have a compelling interest in order to impinge upon that 

exercise of religion and is obliga ted to use the least restrictive means to achieve that interest. (See 

Sherbert v. Verner ). If there is no compelling interest for a longer sentence than necessary, then 

individual freedom prevails. Or, if the government can achieve that interest in ways ot her than 

incarceration, then th ose avenue s take precedence over incarceration. As in religious freedom, the 

rational basis test is not enough to revoke individual freedom. 

In 1990, in the case of Employment Division v. Smith, it was established that in a neutral law of general 

applicability, the rational basis test must be employed. In the case of sentencing, it is not a neutral law, 

because it targets individual freedom directly , therefore, the strict scrutiny test should appl y. It can be 

argued that even according to the rational basis test, at present, the sentencing guidelines def y any 

rational thinking. 

## A BRIEF HISTORY OF SENTENCING GUIDELINES 

The enlightenment era gave rise to the utilitarian model of punishment which resulted in replacing 

corporal pu nishment with imprisonment. In 1910, the federal government recognized rehabilitation as a 

main factor by creating parole and the U.S. Parole Commission. Any prisoner sentenced to terms of one 

year or more, was made eligible for parole upon expiration of 1 /3 of his sentence. This form continued 

to gain momentum until the 1930’s, when rehabilitation became the primary factor when sentencing in 

the U.S. By the 1960’s rehabilitation had become the dominant theory of criminal punishment for the 

entire nation. T hen, the primacy of the rehabilitative goal of sentencing was diminished and many states 

and the federal government established guidelines which limited judicial discretion. In 1984, the federal 

government established the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, which created the U.S. 

Sentencing Commission, which established determinate sentencing and provided for the abolition of 

parole. Congress wanted to achieve three main objectives. See the policy statement below: Policy Statement: To understand these guidelines and the rationale that underlies them, one must begin 

with the three objectives that Congress, in enacting the new sentencing law, sought to achieve. Its basic 

objective was to enhance the ability of the criminal justice system to reduce crime t hrough an effective, 

fair sentencing system. To achieve this objective, Congress first sought honesty in sentencing. It sought to 

avoid the confusion and implicit deception that arises out of the present sentencing system which 

requires a judge to impose a n indeterminate sentence that is automatically reduced in most cases by 

"good time" credits. In addition, the Parole Commission is permitted to determine how much of the 

remainder of any prison sentence an offender will serve. This usually results in a sub stantial reduction in 

the effective length of the sentence imposed, with defendants often serving only about one -third of the 

sentence handed down by the court. Second, Congress sought uniformity in sentencing by narrowing the 

wide disparity in sentences i mposed by different federal courts for similar criminal conduct by similar 

offenders. Third, Congress sought proportionality in sentencing through a system that imposes 

appropriately different sentences for criminal conduct of different severities. 

The Com mission grouped comparable crimes into classes of offenses, reasoning that this would result in 

a system in which defendants who committed similar crimes would receive comparable sentences. The y

analyzed data from over 10,000 sentencing reports and 100,00 federal convictions and calculated the 

average time served for each class of crime. This information was used to set the offense level for each 

class. All the offenses are listed in chapter 2 of the guidelines and each offense has a corresponding Base 

Offe nse Level, for example , for Homicide , first degree murder , the Base Offense Level is 43 which is the 

highest level on the sentencing grid, for fraud the Base Offense Level is 6 or 7. 

Chapter 2 of the the guidelines also introduce Specific Offense Characteristics (S.O.C.’s) to reflect the 

severity of the crime itself. It identifies certain characteristics in each offense that can either increase or 

decrease the defendant’s offense level . It reflects the se ntence to the overall criminality and relevant 

conduct of the defendant. The initial guidelines for economic crimes had only two SOC ’s. T he guidelines 

also offer adjustments in relation to the victim and the defendant’s role the offense . These are listed i n

chapter 3 of the guideline’s manual. In chapter 4 , they introduced the defendant’s criminal history into 

the sentencing calculation. This resulted in the Sentencing Table Grid which contains 43 offense levels 

along its vertical line and 6 classes of the criminal history, along its horizontal line. The horizontal line 

measures according to the past criminal record of the defendant. The vertical line measures according to 

the severity of the crime committed. 

The Guidelines require a judge to tailor a sen tence upon the totality of the defendant’s conduct, not just 

the offense with which the defendant was charged. At sentencing, a judge is supposed to make findings 

of facts upon everything the defendant did. It should be based on the preponderance of eviden ce. The 

Court can apply conduct that was not proven by a jury or a defendants’ own admission. Hearsay and 

evidence excluded at trial by the exclusionary rule is permitted as a factor in establishing the guideline 

leve l. The judge shall then calculate a sentence which includes the Base offense level and all the 

enhancements. He will produce the Guideline range, which reflects overall criminality. Chapter 5 

outlines all departures from the total calculated guidelines rang e upward or downward . The judge th en

considers the statutory factors listed in 3553 (a) to determine if the sentence is sufficient , or not more 

than necessary to achiev e the sentencing goals listed therein . He can than issue a variance if he deems 

the sent ence not sufficient or greater than necessary for the sentencing goals. 

## SENTENCING GUIDELINES FLAWS Although, well intentioned from the outset, the Sentencing Guidelines are not flawless. Following are a 

few flaws in the Guidelines: 

The Mens Rea Factor :

• Since Specific Offense Characteristics ( S.O.C .’s) were introduced, maintaining that the sentence 

should represent the nature of the offense, it would have been appropriate for economic and 

financial fraud to have various ranges based on the level of mens r ea , the same way it is 

established in murder. If punishment is to be proportionate, then it should be based on the 

levels of mens r ea , as in Homicide, see Sentencing Guidelines: 

§2A1.1. Homicide 1 st Degree: Base Offense Level: 43 

§2A1.2. 2nd Degree murder Base Offense Level: 38 

§2A1.3. Voluntary Manslaughter: Base Offense Level: 29 

§2A1.4. Involuntary Manslaughter 

(a) Base Offense Level: 

(1) 12, i f the offense involved criminally negligent conduct; or 

(2) (Apply the greater) 

(A) 18, if the offense involved reckless conduct; or 

(B) 22, if the offense involved the reckless operation of a means of 

transportation 

Recklessness is to act with the knowledge that there is a risk that is sufficiently large and serious. 

It is not just an extreme lack of caring; it is the conscience disregard of a serious risk. Negligence 

is less culpable than recklessness. It is the failure to be aware of something. Some criminologists 

believe that negligence shall never be enough to justify imprisonment. Some jurisdictions do not 

allow negligence to be criminal, only in the case of murder. 

.

In financial fraud cases, there are many levels of mens r ea. For example: when one lies on a 

bank loan application with the intention of stealing mon ey , it is a representation of the highest 

degree of mens r ea in a bank fraud case. Another person might attain a loan by misrepresenting 

his company’s financials, because of financial hardship, though he intends to pay back the 

money. However, the bank is at a risk. This is a form of recklessness, which is a lesser degree 

than purposely stealing from the bank. Lastly, there may be one who is running his business and he offers a misrepresentation on his financials. In his mind there is no chance of a loss fo r the 

bank. This is a form of negligence. Another example: in securities fraud, a corporate officer 

misrepresents a public company’s solvency for it to appear more solvent than it is. When the 

truth is established, stock prices may decline, resulting in l oss to investors. In a public company 

this loss may be a few hundred million dollars, which according to the current loss table could 

result in life in prison. However, the loss to the victims was unintentional. Therefore, the intent 

level should be reckle ssness, or even negligence. 

The Duress Factor: 

• Duress and necessity are an affirmative defense. It exculpates criminal conduct. In the 

Guidelines §5K2.12. it states, if the defendant commits the offense because of serious coercion, 

blackmail or duress under circumstance s not amounting to a complete def ense, the court may 

depart downward, etc. Notwithstanding, this policy statement, personal financial difficulties 

and economic pressure upon a trade or business do not warrant a downward departure . Case 

in point: A person may be in a position of responsibi lity for payroll and/or accounts payable, for 

a large company. As happens in the business world daily, a main customer may have trouble 

paying and keeps delaying payment. Or, even more so, the customer refutes the amount to be 

paid because of unsatisfactio n, or files for bankruptcy leaving a huge hole. The consequences 

are huge. One is faced with a dilemma to close the business or to file for Chapter 11. This will 

result in further loss because of the stigma. The best and most viable option in the mind of t he 

offender is to obtain funds to keep the business afloat, until circumstance s improve. In such a 

case of duress, even though not exculpatory, mandates a downward departure . There is a 

difference between a criminal enterprise that was established for crim inal purposes and a 

business venture or any corporation that was incepted with a proper intent and purpose, but 

due to circumstances under duress the officers violated criminal offenses. 

The Loss Factor: 

• All agree that loss is a factor in a sentence. Two reasons:  

> •

the impact it has/had on others.  

> •

because of the greed of the offender. 

There is no mitigating factor in the Guidelines for one who has committed an offense but has 

not used the monies for personal gain i.e., a private school that has no access to government 

funding. The administrator commits an offense to pay it s teachers. Even in a business or trade, it 

can be argued, that to pay debtors, cannot be considered greed. Rather it is a serious need. 

• There is no mechanism implemented to assure that loss correspond s to inflation. If the 

Commission in the original draft deemed a 5 -million -dollar loss , a trigger for an eleven -point 

enhancement, for the greed for whatever 5 million dollars could buy, they determined that this 

is the proper level. Corresponding to inflation years later 5 million dollars can buy much less. 

Therefore, th ere is less loss and less greed. 

§2B1.1. covers sentences for economic crimes, including theft, embezzlement, fraud, and forgery. One 

of the changes the USSG made, was to raise economic crime sentences above pre guidelines levels so that an increased number of defendants would serve time in prison instead of probation. The USS C held 

that the short definite sentences for this type of offenders would accomplish guideline goals of 

proportionate punishment and deterrence. Originally, the fraud guidelines were at USSG §2F1.1. The 

theft guidelin es were at USSG §2B1.1. The Base Offense Level for fraud was 6. The highest range at the 

Loss Table gained an increase of 11 level s. Combined with the Base Offense Level it totaled 17. The Loss 

Table was capped at a mere 5 million dollars. The fraud guidel ine had only 2 S.O.C .’s. The Commission 

even took steps to make sure that fraud sentences were less punitive than other offenses that were 

considered more serious. E.g., bribery, serious drug trafficking, and violent offenses. 

In 1990, in response to the Savings and Loan scandals, the Loss Table was amended. The highest range 

reached 17 level s for loss es of 40 -80 million dollars. The combined total with the base offense level was 

23 level s. 

In the economic crime package in 2001 , another increase was enacted. It merged three guidelines 2F1.1, 

2B1.1 and 2B3.1. It added more ranges to the Loss Table. The highest range in the Loss Table was 24 

level s, combined with the Base Offense Level it reached 30 levels for loss es of 50 -150 mil lion dollars. It 

also added a new S.O.C . of four levels for more than 50 victims. 

Another increase in the severity of financial fraud occurred a year later. In response to several high -

profile financial scandals i.e., Enron, Tyco International, WorldCom, the Sarbanes -Oxley act was enacted 

by Congress. Among other increases it raised the statutory maximum for wire fraud and mail fraud from 

5 years to 20 years. Additionally, the Commission , by direction of Congress , stiffened financial fraud 

penalties, by in creasing the Base Offense Level from level 6 to level 7 for any fraud offense which carries 

a statutory maximum of 20 years or more. Then, the Loss Table was again extended. The highest loss 

amount grew from 100 million dollars to 400 million dollars , whi ch results in a 30 level enhancement, 

combined with the Base Offense Level it reaches 37 levels. The Commission then added another number 

of S.O.C .’s to the fraud Guidelines. In 2003, a 6 -level enhancement was added for any fraud offense that 

involved more than 250 victims. 

Each amendment that expanded the Loss Table to higher levels, also increased the offense level for the 

existing ones. i.e., in the original draft, an enhancement of 11 applie d to a loss of over 5 million dollars. 

According to the curren t Loss Table it almost doubles. An enhancement of 20 levels is applied for loss es 

between 3 -9.5 million dollars. In actual prison time, it triples. Because of the accelerating nature of the 

guidelines, it rapidly moves upward. In the original draft a 5 -mil lion -dollar fraud case, triggered a 24 –30 -

month sentence. See table at level 17 . C urrently, at level 27 the sentence is for 70 -78 months. 

These sentence increases over the years, for financial fraud, escalated many times beyond any rationale. 

There was no t a decline in crime, and it did not reduce fraud. Any corporate offense with a loss of over 5 

million dollars, and a few S.O.C .’s, which in 1987 would have resulted in a 24 –30 -month sentence, now 

can carr y a sentence for life imprisonment! It may also result in an offense level of 50 -60 points, which is 

basically superfluous, because the highest range in the guidelines is 43, the same offense level for one 

convicted of first -degree murder. 

Over the years the Commission continuously added new S.O.C. ’s. Many of these S.O.C .’s overlap and 

duplicate factors which caus e a cumulative affect that does not truly represent the seriousness of the 

offense. i.e., the number of victims enhancement. This may be a viable tool to measure culpability. 

However, once the Loss Table enhancement is applied, it does not add any culpability. It can be argued 

that it might even serve as a mitigating fact or i.e., if the amount of loss is a million dollars and is related to only one victim, it can have a devastating effect on the victim. As opposed to, if 250 victims are 

affected, that amount is distributed amongst many individuals and each victim only incu rs a loss of 

approximately four thousand dollars. 

When the Sentencing Commission ad opted the original Guidelines, its objective was to deter crime and 

to ensure that financial fraud offenders would face short but definite periods of confinement. The 

origin al draft of the Guidelines well reflects that. Over the years, the Sentencing Commission has let go 

of its original goal of ensuring short but definite sentencing. It has regularly increased the prison 

sentences for fraud. No other civilized country in the world recognizes that economic offenses for over a 

couple of million dollars should have stiffer penalties than the most vicious murders. And, by not 

differentiating between the levels of mens rea, an unbelievable paradox has been attained. One who 

commit s murder in the most heinous fashion, with the highest level of mens r ea , has a lower range of 

Guideline levels , than an individual who commits an economic offense for over 100 million dollars with a 

few S.O.C . enhancements . Though, his mens r ea level was the lowest, for recklessness or even 

negligence. I would dare say , this is barbaric and violates the 8 th amendment. 

The most egregious part of the crime is the actual committing of the offense. Quantity , as in a drug case, 

or amount of money will certainly exacerbate the crime and mandate a harsher sentence. Yet, in no way 

can it turn a low -level felony into a high crime. If a judge deems by a preponderance of evidence, that 

actual loss or intended loss is for a few million dollars, and with some enhancemen ts i.e., using 

sophisticated means and/or multiple victims , it can result in a sentence of 25 years to life. This is 

inherently wrong! 

Criminologists list among various types of offenses, crimes against the person, and crimes against 

property. There are tw o levels of property crime: 

1. Crime against habitat i.e., burglary. This is considered profoundly serious , because the victim’s 

domain is violated. Additionally, there is the possibility of psychological scars, trauma, bodily 

injury, and even death. 

2. Larceny, which is less serious than burglary. 

Crimes against a person are more severe than both levels of cri me s against property. Though, of course, 

high level crime against property can result in a stiffer sentence than a lower -level crime against a

person . But it is definite, that even a high -level crime against property cannot be up to par and even 

exceed the most heinous crime against a person. 

That is the reason that when one commits multiple low -level felonies ( i.e., class E felonies), that person 

is not sentenced for each crime separately, resulting in consecutive sentences, which is known as the 

cumulativ e approach. If this approach is followed, then punishment is more severe than one who is 

convicted of a much more serious crime, i.e., murder. The principle of proportionality mandates that the 

severity of the sentence corresponds with the seriousness of t he offense. The USSG does not accept the 

cumulative approach. That is why many offenses are grouped together when exacting a sentence, even 

though each offense is a different crime. 

When one analyzes the contrast between one who commits multiple offenses, which are not punished 

separately, as opposed to one who commits one or two offenses where loss is established for a few 

million dollars, it can be deduced that it takes a more morally depraved mindset to commit multiple offenses, though there is a lower l oss, than to commit one offense with a high loss. In the former case 

one must violate every law separately. Whereas, in the case of the greater money loss, the violated 

offense is not greater. It is only the amount of money, which is a consequence of the o ffense, that is a 

greater loss. If the cumulative approach is not recognized in sentencing, then how can an offense that 

the base offense level does not mandate prison for, be punishable up to a to life sentence in prison ?! 

See the initial draft of the gui delines: e) Multi -Count Convictions. The Commission, like other sentencing 

commissions, has found it particularly difficult to develop rules for sentencing defendants convicted of 

multiple violations of law, each of which makes up a separate count in an in dictment. The reason it is 

difficult is that when a defendant engages in conduct that causes several harms, each additional harm, 

even if it increases the extent to which punishment is warranted, does not necessarily warrant a 

proportionate increase in pun ishment. A defendant who assaults others during a fight, for example, may 

warrant more punishment if he injures ten people than if he injures one, but his conduct does not 

necessarily warrant ten times the punishment. If it did, many of the simplest offens es, for reasons that 

are often fortuitous, would lead to life sentences of imprisonment — sentences that neither "just deserts" 

nor "crime control" theories of punishment would find justified. 

If this approach is accepted, then money loss, though aggravatin g the crime, should not be the 

determining factor between a sentence of life in prison or no prison at all. 

PURPOSES & GOALS OF SENTENCING: 

What they are, and what they were intended to be: 

The Sentencing Guidelines recognize retributive justice (just deserts) and utilitarian justice, which is 

comprised of 3 goals in Sentencing: 

1. Incapacitation 

2. Rehabilitation 

3. Deterrence 

See policy statement of the Sentencing Guideline 18, US Code §3553 (A): 

(a) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN IMPOSING A SENTENCE. —The court shall impose a sentence sufficient, but 

not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection. The 

court, in determining the particular sentence to be imposed, shall consider —

(1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant. 

(2) the need for the sentence imposed —

(A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just 

punishment for the offense. 

(B) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct. 

(C) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and (D) to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or 

other correctional treatment in the most effective manner. 

These long sentencing ranges for economic crimes do not satisfy any goals of sentencing. If retribution is 

a goal of sentencing, then proportionality must be a main factor in punishing. Because puni shment is 

established by the moral turpitude it takes to commit an offense , e conomic crimes should not be up to 

par with the most heinous crimes like first degree murder , e ven when a huge amount of money is 

involved. 

According to the utilitarian model, proportionality should also guide the length of a sentence. Society 

has an interest in sentences to be proportionate to the gravity of the crime. The leader of modern 

utilitarianism, Jeremy Bentham , wrote in Principles in Penal Code Rule III: when t wo offenses come in 

competition , the punishment for the greater offense must induce a man to go for the lesser offense . If 

financial fraud is penalized more gravely than the most vicious murders a potential offender will choose 

to commit the offense with t he lesser consequences. Economic offenders must be punished less than 

homicide offenders of the first degree. The way it now stands , the ranges for economic offenders in 

multimillion dollar fraud cases are much higher than the 43 ranges for first degree mu rder !

Proportionality is ingrained in the core values of the U.S. As in the ruling of Whims v. U.S. , and much 

later Solem v. Helm, both emphasized that even in non -capital cases, disproportionate sentencing is in 

violation of the eighth amendment , that cru el and unusual punishment should not be imposed. In the 

Solem v. Helm case, the court pointed out three factors to determine whether the sentence is 

proportionate to the crime: 

• The seriousness of the crime to the severity of the penalty. 

• The sentence imp osed for similarly grave offenses in the same jurisdiction. 

• Sentences imposed for crimes in other jurisdictions. 

In Harmelin v. Michigan, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5 -4 decision that proportionality is not 

guaranteed by the eighth amendment, only in capi tal cases. The reason, as Justice Scalia points out, is, 

that there is relief from the other branches of government. The Legislative branch may retroactively 

change the amount of time for offenses. Or there is the availability of Executive clemency. 

Therefore, it is incumbent on the legislative branch, to ensure that proportionality is upheld in 

sentencing. Additionally, the Court agreed in a 7 -2 decision, that a grossly disproportionate sentence, 

even in a non -capital case is unconstitutional. It can be argued that when following the calculations of 

the Guidelines in financial fraud , they are grossly disproportionate. 

In other jurisdictions, like Canada, the maximum sentence for fraud is 14 years. There is the availability 

of parole after 1/3 of the sentence or after 7 years, whichever is less. The protection of society is the 

overriding consideration in any release dec ision. For example, R v. Slobagian, who orchestrated one of 

the biggest frauds in the history of British Columbia, the fraud amount was 182 million dollars. He was 

sentenced to 6 years in prison , a nd he was able to face a parole board for early release aft er two years. 

Canada does not have a bigger fraud problem than the U.S. In the U.S., after all enhancements were 

enacted, there was no decline in any of the §2B1.1. crimes. This is empirical evidence that these 

enhancements did not accomplish any of the ut ilitarian goals. Parole should be reinstated in the U .S. See 

policy statement of the Parole Board of Canada: Research over many years has shown that offenders are more likely to become productive law -abiding citizens when they have been returned to the com munity 

through conditional release (parole) than when they stayed in prison until the end of their sentence. 

If these sentences are justified for incapacitation purposes , the Sentencing Guidelines Commission has 

conducted a study that first -time fraud offe nders are unlikely to recidivate. Furthermore, as opposed to 

street crimes, where the public cannot protect itself if someone is released from prison. In financial 

fraud, a lifelong ban on that activity will accomplish incapacitation to the fullest. We cle arly see this in 

the following cases of the 1980 ’s:  

> •

Ivan Boesky, who was released from prison after two years, but was issued a lifelong ban for 

trading.  

> •

Martin Siegel pled guilty, and he also received a lifelong ban on trading.  

> •

Dennis Levine received a two -year sentence and a lifelong ban on trading.  

> •

Michael Milken was sentenced to two years in prison and received a lifelong ban from the 

securities industry. 

These were multi million dollars offenses and incapacitation was achieved by banning activity. 

In the sentencing documents for Michael Milken, it is stated that only three out of the nearly one 

hundred securities law violators sentenced in this district who pled guilty, received sentences greater 

than one year and a day .

With the rehabilitative goal in mind, it takes a lesser criminal mindset to perpetrate financial fraud than 

murder. If done with the lowest level of mens r ea, it is even less than that. Therefore, minimal time in 

prison should suffice to cure the offender. 

For both deterrence purpose s, general and specific, it has been established that economic crime 

offenders do not calculate the levels of risk and gain. It simply does not dawn on them that there will be 

consequences to suffer for that activity. The fact is, that any sentence will su ffice for an economic crime. 

Even a perp walk is a consequence to reckon with. This is the reason why the Guidelines, in its initial 

draft sought to ensure that financial fraud offenders face short but definite periods of confinement. It 

was understood, an d rightfully so, that any prison time would accomplish deterrence goals. 

The most significant position of t he model penal code is §7.01 which provides that punishment other 

than prison should be used unless prison is necessary for the protection of the public. 

The enhanced sentences have wreaked havoc and caused irreparable harm to American families without 

any mercy or compassion. It has left devastating effects on children of the defendants. In U.S. v. 

Johnson, the District Court issued a downward dep arture of ten levels for extraordinary family 

responsibilities. The government appealed. The 2 nd circuit court sustained the departure. Chief Judge 

Oakes wrote in that decision: The USSG do not require a judge to leave compassion and common sense 

at the do or to the courtroom. The government asks us, on this appeal, to reverse a sentencing judges 

exercise of downward flexibility on behalf of an infant and three young children who depend entirely 

upon the defendant for their upbringing. The Sentencing Guidel ine Commission’s Base Offense Level for robbery, burglary and fraud is accorded 

in proportion to the severity of the crime. The base offense level for robbery, which is a crime against a 

person, is 20. Burglary, which is a crime against habitat: 

1. 17, a resi dence, or, 

2. 12, if a structure other than a residence. 

Fraud, which is a crime against property is 6 or 7. 

Contrarily, the Loss Table is just the opposite. For robbery, the loss table offers only 8 levels with the 

highest level of 7, for more than 9.5 mil dollars. For burglary, which is a lesser crime, there are 9 levels. 

The top level is 8 for over 9.5 million dollars. Fraud is 30 levels for more than 550 million dollars. 

Additionally, the fraud table adds many more levels than the other tables for a loss amount up to 9.5 

million dollars , which is covered by all three tables . For example, in the case of loss of more than 9.5 

million dollars , the burglary table add s 8 levels, and t he fraud table adds 20 levels. 

The fact that other tables were not so drastically enhanced , proves that these enhancements are 

unnecessary for any sentencing goals or purposes. Why should a fraud of 5 million dollars yield an 18 -

level increase and a 5 -million -dollar burglary yield only a 7 -level increase?! 

Loss itself does n ot necessarily represent moral depravity or culpability. It might be determined by sheer 

luck. There may be two similarly situated defendants. They both g ave misrepresentation s on their 

financials. One company is doing well so there is no actual loss. Inte nded loss is not relevant, because it 

is estimated by the pecuniary harm that the defendant purposely sought to inflict. The offense level is 6 -

7 which is in Zone A with no prison time. The other company lost money or stock value in the amount of 

a few mil lion dollars, therefore that defendant receives a virtual life sentence. So, luck is the deciding 

factor between no prison time or serving the rest of his life in prison. It truly boggles the mind! 

The draconian enhancements by the Commission coupled with above mentioned flaws in the Guidelines 

resulted in out of proportion sentencing, which in turn resulted in disparate sentencing, nationwide. The 

main reason why the Guidelines were enacted had the opposite effect. In 1996, in Koon v. U.S., the 

Supreme Cou rt widened judicial discretion . It ruled that a District Court’s decision to depart from the 

Guidelines were entitled to deference on appeal by adopting an abuse of discretion standard of review 

rather than the de novo standard. It also ruled that although the SRA of 1984 requires that a district 

judge impose a sentence within the applicable Guidelines range in an ordinary case, it does not 

eliminate all the district courts traditional sentencing discretion . R ather, it allows a departure from the 

range if t he court finds there exists an aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind , or a degree , not 

adequately taken into consideration by the sentencing commission in formulating the Guidelines. 

However, in 2003 Congress enacted the Protect Act , which inclu des burdensome reporting 

requirements on judges who depart from the Guidelines and requires de novo appellate review of 

departures . It also direct ed the Sentencing Commission, within 180 days, to amend the Guidelines and 

Policy Statements to ensure that th e incidence of downward departures is substantially reduced. 

However, this did not hold out for too long. 

The disparity widened in U.S. v. Booker, where the Supreme Court applied the rulings of Apprendi v. NJ, 

and Blakely v. Washington to the federal guidelines. It ruled in a split decision that the mandatory nature of the Guidelines violate d the 6 th amendment, trial by jury. It h eld that all the facts relevant to a 

sentence must be found by a jury, not by a judge. They also ruled that the mandatory nature of the 

Guidelines can be severed under the Statutory Severance Doctrine to render the Guidelines merely 

advisory. As such, a se ntencing court would still be required to consider the Guidelines but would now 

have the freedom to tailor a sentence considering other statutory concerns. They severed and excised 

18 US §3553 , (b) (1) which made the Guideline sentences mandatory, and 18 USC §3742 , which 

established standards of appellate review of sentences and reinstated reasonableness as the standard of 

appellate review. The Court then directed District Courts to continue to calculate proper USSG 

guidelines with other sentencing goals i ncluding §3553 (A). This directive to use 18 USC §3553 (A) which 

sets purposes to be considered when issuing sentences and states that the court shall impose a 

sentence , sufficient , but not greater than necessary to comply with the purposes set forth in 18 USC 

§3553 (a) (2) has resulted in district judges to consider purposes in sentencing when issuing sentences. It 

also factors in , a large variety of fact and conduct in sentencing , that was not factored in before the 

Booker case. 

In 2007 , the U .S. Supreme Court again expanded its decision in U .S. v. Booker, when it ruled in Gall v. 

U.S. The District Court issued a sentence of 36 months’ probation for one who ple d guilty to conspiracy 

to distribute ecstasy , instead of the recommended sentence of 30 -37 month s in prison. The government 

appealed and the circuit court vacated and remanded the sentence , because it was a 100% downward 

departure, it had to be justified by extraordinary circumstances. The Supreme Court reinstated the 

probation sentence, and it rule d that the appellate court may not apply a presumption of 

unreasonableness. It may consider the extent of the deviation but must give due deference to the 

district court decision, that the 18 USC §3553(A) factors , overall , justify the extent of the variance. The 

fact that the appellate court might reasonably have concluded that a different sentence is appropriate is 

insufficient to justify reversal of the district court. And in, U.S. v. Kimbrough, in 2007, the Supreme Cour t

ruled that when the Sentencing Commission fails to fulfill its characteristic institutional role of 

developing a particular guideline, or its later amendment, based upon empirical data, national 

experience or some rational policy basis, the district cour t has the discretion to conclude that the 

resulting advisory range, yields a sentence greater than necessary to achieve §3553 (A) purposes. 

Since this ruling, judicial departure on sentences is permissible if there is a policy disagreement with the 

Senten cing Commission. This resulted in even greater disparity in the country. Just to mention a few 

notable cases:  

> •

US v. Olis; this case attracted a lot of publicity because of the draconian sentence that was 

imposed on a corporate officer for participating in a fraudulent scheme called Project Alpha. A 

representative a of a large institution testified that the fund lost 105 million dollars when 

Dynegy’s share price declined in the period after revelation of the fraud. This mandated a 26 -

level increase in the G uidelines level. Then, a two -level enhancement was added for employing 

sophisticated means, and another two -level enhancement for a special skill to carry out the 

fraud. Additionally, the court found that there were more than 50 victims, requiring a four -level 

enhancement. None of these findings were proven by the jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The 

courts calculation of Olis’ total offense level was 40 , a lmost the same range as first -degree 

murder. A sentence for 292 months was imposed. Olis’ boss, Gene Fo ster, a partner in the 

crime , pled guilty and cooperated. He received a sentence of eight months. Another 

codefendant Helen Sharky was sentenced to 30 days! While an appeal was pending , the 

Supreme Court ruled in U .S. v. Booker . Olis’s case was remanded fo r sentencing and the 

calculated Guidelines level was established at 151 -188 months 12 -16 years . T he recalculated 

Guidelines that was less severe than the original was in relation to the determination that the amount of loss attributable to the defendant wa s 79 million, not 105 million that was attributed 

to him in the original sentences. If not for the case of U.S. v. Booker, Olis would have received 

th e sentence of 12 -16 years. But, since U.S. v. Booker had already been decided by Olis’ second 

sentencing, the judge sentenced Olis to a non -Guidelines sentence of 72 months in prison. The 

judge took several factors into consideration:  

> o

1-Defendant did not have the authority to approve Project Alpha  

> o

2-Defendant did not defraud Dynegy and was not enriched in a significant way by the 

scheme.  

> o

3-Dynegy was not forced to file for bankruptcy . 

> o

4-Defendant was born in Korea and raised by a single mother in the U .S. He had no 

criminal history. 

The judge did no t include the factor that the defendant committed the offense with the lowest 

level of mens re a. 

> •

U.S. v. Sholom Rubashkin; he was convicted of bank wire and mail fraud and false statement s to 

a bank. Additionally, he was convicted for money laundering and in violation of an order of the 

Secretary of Agriculture, by making late payment to the cattle suppliers. District Court judge 

Linda R. Reade, of the Northern District of Iowa, sentenced Sholom Rubashkin to 324 months, 

27 years in prison. This was the low end of the Guidelines range. The money laundering charge s

were for only 3 million dollars. Rubashkin’s financial charges were based on Agri Processors 

fraudulent inflation of collateral, and immigration violations, which gave rise to fraud charges. 

Agri to ld the bank that it was not in violation of any law statute or regulation, which would in 

any respect materially and adversely affect the collateral of Agri’s property, business, etc. The 

Court found that Rubashkin’s fraudulent activity resulted in a loss to the bank of 27 million 

dollars. This increased his offense level by 22 levels. Another 2 levels were supplemented for 

sophisticated means. Another 2 levels were added for money laundering , if convicted under 

Title 1 8 U.S.C. §1956 . Another 2 levels were added for sophisticated laundering. The judge than 

added the following chapter 3 adjustments, A 4 level upward adjustment for organizer or leader. 

2 levels for abuse of position of trust. Another 2 levels upward adjustment for obstruction of 

justice. Furth ermore, the government noted that the court had authority to depart upward on 

the guideline’s provisions, for: 

1. Extraordinary obstruction of justice. 

2. Criminal conduct that did not enter the above guideline analysis. 

The judge reserved the right to use oth er enhancements in case she would lose a few levels on appeal. 

She would keep the range at 41 by taking into consideration upward departures, that she did not 

consider at the sentencing! 

The above two cases strongly illustrate, how out of touch, sentencin g for financial crimes has become. In 

both cases the defendant did not intend to steal any money. Sholom Rubashkin was paying his monthly 

bank payments for many years. His intent was to pay back every penny, with the interest incurred. His 

level of mens r ea was not more than negligence. He received a sentence up to par with one convicted of 

first -degree murder, which reflects the highest level of mens r ea . Secondly , the judge herself admitted 

that Agri was always strapped for cash. Rubashkin was under tremendous pressure to cover payroll and 

suppliers. No mitigation of the offense level was offered because of duress, even not exculpatory, but as 

a mitigating factor. Thirdly, the money was used to run his business. It was not done out of greed. This too, was not a mitigating factor in sentencing. After adjusting his offense level to 29 points because of 

the loss, a four -level enhancement was added on top of that, for m oney laundering. Since the 

sentencing table works in an accelerating fashion; It grows exponentially. In the upper levels, every level 

increase, results in additional years in prison. The money laundering enhancement was put on top of the 

loss enhancement, even though the money laundering was for only 3 million dollars. If a sentence 

should reflect overall criminality, then it is unfair that fraud for 27 million dollars and money laundering 

for only 3 million dollars should carry the same penalty as one who launders the whole 27 million 

dollars. The four levels that were added on top of the money loss enhancements added another 10 

years to Rubashkin’s sentence. 

It is unfair, even in a case where money laundering represents the complete loss . Since the Senten cing 

Table works in an accelerating fashion it ends up adding the years from the Loss Table plus the years 

from the money laundering range. The money laundering is in the highest range, where sentencing 

ranges are much wider. This results in ridiculous sen tences. 

However, there are judges who are fair -minded as illustrated below:  

> •

US v. Gupta (2012). Rajat Gupta was convicted for insider trading. His Guidelines range was 

between 97 -121 months. Judge Jed Rakoff sentenced Gupta to 24 months in prison. Judge 

Rakoff called the current Sentencing Guidelines for fraud , a draconian approach to white collar 

crime unsupported by any empirical evidence.  

> •

US v. Ade lson. Adelson, president of Impath, Inc., a public company specializing in cancer 

diagnosis testing, joined a conspiracy initially concocted by others to materially overstate 

Impath’s financials, thereby artificially inflating the price of its stock. His Guidelines range was 

life in prison, blocked by an 85 -year statutory maximum. Loss was calculated between 50 -100 

million dollars. There were another 5 defendants who were as guilty in accounting and fraud as 

Adelson. The others who originated the conspirac y struck deals and received no prison time. Mr. 

Adelson exercised his right to trial. He was faced with a 360 year to life sentence. Judge Rakoff 

sentenced Adelson to 42 months in prison. 

The fact that prosecutors offer such huge deductions in prison time to offenders who cooperate, 

sustains the point that the stiff sentences are not rational with any of the sentencing goals to begin with. 

In murder cases there is not such a large contrast when a defendant pleads guilty or makes the decision 

to execute his right to trial by jury .

In 2015, the Committee proposed amendments to the Guidelines. It was a minor step in the right 

direction. The definition of intended loss was amended to mean, the pecuniary harm that the defendant 

purposely sought to inflict. Only purposeful intent should be included. The table for victims was also 

amended. and included an enhancement for even on e victim if one suffered substantial financial 

hardship. It lessened the enhancement for multiple victims. It altered the sophisticated m eans S.O.C. It 

issued an amendment to add an inflationary adjustment for all tables contained in the guidelines. True, 

it is a step in the right direction, but it is a drop in the bucket. The Sentencing Guidelines requires a 

major overhaul. 

In conclusion, these two factors (the stiff enhancements over the years by the Commission and the 

Supreme Court rulings, mentioned above) resulted in the g re atest disparity. Many judges impose 

sentences that comply with the purposes in §3553A which results in a drastically lower sentence than 

when following the Guidelines calculations. However, there are still some judges who just follow the Guidelines computation. This results in sentences that do not meet any of the sentencing purposes. This 

scenario crea tes the greatest disparity. By increasing the sentences out of proportion and out of line 

with the sentencing purposes, the purpose of the Sentencing Guidelines §3553 (B) a primary goal of 

sentencing reform is the elimination of unwarranted sentencing disp arity , has been defeated. 

Considering the above , I offer the following amendments: 

1. The Commission shall amend the Loss Table at §2B1.1. (b) (1 ) and insert the original Loss 

Table at §2F1.1 (b) (1). 

2. 

The Commission shal l amend existing Guidelines for all §2B1.1. offenses . Computed 

offense level should apply only when fraud, theft, or deceit, is committed purposefully .

If committed knowingly, offense level should be reduced by 25 %. If committed 

recklessly, the offense level should be reduced by 50%. If committed negligently, the 

offense level should be reduced by 75%. 

3. The Commission shall promulgate Guidelines to include a downward departure for any fraud 

case where personal greed was not the objective of the defendant. 

4. The Commission shall amend §5K2.12. and establish a downward departure for an offense 

that was committed under duress. P ersonal financial difficulties and economic pressure upon 

a trade or business warrants a downward departure , i n a case where the initial operation for 

the enterprise was not incepted for criminal activities. 

5. The Commission shall promulgate guidelines to enact a maximum cap, if there are two or 

more S.O.C. ’s that overlap or interact .

6. The Committee shall promulgate Guidelines, that when an en hancement does not relate to 

the complete loss amount i.e., a fraud case where money laundering was committed but not 

for the entire amount , a judge may depart downward. 

7. The Commission shall promulgate Guidelines , that i n a case where no violence was involved, 

and protection of the public can be achieved by a lifelong ban on that activity , then a 

variance for a sentence from 1 to 2 years should apply, regardless of loss amount. 

8. The Comm ission shall amend §5H1.6. of the Guidelines. To insert , in the case of a defendant 

who is responsible for a special needs child, or responsible for an infirm spouse or parent. A 

downward departure may ordinarily be warranted in a non -violence offense. From: ~^! SCHWARTZBERG, ~^!SAGI    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SCHWARTZBERG, SAGI, , TRM-A-A
> Date: Monday, July 17, 2023 8:34:42 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Chair Reeves Inmate Work Assignment: Safety ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Dear Chair Reeves and the Commission: For this year's amendment cycle, I implore on the Commission to prioritize amendments to Guideline 5D1.2(b). There needs to be a reconciliation, as this amendment and policy statement was adopted when the maximum term of supervision was 5 years. There are many "sex offenses" that the recidivism rate is one, if not the, lowest for all federal offenders. While supervision of high risk offenders is appropriate, the routine imposition of lifetime supervised release (or even 10-20 years) for low-risk offenders is unecessary. The resources of the US Probation Department can be better spent, as all of these offenders are, or will be subject to the registry anyway. It is double work, double cost, and provides no benefit. Also, I believe that you should amend 4C1.1 to include all first-time zero criminal history offenders to get the benefit of the 2-point reduction. This can, and will, save the BOP millions of dollars, especially for the low level, low-risk of recidivism offenders--such as those sentenced under 2g2.1 and 2g2.2. While the PROTECT ACT prevents you from calibrating these guidelines as you deem appropriate, this will be one way to do so. Either delete all exclusions, or eliminate the "sex offender" exclusion and perhaps only include violent or hands-on offenses in the exclusion. While I doubt this will go anywhere, I hope the commission pays attention to these issues. Thank you for you time. From: ~^! SEGREST, ~^!ROBERT    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SEGREST, ROBERT, , PET-D-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 12:49:42 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Comments  for  policy Inmate  Work  Assignment:  NA ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I wanted  to  make  note  in  this  forum,  that  there  is  a first  Step  Act  issue.  The  issue  is,  that  Petersburg  VA  FCI  LOW, has  no  education  Building  available  to  facilitate  its  requirements  to  provide  students  with  the  abilities  to  obtain  there programing.  They  are  stagnate  in  the  water  by  only  having  a rotting  down,  Black  Mold,  Falling  apart  and dilapidated  building  and  compound  for  that  matter.  Furthermore,  by  not  allowing  the  students,  residents,  inmates  at this  facility  to  obtain  Vocational,  educational,  hobby  craft,  or  any  other  FSA  allotted  Recreational  programing,  they are  not  providing  the  American  People  the  rights  given  to  them  by  these  same  policies  we  are  here  for  today  to correct.  We  need  not  tell  the  inmates,,  "your  on  a waiting  list,  you'll  get  credit"  It's  not  just  about  the  credit.  It's  the recidivism,  the  return  of  these  men  to  the  system,  including  myself,  by  not  being  afforded  the  right  to  program.  The lies  about  the  programs  they  say  they  provide  and  the  ones  that  are  not  Recreational,  or  self  taught,  just  are  not enough.  We  get  to  teach  ourselves  a lot  of  things,  but  what  we  need  is  HELP.  Help  from  competent  staff  that  knows what  they  are  teaching.  Dedicated  instructors  that  care  about  life,  and  the  return  of  these  men,  self  included,  to society  and  to  their  families,  better  off  than  before  they  came  in,  Not  worse.  In  short,  We  need  staff,  educators,  aplace  to  go  for  these  programs  and  the  ability  to  obtain  these  things  in  a manner  which  lines  up  with  the  policies already  in  place  in  a timely  manner,  as  for  so  these  men  that  are  there  now  can  obtain  what  is  put  forth  in  the verbiage  and  language  of  the  First  Step  Act.  Get  the  education  they  need,  that's  already  been  voted  on  and  approved by  the  legislature.  This  is  by  a inmate  currently  being  housed  at  the  LOW  in  Petersburg,  VA.  FCC.  LOW  Robert Segrest From: Abdull posso    

> To: Public Affairs
> Subject: [External] Lowering actual meth sentencing
> Date: Monday, July 31, 2023 9:08:57 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 

Please lower the sentencing guidelines of (actual) methamphetamine to match that of methamphetamine mixture. There is no data that merits the guidelines disparity for (actual) methamphetamine. The overdose for methamphetamine are so few that the CDC bunches methamphetamine with all psychostimulants and even prescription medication overdoses. There is also no data that merit’s methamphetamine being punished more severely than cocaine, fentanyl, and heroin. Please make all changes retroactive to get rid of past sentencing disparity. Scott Rodriguez Serrano Federal Corectional Institute Ashland KY 41105 Sent from the best. iPhone 7/12/2023 21:56 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Amy Smith 

# Topics: 

> 5. Career Offender Guideline/Categorical Approach

# Comments: 

Thank you for taking the time and reading my comments regarding career offender. As you are aware the career offender law needs to be looked at and redesigned with offenders already in custody given the opportunity to benefit. How can one determine a serious drug crime when in reality it's not a serious drug offense. Serving 15 years plus for having a drug addiction is ludicrous and we as the United States of America have to do better. It's less expensive to rehabilitate then to incarcerate for that long. It's a disservice to the citizens as these offenders will be released one day and in our community as our neighbors. With attaching career offender to everyone is like trying to compare apples to apples, they are all different sizes and different cases. I have faith in the USSC and pray daily that the ones in federal prison and effected by this will see some sort of relief. I understand and am very thankful for your willingness to look into this important issue. Thank you for your time. Have a blessed day.     

> Submitted on: July 12, 2023 From: ~^! SMITH, ~^!EDWARD LEE
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SMITH, EDWARD, , SST-C-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 1:20:21 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Inmate Work Assignment: orderly C-unit ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** I ask the commission to apply retroactivity to 4B1.2 for those who have been sentenced as career offenders under the commentary that has now been removed. The commission is well aware of the many circuits that have ruled that the commentary cannot add crimes to the text that weren't in it, see 3rd, 4th, 6th, 9th, 11th, DC, and 5th circuit pending at this time. Persons in those circuits prior to November 1st 2023 do not get enhanced sentences under 4B1.2 for inchoate crimes. Others in circuits outside of those listed are enhanced and stuck with sentences that far exceed others similarly situated as them. It's "luck" of the draw depending totally on the circuit you were convicted in. To apply retroactivity to those sentenced prior to November 1st causes no hardship but levels the the playing field. One of the top priorities of the commission should be uniformity in sentencing. From: ~^! SMITH, ~^!MARTI J    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SMITH, MARTI, , MNA-Y-A
> Date: Friday, July 21, 2023 8:05:52 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Judge  Reeves Inmate  Work  Assignment:  food  service ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** I'm  writing  in  support  of  any  reform  toward  correcting  the  pure  meth  vs  meth  mixture  disparity  in  sentencing.  The U.S.  has  conceded  on  numerous  cases  that  there  is  currently  no  empirical  basis  for  the  10-1  disparity.  In  fact  the DEA  data  shows  that  "average"  meth  purity  was  above  96.2%  in  2014  and  has  continuously  increased  to  around 98%  in  2020.  Sentencing  guidelines  should  be  adjusted  because  meth  purity  is  not  indicative  of  culpability  or hierarchy  in  the  distribution  chain.  These  days  a homeless  man  on  the  street  and  a drug  kingpin  can  both  have  the same  disparity  in  meth  and  therefore,  this  disparity  is  very  unfair.  Common  addicts  who  just  need  help  for  their disease  are  being  sentenced  to  decades  in  prison.  I hope  that  you  can  look  further  into  the  data  and  this  is  a priority topic  for  the  2024  amendments. From: ~^! STEIN, ~^!CHRISTINA LOUISE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** STEIN, CHRISTINA, , DAN-P-A
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2023 1:19:52 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  COMMISSION Inmate  Work  Assignment:  UNIT  ORDERLY ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Suggestion  for  next  cycle  would  be  to  make  922(g)  1 offenses  elgible  for  the  year  off  for  RDAP.  This  is  by  LAW  anon-violent  crime  and  we  qualify  for  FSA  time  off  but  not  time  off  for  RDAP.  This  would  be  a positive  change  and is  rehabilitative. From: ~^! SULLIVAN, ~^!TIMOTHY F    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SULLIVAN, TIMOTHY, , ELK-B-B
> Date: Saturday, July 1, 2023 1:34:51 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  Temp  Unit ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** If  you  want  to  start  with  the  problem  of  prison  overcrowding,  make  the  FBOP  follow  the  First  Step  Act  (FSA)  Law as  well  as  the  Second  Chance  Act  (SCA).  They  are  making  a mockery  of  these  both.  They  are  forced  to  give  every time  credit  eligible  inmate  the  one  year  off  their  sentence  for  the  first  365  Federal  Time  Credits  (FTC's)  but  where they  are  to  give  you  ADDITIONAL  halfway  house  time,  well  that  simply  doesn't  happen.  I am  an  inmate  at  Elkton FCI  and  our  Case  Manager  is  following  neither  of  these  laws  causing  many  inmates  to  be  here  costing  exhobinant amounts  of  money  when  they  should  be  released  to  the  RRC,  sometimes  costing  inmates  up  to  18  months  here instead  of  reintegrating  back  into  society.  They  do  it  because  there  is  no  oversight  and  they  interoperate  the  law  to whatever  suits  them  best. The  Second  Chance  Act  has  a formula  giving  the  inmate  up  to  10%  of  their  sentence  for  halfway  house  HOWEVER they  are  encouraged  to  give  EVERY  inmate  12  months.  That  simply  does  not  happen.  Most  inmates  are  lucky  to  get 3-6  months.  Again,  they  are  holding  inmates  much  longer  than  necessary  and  against  Congress'  intent. But  the  biggest  problem  is  that  they  are  ignoring  inmate's  FTC's  (above  the  inmates  year  off)  and  not  giving  the additional  halfway  house/home  confinement  that  the  law  as  earned  by  eligible  inmates  and  is  costing  tens  of thousands  of  dollars  each  year  and  causes  the  overcrowding.  Even  entitled  to  the  additional  halfway  house  time earned  by  the  inmate,  the  unit  staff  is  simply  denying  the  inmates  what  they  earned.  They  have  had  almost  5 years  to secure  more  halfway  house  facilities  but  they  lie  and  tell  us  that  we  don't  get  our  (earned)  additional  halfway  house placement  because  they  are  full.  This  simply  is  not  true.  I should  be  leaving  for  the  halfway  house  in  August  2024 having  my  initial  12  months  per  the  SCA  and  have  an  additional  16  months  per  the  FTC's  I earned  (my  statutory  out date  is  Dec.  2026).  This  would  be  a great  savings  to  this  country  and  we  would  be  getting  nothing  more  than  what we  EARNED.  The  DOJ  needs  to  intervene  because  the  BOP  is  a holy  mess.  There  is  NO  rehabilitation  and  the "programs"  are  a running  joke  here  (in  the  event  that  they  are  even  available). Following  the  FSA  FTC's  would  be  the  easiest  solution  immediately  to  save  money  and  ease  overcrowding.  Why  is the  BOP  allowed  to  ignore  this  law  and  its  benefits?  You  are  the  first  group  to  see  the  damage  that  mandatory minimums  and  long  sentences  do.  They  help  no  one  and  place  an  unnecessary  monetary  burden  on  this  country when  a simply  diversion  program  for  first  time  offenders  (as  is  done  in  State  Courts)  would  suffice  instead  of  a 10 year  mandatory  sentence.  It  is  sad  that  the  state  courts  (most  of  them,  anyway)  have  outdone  the  federal  government in  finding  fair  and  just  laws.  We  as  federal  inmates  could  be  out  working,  providing  for  and  caring  for  our  families but  still  be  under  scrutiny  but  instead,  we  languish  EVRY  DAY  either  reading,  watching  TV  or  sleeping.  Period!!! IF  a program  every  even  is  offered  to  you  it  is  usually  sped  through  by  staff  and  if  there  is  a 'final',  the  answers  are usually  given  to  the  inmates  by  staff. The  BOP  is  broken  and  beyond  repair.  It  only  gets  worse  and  the  fact  that  it  is  432  (worst  place  to  work)  out  of  432 agencies  tells  how  the  inmates  are  punished  in  ways  the  Court  never  intended.  Let  us  get  our  lives  back  and  actually 

be  ABLE  to  reintegrate  into  society  and  not  be  marked  and  burdened  by  a one  time  mistake. Thank  you  for  taking  on  these  issues.  Please  help  so  that  we  can  all  as  inmates  benefit  from  the  FSA  FTC's  as  was intended.  Address  the  BOP  and  enforce  the  law.  Giving  us  what  was  earned  should  not  be  optional. From: ~^! SWISSI, ~^!AHMED    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** SWISSI, AHMED, , SCH-D-A
> Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2023 3:06:10 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To: Inmate  Work  Assignment:  N/A ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Dear  Reader, I am  currently  a federal  inmate  serving  a 14  year  sentence  for  Distribution  of  Fentanyl  Resulting  in  Death  (21 U.S.C.  841(B)(1)(C))  in  the  9th  Circuit  out  of  the  Los  Angeles  Courthouse.  I accepted  a plea  deal  that  removed  the death  from  the  language  of  the  charge  but  still  left  me  at  the  base  offense  level  of  38  thus  allowing  me  to  be sentenced  to  a maximum  of  20  years  instead  of  the  mandatory  minimum  of  20  years  I was  facing.  The  charge  I was convicted  of  was  21  U.S.C.  841  a1,(B)(1)(C). 

After  reading  a memo  with  your  proposed  priorities  I found  that  Priority  #10  deals  directly  with  my  case. Specifically  it  says,  (10)  Further  examination  of  federal  sentencing  practices  on  a variety  of  issues,  possibly including  (B)  drug  trafficking  offenses  resulting  in  death  or  serious  bodily  injury.  In  my  letter  to  the  U.S.  Sentencing Commission  I will  give  a background  on  how  I came  to  be  convicted  of  this  offense  and  my  opinion  of  possible changes  to  the  base  offense  level. As  you  may  know  our  country  is  going  through  a fentanyl  epidemic  that  is  wrecking  havoc  on  our  population.  In 2021  alone  about  107,000  people  died  from  drug  overdoses  a majority  from  fentanyl.  As  the  years  pass,  the epidemic  is  only  getting  worse  and  with  that,  unfortunately  death's  are  increasing.  In  late  2018  I became  a fentanyl addict  by  being  sold  counterfeit  OxyContin  Pills.  For  months  I was  using  these  pills  not  knowing  I was  infact  using fentanyl.  Once  I realized  I was  using  fentanyl,  I started  using  powder  fentanyl  which  was  in  March  2019.  My  funds depleted  from  spending  all  my  money  on  fentanyl  and  to  get  high  I helped  a dealer  sell  there  product  just  to  get  high. The  grip  the  addiction  had  on  me  distorted  my  thought  process  and  I did  not  know  right  from  wrong.  On  April  3rd, 2019  I sold  a .5  gram  to  a 25  year  old  man  who  lost  his  life  that  night. At  the  time  I had  no  clue  what  I was  doing  and  was  not  part  of  a major  drug  dealing  orginization.  I was  just  ascatterbrained  drug  addict.  To  be  subject  to  38  is  very  harsh  and  is  more  than  what  major  players  in  this  industry  are subject  too.  I think  based  on  the  amount  sold  there  should  be  a lower  offense  level.  We  really  need  to  go  after  the suppliers  not  the  addicts.  Right  now  I need  to  be  in  rehab  but  I'm  in  jail  and  my  drug  problem  is  only  getting  worse. I need  help,  I need  drug  counsling.  I am  not  getting  this  at  all  and  I've  constantly  asking  for  it. I hope  this  letter  gives  you  insight  on  how  this  charge  affected  my  life.  I have  remorse  for  my  actions  but  14  years in  prison  is  not  going  to  help  rid  fentanyl  from  society.  Before  prison  I was  18  months  clean  and  never  went  back  to fentanyl  or  any  sort  of  criminal  activity. Thank  You  For  Your  Time, Ahmed  Galal  Abdelkader  Swissi From: ~^! TILLMAN, ~^!DEANTHONY    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** TILLMAN, DEANTHONY, , FOR-H-C
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2023 1:34:42 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  BOP Inmate  Work  Assignment:  oderly ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** i have  been  incarcerated  since  2018  of  march  i have  to  federal  sentencing  i got  sentenced  to  84  months  feburary  of 2019  i was  indicted  while  still  incarcerated  housed  at  fci  greenville.  there  i left  on  a writ  to  get  sentenced  to  144 months  in  the  western  district  of  arkansas  in  which  my  both  terms  of  inprisonment  was  ran  concurrently  january 2022  now  the  BOP  is  telling  me  i have  a overlap  concurrent  sentence  which  was  not  stated  in  court.  i was  credit  for all  my  time  incarcerated  january  2022  at  sentencing  not  a overlap  this  issue  need  to  be  fixed  Asap  its  very  stressful. my  144  month  sentence  monthsis  more  than  my  84  months  if  i get  credit  for  the  entire  time  i have  been  incarcerated i should  only  be  facing  a 144  months  which  is  12  yeqars  not  14  years  11  and  15  days  ...  again  this  issue  is  stressful and  i should  not  have  to  work  with  the  courts  to  fix  this  minor  issue  all  my  jail  time  credits  was  giving  to  me  and  my computation  and  time  should  be  fixed  to  12  years  only  thank  you  ...if  this  is  a court  issue  please  let  me  know 2

July 28 , 2023

VIA EMAIL to PubA ffairs@ussc.gov 

UN ITED STATES SENTEN CING COMMI SSION 

Attn: Public Affairs -Priorities Comment One 

Co lum bus Circle, N.E. Suite 2-500

Washington, D.C. 200 02-8002

RE: Pol icy Pri oriti es for Am endm ent Cycle 2024

Dear Chair & Sent encing Commi ssi on :

I am writi ng to you regarding the United States Sente ncing Commission's requ est 

for comm ents on possi ble pol icy priorities for the am endment cycle end ing May 1, 2024. I

su pport and urge the commission to prioriti ze these Guideline issue s: 

1. Guideline § 5D1.2(b)

The Policy Statem ent in this Gu ide line shou ld be delet ed, or severely modifi ed to 

limit those off end ers who shou ld be su bject to a lifetime of sup ervis ed release. The Pol icy

Statement provide s that the maximum term of supervisio n is recomm ended for indiv idua ls

conv ict ed of sex off enses. This Policy Statem ent, however, was added by the Sen tencing

Co mmi ssion when the statu tory maximum term of sup erv ised release was five yea rs, 

not life.(com pare U .S.S.G. App . C, Am end. 61 5 (2001)with 18 U .S.C. §

3582(k)(b)(2000); see also, Unit ed States v. Apod aca, 641 F. 3d 1077 (9th Cir. 

2011)(concur ring op inion by Judge fle tcher criticizing the drac oni an, outdat ed, and 

unsupp ort ed Policy statem ent and life -time superv ision for no -cont act off en ders). This is, 

partly, beca use the "Sent encing Commissi on has not am end ed the [Pol icy] fol lowing the 

enactm ent of the [PROTECT Act .]" (Unit ed States v. Brown , 411 F. Sup p. 3d at 449, n.1).

In 2012, the Commission publish ed a re port about Chi ld Pornogra phy and the 

dr aconi an Guide lines, g uidel ines that were not the result of the Commission 's role but were 

ca used by direct mandat es from Congr ess. While the Commission called for a change in the

Guide lines dealing with Chi ld Porno gra phy, not hing was don e. Nearly 10 years lat er, the 

Commission aga in issu ed ano ther report on Chi ld Porno graphy. In its June 2021 report, the

Commi ssion cit ed .stat ist ics re lat ing to the recidivism rate for no -cont act sex off enders as

being as high as 4.3%, and stat ing that one·- half of those recidivat ing were arrest ed wi th

12 months of rel ease from priso n.· (See Federal Sentencing of Chi ld Porno graphy : Non-

Prod uction Off enses, Unit ed Stat es Commi ssi on, June 2021). 

Pri or to its lat est report about Child Porno gra phy in 2016, a study concl uded that 

"[w]hile it rema ins a widely accept ed belief that people who commit sex crim es wi ll

inevitab ly rep eat . . . , the academ ic lit erat ure, for the most part, do es not su pport this claim. 

Ov erwhelm ingly, recid ivism st udies cond uct ed ov er the last sixty -five ye ars find that a large 

ma jority of individ uals convict ed of sex crim es will not repeat ." (Bad Data: How Gov ernm ent 3

Ag enci es Dist ort Statist ics on Sex -Crime Recidi vism, A. Ackerm an and M. Burns, Just ice 

Policy Journal , Spring 2016, at pg. 6). In fact , s ex off end ers have some of the lowest 

recid ivism rat es of any cl ass of crim inal ." (Sexual Viole nce, Victim Advo cacy, and Re publican 

Crim inology: Washingt on State 's Communi ty Prot ecti on Act, St uart A. Sche ingold, et al., 28

IAW & SOC'Y RE V. 729, 743 (1994) .

The empir ical data and evide nce is cl ear: sex off end ers are the least like ly group of 

offenders to recidivate; especially those convicte d of no -contact, internet offe nses. 

1. Relatio nship of This Statem ent wi th Cost of Incarc erati on

As the Co mm ission consid ers the iss ue of red ucing the cost of incarceration und er

28 U.S.C. § 994(g), the elimination and/or limitat ion of this Po licy Statem ent will have a

sign ificant imp act on costs of incarceration —specifically , the Unit ed Stat es Probati on

De partm ent 's costs and resou rces. 

Accordi ng to the Admin istratio n Office of the Unite d State s Courts, August 27, 

2021, re port, the cost of supervision is $,454.00 per year, per off ender. 'While the num ber

of people that may be aff ect ed by this is still unkn own, am endm ent to this Pol icy 

Statem ent of deletion or mod ifica tio n can limit only the most dang ero us sex off enders 

(such as repeat off enders, or sex ually viol ent pers ons) to life -time sup erv isi on and allow

other low-risk off enders, who are the least like ly group of offe nders to re cidivate, to spe nd 

the mandatory 5 years of supervisio n inst ea d of life. Th is can, and will save the United 

Stat es Probation Departm ent mil lio ns of do llars. This, in turn, will ensure that the U .S.

Pro bat ion Departm ent 's limit ed resources in sup erv ised re lease is sp ent in the areas that 

are most ne eded. 

2. Prop osed Amendments 

I sup port and urge the Com missi on to consid er and adopt one of the fo llowing 

am endm ents to Guide line § 5D1.2(b)'s Policy Statem ent: 

i. Pro posed Am endm ent No. 1:

Guid eline § SD1.2(b)and the Policy Statem ent be delet ed. 

ii. Proposed Ame ndment No. 2: 

(Policy Statem ent) If the inst ant off ense of convict ion is a sex 

off ense, however, the sta tut ory minimum or 5 years, which ever is

less, is recommended, unl ess the off ender is a repeat sex of fender

or has been previo usly deem ed a sexually violent pers on.

iii. Prop osed Ame ndment No . 3: 

(b)Notwi thst anding subd ivisi ons (a)(1)thro ugh (a)(3) . . . (b)a

covered sex off ense. 

(Policy Statem ent) If the instant off ense of conv iction is a

covered sex off ense, however, the statuto ry maximum of 

supervis ed rel ease is re comm ended un less the offender can 

prove ·that he or she is not likely to reoffend ”4

1. De finitions: 

“Covered Sex Off ense" means (A)an off ense, perpe trat ed ag ainst a minor, under

(i)109A of Title 18, Unit ed Stat es Code, (ii)Chapt er 110 of such title, not including

trafficking in, receipt of, or possessio n of child pornography, or a record

keep ing off ense; (ii i)Chapt er 11 7 of such title, not including transmitt ing

information about a minor, or an off ense under 18 U .S.C § 2421A; or (iv)18 U.S.C .

§ 1591; or, (B) an attempt or consp iracy to commit any off ense descri bed in

subdivisi on A(i) thro ugh (iv) of this note .

Am end ing this Guide line (5Dl .2(b))and its corr esponding Policy Statem ent will 

harmonize the Policy Statem ent that was issu ed und er an old regim e/law with the new, 

and empir ically-based on e.

2. Guideline § 4C1.1

Alt hough the Comm ission recent ly promulgat ed this Gu ide line, the vers ion 

promu lgat ed should be am ended to delete subsecti on (5)(sex off ense) or modified 

to "covered sex off ens e" (as defin ed previo usly ).

As the Comm ission would be a ware , "[t]he cur rent status of the child pornograp hy

Guide lines dat es to Congr ess' enactm ent of the PROT ECT Act of 2003, Pu b. L. 108-21, 11 7

Stat. 650. It wa s the culmination of the Sent en cing Corrnnissi on's multiple am endm ents to 

th ese Guide lines-at Co ngres s' direction -si nce th eir introducti on in 1987, each time calli ng

for ha rsher penal ti es. And it wa s the first inst ance si nce the incepti on of the Guide lin es

wh ere Congr ess dir ect ly am ended the Guide lin es Manual .. .[T]here congressi onally 

mandated Guide lines were fundam ental ly diff erent from £?Ost. •.'.' (May v. Shinn, 37 F.4th 

552 (9th Cir. 2022)(Bl ock, F. concurri ng) .(quoti ng Unit ed Stat es v. Dorvee, 616 F.ed 174

(2nd Cir. 2010)(int ernal quotations and citati ons omitted )).

Th e Commi ssi on, in its reports to Co ngr ess in 2012 and 2021, noted that 

nearly every def endant's Gu ide line range incl udes all Sp ecif ic Off ense Ch aract erist ics and

eff ective ly "max es ou t" each Defend ant. Nevert hel ess, Co ngress has rep eat edly ign ored, and 

cont inu es to ign ore, the Sent enci ng Comm issi on re ports and emp irical- ba sed studies. 

While the Comm issi on 's hands are "ti ed" wi th resp ect to cali brati ng the 

Chi ld Pornogra ph y Guide lin es (2G2.1 and 2G2.2)due to the PROT ECT Act, the Comm ission 

·can do so indirect ly, thro ugh Guide line 4Cl.1, by am endi ng it to eit her delete subsecti on

(5) for all sex off enses, or modify so that those convicted of 

child porno gra phy off enses are eligi ble for the reducti on. 

Th e above-describ ed am endm ent will be consist ent with the Comm issi on 's goal of 

re du cin g the cost of in car ceration an d prison over -population. The child porno gr aphy

guide lines have increased from an average of 36 months in 1994 to an average 4

of 109.6 mon ths in 2007, due to chang es that were "large ly the consequ ence of 

num ero us mora lity earm arks, slipped into larg er bil ls ov er the last fift een years, oft en

wit hout not ice, de bate, or st udy of any kind ." (See T. St abenow, Deconstr ucti ng the 

Myth of Car eful St udy: a Prim er on the Flawed Pro gression of the Chi ld

Porno grap hy Guide lines,

(https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/training/annual -national -training -

seminar/2016/report_stabenow.pdf )

With the use of the int ernet, the Child Pornogra phy off end er po pulation in 

Fed eral Prison has increased exponentially . By making this am endm ent, the 

Comm issi on can reduce the cost of incarcerat ion by mi llions of do llars.

Th e average annual cost to house an individual in the Bureau of Prison is 

$44,258.00 accord ing to the Adm inistrati on Off ice of Unit ed Stat es Court, August 27, 2021

rep ort. A 2-point red ucti on will result in about a 20% red uction of off enders' sent ences. 

As the average sent ence for first -time Chi ld Porno gra phy off end er is 109 months, a

red ucti on of 2 years (ap proximately) will save more than $88,00 0 per off ender. On 

av erage, for the last ap proximate ly 5 years, ap proximately 1, 200 indiv iduals were 

sent en ced und er the Child Porno gra phy Guidel ines per year; this mi nor adjustm ent can

save more than $88,000,00 0 per year (See Sent en cing Comm ission "Qu ick Fact s"-

Child Porno graphy Off end ers, Fiscal Year 2021)

By maki ng the am endm ent to Guide line 4Cl .1 a priority and making 

Chi ld Pornogra phy offenders el igible for the 2-point red uction, the Commission can

fulfil l its role and duti es und er 28 U.S.C. § 991, et seq. After all, as a society we 

"cannot keep power in the hands of Congr ess if it is not wise and timely 

meeti ng its problems ." (Youngst own Sh eet & Tube Co. v. Sawy er, 343 U.S. 579, 

654 (19 52)(Jackson, J. Co ncurring )).

Con gress see m to have ignor ed the Commission 's re ports reg ard ing the 

emp irical st udi es concerning Child Pornogra phy and its ongoi ng recommendatio ns

to am end these Guide lin es. Priorit izing this am endm ent will ens ure that off end ers 

conv icted of no cont act, int ernet only, off enses that pose little to no ri sk to society 

end up wi th a fa ir, emp irically based, and just sent ence, while at the same time 

save society mil lions of dol lars per year on the cost of incarceration; costs and

reso urces that can be put to wards other much-needed pro grams. 

I urge the Commissi on, and support it in its mission, to make Guide lines 4Cl .1 and

5Dl .2(b)a pri ority for its May 1, 2024 cycle .

Th ank you .

Terrel Transtrum, Idaho Falls ID, TEL 57/31/2023 8:37 AM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Christopher Velissaris 

# Topics: 

> 3. Simplification/Structural Reform 4. Case Law Relating to Guideline Commentary

# Comments: 

Dear Honorable Members of the Sentencing Commission, This letter respectfully seeks your consideration in restructuring the Economic Theft loss table as defined under U.S.S.G. 2B1.1(b)(1). We have serious concerns about the current approach, most notably the sentencing disparities created by the current loss table and the subjective nature in which the loss table is applied. The current table has historically fostered sentencing disparities that fundamentally challenge the notions of justice in our country. These concerns were compounded by the revisions to the Guidelines in 2005, which transformed the loss table into an even more punitive tool by amplifying the maximum level enhancement from 20 points to a staggering 30 points. This shift appears to contradict the fundamental purpose of the Sentencing Guidelines, raising the question of whether it accurately reflects the severity of economic theft offenses. In its current form, the Guidelines result in significant disparities in sentencing outcomes between Theft, as specified under U.S.S.G. 2B1(b)(1), Burglary under U.S.S.G. 2B2.1(b)(2) and Robbery under U.S.S.G. 2B3.1(b)(7). At first glance, it would be expected that the loss tables for these crimes would be extremely closely correlated, but the current Guidelines exhibit a substantial deviation. These discrepancies are particularly inequitable considering the subjective nature of the calculation of loss for Theft under U.S.S.G. 2B1.1(b)(1). Notably, U.S. vs. Borrasi, 639 F. 3d 774 (7th Circuit (2011)), highlights that the Sentencing Guidelines aim to eradicate sentencing disparities and foster uniformity. This mission appears to be undermined by the current Economic Theft loss table, which engenders significant sentencing discrepancies. Under the present Guidelines, a defendant charged with Burglary and Robbery under U.S.S.G. 2B2.1(b)(2) and Robbery under U.S.S.G. 2B3.1(b)(7), face a maximum of 8 level enhancement for losses exceeding $9.5 million. Conversely, the Economic Theft loss table encapsulated in U. 7/31/2023 8:37 AM 

S.S.G. 2B1.1(b)(1), posits a significantly more punitive response to economic crime with a maximum enhancement of 28 levels. When aggregated with the base level offense of 6 or 7 levels and any supplementary enhancements, this provision could compel a defendant to confront sentencing ranging from 30 years to life in prison, largely dictated by the loss table. To emphasize the unreasonable consequences of the current system, consider the following scenario. An individual contemplating the commission of securities fraud analyzes the Economic offense loss tables, and instead decides to physically steal from a company resulting in a $70 million loss. Under the Burglary Guidelines, this individual would accumulate a total of 20 points, which would result in a sentence of approximately 3 years. However, if the same person were to commit securities fraud for the equivalent dollar amount, their total points would sky rocket to 31 points which would result in a sentence of approximately 10 years. The same exact crime with the same dollar amount creating substantially different outcomes. Such disparities not only contradict the fundamental purpose of the Sentencing Guidelines, but also lead to incongruous outcomes that undermine the integrity of the judicial system. This punitive disparity defies the spirit of the Supreme Court's ruling in U.S. vs. Gall, 552 U.S. 38 (2007), which advocated for a sentencing approach that is "sufficient, but not greater than necessary." This disparity seems to deviate from the Sentencing Guidelines' purpose of harmonizing sentencing outcomes as highlighted in U.S. vs. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005). Furthermore, the calculation of the loss under U.S.S.G. 2B1.1(b)(1) is often subjective and frequently leads to unjust outcomes, which is incompatible with our criminal justice system. The Sentencing Guidelines define loss as "the reasonably foreseeable pecuniary harm" that is "readily measurable in money." These losses should be a reasonable estimate of the monetary value which includes: "the fair market value of the property taken, or the cost of the property." These definitions directly contradict the subjective manner in which federal courts are interpreting loss and imposing sentences utilizing the Theft loss table. A clear instance of this subjectivity was shown in the securities valuation case U.S. vs. Velissaris (2nd Circuit (2022)), where the court stated that it was "largely immaterial" whether the defendant's calculations were "objectively correct or not," and that the prosecution "will not even attempt to provide a fair market value." This approach directly contradicts the Supreme Court's assertion in U.S. vs. Williams (2017), where the court emphasized the need for clear and objective Guidelines to avoid arbitrary sentencing outcomes. Therefore, we call upon the Sentencing Commission to implement a more objective and more just Economic Theft loss table with a more reasonable maximum sentence enhancement to accurately reflect the severity of Economic Theft offenses. Thank you! 

> Submitted on: July 31, 2023 7/6/2023 16:41 PM

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Vicki Vest 

# Topics: 

> 11. Other Suggested Priorities

# Comments: 

Subject: Request for Review and Consideration of Sentencing Guidelines for Long-Term or Life Incarceration Cases Dear United States Sentencing Commission, I write to express my concern regarding the current state of sentencing guidelines for individuals who have been incarcerated for extended periods, specifically those serving life sentences without the possibility of parole. While I understand the importance of accountability and public safety, there arises a need to reevaluate the system to ensure fairness and justice in such cases. It is with great empathy that I bring to your attention the case of individuals who have spent substantial portions of their lives behind bars. These individuals, having already served decades in prison, often exhibit remarkable personal growth, rehabilitation, and positive contributions to their communities from within the correctional system. This raises questions about the continued necessity and proportionality of their continued incarceration. While recognizing that public safety remains a paramount concern, it is essential to strike a balance between accountability and providing avenues for redemption and reintegration into society. This delicate balance should account for factors such as exemplary behavior, participation in rehabilitative programs, demonstrated remorse, and significant contributions toward the betterment of others, both inside and outside of the correctional facility. By revisiting and reassessing the sentencing guidelines for long-term incarceration cases, the 7/6/2023 16:41 PM 

United States Sentencing Commission has the opportunity to ensure that the justice system recognizes and rewards genuine efforts at rehabilitation and positive transformation. A thoughtful examination of these cases, taking into account the specific circumstances and the demonstrated commitment to personal growth, can result in fairer outcomes and a more rehabilitative approach to justice. I respectfully urge the Commission to undertake a comprehensive review of the sentencing guidelines for long-term incarceration, seeking input from legal experts, practitioners, and stakeholders, as well as considering the evolving societal understanding of rehabilitation and punishment. Through this process, we can work towards a system that not only safeguards public safety but also acknowledges the potential for redemption and reintegration into society, even for those sentenced to lengthy terms. Thank you for your dedication to maintaining a just and equitable sentencing system. Your thoughtful consideration of this matter and potential revision of guidelines will have a profound impact on the lives of those serving extended sentences and contribute to the continued improvement of our justice system. Thank you for taking the time and your consideration.     

> Submitted on: July 6, 2023 From: ~^! WHISMAN, ~^!WILLIAM CRAIG
> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** WHISMAN, WILLIAM, , OAK-A-B
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2023 8:20:11 PM

CAUTION:  This  email  originated  from  outside  the  organization.  DO  NOT  click  links  or  open  attachments  unless you  recognize  the  sender  and  know  the  content  is  safe. To:  U.S  Sentencing  Commission Inmate  Work  Assignment:  UNICOR ***ATTENTION*** Replies  to  this  message  will  not  be  delivered. ***Inmate  Message  Below*** Please  consider  ammending  the  significant  differences  in  sentencing  between  plea  deals  and  trials.  Defendants  are given  an  impossible  choice  of  "take  the  deal  and  we'll  give  you  10  years  or  go  to  trial  and  we'll  give  you  30".  Why are  defendants  punished  for  exercising  their  constitutional  right  to  trial.  The  rules  are  written  to  benefit  the government.  If  a person  is  offered  a 10  year  sentence,  the  DOJ  is  acknowloging  that  10  years  is  sufficient  to  meet the  punishment  requirement.  But  if  you  make  them  actually  work  for  the  conviction,  they  push  for  every enhancement  they  can.  And  for  what?  They  thought  10  years  was  enough  in  the  plea  deal.  So  how  does  pushing  for the  maximum  at  trial  do  anything  more  than  punish  the  defendant  for  actually  going  to  trial?  The  last  statistics  Iremember  reading,  about  95%  of  all  cases  end  in  a plea  deal.  And  of  the  remaining  5%,  over  95%  of  those  end  in  aconviction.  State  conviction  rates  are  significantly  lower  than  that.  Are  the  governments  lawyers  that  much  better? Or  are  the  rules  stacked  in  their  favor? From: ~^! WINSTON, ~^!KWAN ANDRE    

> Subject: [External] ***Request to Staff*** WINSTON, KWAN, , THP-D-B
> Date: Tuesday, July 4, 2023 12:35:50 PM

CAUTION:  This email originated from outside the organization.  DO NOT click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe. To: Mr. Carlton Reeves Inmate Work Assignment: Unicor ***ATTENTION*** Replies to this message will not be delivered. ***Inmate Message Below*** Greetings: My name is Kwan Winston, and I have been incarcerated for a quarter of a century, for crimes I committed between the young ages of 16-21, that I  went to trial on and am serving a life sentence for (I was enhanced to the maximum level of 43 under the Guidelines). I have been incarcerated since age 23, and am now a graying (grandfather) of 48, with three children (one recently deceased), and six grandchildren. I am a first time offender, and have grown and matured while incarcerated, and have a loving and supportive family. All of my co-defendants (with the exception of one, who refused a plea deal and elected to go to trial with me) are home, and have been home for years, but of course they were smart enough to take a plea. I add this to point out that the ignorance of my youth was a huge factor in the decisions I made with regards to crimes committed, as well as the decision to go to trial, which all resulted in my life's forfeiture. I am writing to ask that the Sentencing Commission implement changes within the Guidelines for "Youthful Offenders" which would require sentencing courts to take into account an offenders age at the time of the offense, and provide a safety valve for those meeting this criteria. And, I believe it is important that there be adjustments for those who elect to go to trial, as the sentence disparity between myself and my co-defendants (who engaged in the same, or similar conduct) is without compare. Also, it is important that any such changes be implemented retroactively, as my situation is not all that unique in the federal system, and could positively impact hundreds of family's. Thank you for your time and consideration 7/10/2023 12:07 PM 

# Public Comment - Proposed 2023-2024 Priorities Submitter: 

Ken Zipf 

# Topics: 

> 11. Other Suggested Priorities

# Comments: 

I would like to comment on what should be the real priorities for the 2023-2024 Amendment cycle should be. To solve all most all problems in the federal prison system the large number of prisons needs to be reduced. Federal prisons over incarcerate people with long sentences and no parole system. Most states have a parole system and give out far less sentencing length. If you bring back parole, you solve the problem of overcrowding and the cost of incarceration. A simple solution and not political is to increase the amount of time off for good behavior from 15% of your sentence to 30%. An inmate serving a 10-year sentence would serve 7 years instead of 8 ½, and with FSA (First Step Act) credit of one year and the early release for halfway house for at least a year, the inmate would serve 5 years of incarceration. Make all solutions retroactive. 30% of the Federal Offenders are in prison because of immigration crimes. There needs to be an alternate solution instead of putting these offenders into a Federal correctional institution. Immigrants take away scarce resources from American inmates. Priorities could be, bring back parole, give 30% off for good behavior instead of 15%, reduce federal sentences across the board, decrease the number of immigration federal offenders in prison. Any changes should be made retroactive. Thank you, Ken Zipf 

> Submitted on: July 10, 2023

# UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION 

## One Columbus Circle, NE 

## Suite 2-500 

## Washington, DC 20002-8002 

## www.ussc.gov
