Title: 

URL Source: https://en.ccccltd.cn/tzzgx/dxbg/202403/P020240430625761317276.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 30 Apr 2024 09:23:31 GMT

Markdown Content:
Corporate Profile Performance Highlights Chairman’s Statement Business Overview Management’s Discussion and Analysis Report of the Board of Directors Report of the Supervisory Committee Corporate Governance Report Profile of Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management Investor Relations Independent Auditor’s Report Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Notes to Financial Statements Terms & Glossaries Corporate Information 24610 40 56 86 90 102 108 116 120 121 122 124 126 128 253 255 

# CONTENTS CORPORATE PROFILE 2CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

The Company was incorporated on 8 October 2006 and was initiated and founded by CCCG (a state-owned enterprise under the SASAC) through restructuring as approved by the State Council. Its H shares were listed on the Main Board of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange with stock code of 01800.HK on 15 December 2006. It is the first ultra large state-owned infrastructure enterprise entering the overseas capital market. The Company’s A shares were listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange with stock code of 601800.SH on 9 March 2012, representing a leap-and-bound advance taken by the Company in the course of its development. As a leading transportation infrastructure enterprise in the PRC, the Company is the industry leader in each of its core businesses, namely infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging. Leveraging on its extensive operating experience, expertise and know-how accumulated from projects undertaken across a wide range of areas over the years, the Company is capable of providing integrated solutions throughout each stage of infrastructure projects for its customers. The Company is the world’s largest port, road and bridge design and construction company, and the world’s largest dredging company; it is also the largest international contractor and highway investor in China; and the Company also owns the largest engineering fleet in the world. The Company currently has 35 principal wholly-owned or controlled subsidiaries. The Company operates its businesses in all provinces, cities, and autonomous regions of China, including Hong Kong and Macau Special Administrative Regions, and has established its global presence in 139 countries and regions. As an important holding subsidiary of CCCG, the Company played a decisive role in the business performance of CCCG. CCCG has been rated as a Grade A enterprise in the Operating Results Assessment of State-owned Enterprises conducted by the SASAC for eighteen consecutive years, and it has been rated as a Grade A enterprise in the Party Building Accountability Assessment conducted by the SASAC in consecutive years. CCCG has ranked the first among Chinese enterprises in ENR’s Top International Contractors for seventeen consecutive years. Meanwhile, CCCG ranked the 63rd in the Fortune Global 500. Through designing and constructing in state-level engineering construction projects, the Company has set many records recognised as the “first”, the “best” and the “most” in the history of port and bridge construction not only in the PRC but also the rest of Asia and around the world. Construction projects such as the Sutong Yangtze River Bridge, Shanghai Yangshan Deepwater Port, Yangtze River Mouth Deepwater Navigation Channel Regulation Project, Hainan Project, and the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau Bridge reflected the state-of-the-art standard of China, and that of the world. The Company entered the railway market since the market opened and participated in the design and construction of over 130 national key railway projects, including Harbin-Dalian PDL, Beijing-Shanghai High Speed Railway, Lanzhou-Chongqing Railway, etc. Meanwhile, the Company proactively participated in the railway projects of “Going Global”, and the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway in Kenya and the Nairobi-Maraba Railway Phase I Project were independently designed and constructed by the Company on the basis of the construction standards of railway in China. A number of overseas projects of the Company have won the Luban Award, the National Quality Project Award and the ENR’s awards, and have established a number of landmark projects, quality projects, and people’s livelihood projects overseas. During the “14th Five-Year Plan” period, the Company made plans to firmly implement the new development concept, insisted on innovation as the first driving force, grasped the direction of digitalization and smart development in the infrastructure industry, and accelerated the industrial transformation and upgrading, so as to consolidate its position as the national team of “big transportation” construction and the main force of “big city” development. In 2023, the engineering contractor base was solidified, the highway business maintained its leading position in the industry, and the results of “expanding contracting projects” were remarkable. We continued to optimize the investment structure, improved overseas business steadily, accelerated green and low-carbon transformation and made progress in the “three new” businesses. We focused on new industry sectors such as energy conservation and environmental protection, new energy, new information technology as well as new business forms and models to optimize top-level design, with clearer business development directions and management models, and a deepening integration of industry and finance. The Company has successfully spun off its subsidiaries and realised the reorganisation and listing of its design segment, so as to make every effort to build CCCC Design into a world-class design consulting group which is professional, integrated, technological, high-end, capitalised and international. The Company places great emphasis on technological innovation which would improve the Company’s competency and guidance in operation. Following the direction of “making innovations and leapfrog advances in key areas, supporting development and thus creating a better future”, the Company continues to optimize the structure and layout of innovative platforms and determines to establish a “three-level and four-type” innovative platform system with key laboratories, R&D centres, enterprise technology centres and field observation stations (bases) at national, provincial and group levels as the core, to achieve the objectives to establish four types of scientifically innovative platform by carry out fundamental research on application at key laboratories, engineering and industrial R&D at R&D centres, supporting production and operation at enterprise technology centres and supporting fundamental research and fundamental research on applications by scientific observation data obtained by field observation stations (bases). The Company has a total of 12 innovation platforms at national level, 87 innovation platforms at provincial level and 31 innovation platforms at group level. This forms a group of innovation platforms that covers each session within the innovation chain and assembles the characteristics of fundamental support and guaranteed condition, fundamental research on applications, technology research and development, achievement transformation, and industrialization. The Company owns 27 Post-Doctoral research centres and 4 academician research centres and has systematically nurtured a pool of scientific experts and a professional innovation team by leveraging on innovation platforms and the establishment of key scientific research projects and key engineering projects to create a nurturing model of a “three-in-one” professional team of scientific calibers with its resources on talents, teams and platforms. CORPORATE PROFILE 3CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

The Company has been accumulatively awarded with 40 National Science and Technology Advancement Awards, 5 Technological Invention Awards, 130 Luban Awards, 400 National Quality Project Awards (including 46 golden awards), 120 Zhan Tianyou Awards, 2 Chinese Golden Patent Awards and 39 Chinese Outstanding Patent Awards. The Company has accumulatively participated in the compilation of 162 national standards and 528 industry standards that have been promulgated, and had a total of 34,343 authorized patents. The Company owns a diverse range of specialised equipment, including modern dredging vessels, various equipment for marine and onshore engineering, as well as various state-of-the-art machinery and equipment for investigation, design and research, which gives the Group competitive advantages to win and perform contracts for challenging large-scale complex projects. By insisting on the vision of “making the world more expedite, making the city more habitable, making life more beautiful”, adhering to the corporate mission “fostering sustainable development with firm foundation and good morality”, and persisting on the corporate spirit of “communicating with the world and constructing without boundaries”, the Company will spare no efforts to become a globally competitive world-class enterprise with technology, management and quality and start a new journey of high-quality development in the new era. PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS 4CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

For the year ended 31 December RMB million (except per share data) 2023 2022 Change (%) 

Revenue 755,646 719,084 5.1% Gross Profit 94,528 83,692 12.9% Operating Profit 38,955 34,002 14.6% Profit attributable to owners of the Company 24,734 20,226 22.3% Basic earnings per share (RMB) (Note) 1.45 1.15 26.1% 

As at 31 December RMB million 2023 2022 Change (%) 

Total assets 1,684,262 1,516,713 11.0% Total liabilities 1,225,138 1,089,221 12.5% Total equity 459,124 427,492 7.4% Capital and reserves attributable to owners of the Company 301,734 282,500 6.8% 

For the year ended 31 December Value of New Contracts RMB million 2023 2022 

Number of Projects Value of Contracts 

Value of Contracts Change (%) 

Infrastructure Construction Business 3,853 1,558,482 1,367,070 14.0% 

－Port Construction 430 84,523 76,700 10.2% 

－Road and Bridge Construction 537 349,005 357,875 -2.5% 

－Railway Construction 33 36,919 44,873 -17.7% 

－Urban Construction 2,510 792,908 678,981 16.8% 

－Overseas Projects 343 295,126 208,641 41.5% Infrastructure Design Business 5,381 55,972 54,899 2.0% Dredging Business 1,136 119,193 106,654 11.8% Other Businesses N/A 19,568 13,633 43.5% Total N/A 1,753,215 1,542,256 13.7% 

As at 31 December Backlog RMB million 2023 2022 

Number of Projects Value of Contracts 

Number of Projects Value of Contracts 

Infrastructure Construction Business 6,969 2,987,922 3,028,916 -1.4% Infrastructure Design Business 15,666 154,256 148,112 4.1% Dredging Business 1,577 278,577 204,832 36.0% Other Businesses N/A 29,904 6,465 362.6% Total N/A 3,450,659 3,388,325 1.8% 

Note: In calculating the amount of basic earnings per share, the interest of perpetual securities with an aggregate amount of approximately RMB1,327 million shall be excluded from profits. Shenzhen-Zhongshan Bridge, with a total length of 24 kilometers, integrates “bridge, island, tunnel, and underwater interchange” into one complex system. It is designed for a speed of 100 kilometers per hour and features eight lanes in both directions. The Shenzhen-Zhongshan Bridge is recognized as the most challenging integrated marine construction project in the world, featuring the highest navigable clearance for a sea bridge, the largest span for an offshore steel box-girder suspension bridge, the highest wind-resistant rating for a steel box-girder suspension bridge, the largest mass for a sea anchor, the first dual eight-lane steel-shell concrete immersed tube tunnel, and the longest and widest underwater steel-shell concrete immersed tube tunnel in the world. CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 6CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

Dear Shareholders, On behalf of the Board, I am pleased to present to you the 2023 annual report of the Company for your review. In 2023, the Company adhered to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, closely followed the main line of “Year of Deepening High-quality Development”, withstood pressure, coordinated efforts, and focused on surmounting various challenges, thereby realizing progress and improvement amidst stability. The revenue of the Group amounted to RMB755,646 million, representing a year-on-year growth of 5.1%. Net profit attributable to the Shareholders amounted to RMB24,734 million, representing a year-on-year growth of 22.3%, and earnings per share were RMB1.45. The value of new contracts of the Group amounted to RMB1,753,215 million, representing a year-on-year growth of 13.7%. As at 31 December 2023, the backlog amounted to RMB3,450,659 million. The year 2023 marked the first year of fully embracing the principles set forth by the 20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CPC) and a pivotal year for economic resurgence and advancement. Additionally, it was a crucial year for the Company as we persisted in our endeavors and intensified our commitment to pursuing a path of high-quality development. The Company’s appreciation for high-quality development has become more profound, leading to a widespread consensus within the organization. Our focus has shifted from merely expanding size and speed to a stronger emphasis on quality and efficiency. To this end, we’ve increasingly embraced the “four initiatives ( 四做 )”, which have positioned us at the forefront of our industry in terms of full-employee labor productivity. Additionally, we’ve seen steady improvements in various performance metrics, including asset growth rate and operating cash flow. Our development approach, operational systems, and development achievements have all seen significant enhancements, resulting in a consistent optimization of development quality and efficiency. As a major holding subsidiary of CCCG, the Company played an important role in the business performance of CCCG. In 2023, CCCG has rated Level A in business performance appraisal of state-owned enterprises (organized by the SASAC) for the eighteenth consecutive year and ranked the first among Chinese enterprises in ENR’s Top International Contractors for the seventeenth consecutive year. CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 7CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

The year of 2024 is pivotal for achieving the goals and initiatives set forth in the “14th Five-Year Plan” and represents a crucial period for the Company’s pursuit of high-quality development. The Company is dedicated to expediting progress toward “six major improvements ( 六個顯著提升 )”, i.e., markedly improving development quality and efficiency; substantially increasing our capabilities in scientific and technological innovation; greatly advancing the modernization of our industrial system; significantly strengthening reform and empowerment; notably enhancing our ability to prevent and mitigate major risks; and prominently reinforcing the guiding and protective influence of party-building activities. In order to better promote high-quality development, according to the upgraded version of the “123456” overall development ideas, the Group will stick to the main line of “Year of Improving High-quality Development”, and work on six key areas in 2024. I. Maintaining the strength to push forward high-quality development and stable growth to achieve new results. Firstly, we will focus on expanding volume and enhancing quality to “scale up projects.” In 2024, the growth target for the value of new contracts of the contracting business will be no less than the overall growth in the value of new contracts. The Group will advance the management of high-quality projects and improve the performance and efficiency of contracting projects. Secondly, we will focus on creating value to “strengthen investment.” In 2024, strict control will be placed on the scale of new investments in domestic project. With cash flow and profit management at the core, we will select high-quality investment projects, and increase the proportion of medium- and short-term projects, light-asset projects, and projects in key regions. Thirdly, we will focus on the improvement of both quality and efficiency to “solidify the value of assets.” This includes speeding up the reorganization and divestiture of existing assets without core competitiveness such as lands, real estates, and equipments, enhancing the turnover efficiency of assets, accelerating the cash return, and thus freeing up resources for the core business and creating opportunities for its development. Fourthly, we will focus on the integration of production and financing to “optimise capital.” The Group will scientifically expand financing channels, increase the proportion of direct financing, and open up the circulation path of capital, resources and industries, thereby improving the service system which integrates production and financing and promotes production by financing. II. Making precise efforts to promote industrial reshaping and layout optimization to achieve new upgrades. Firstly, we will continuously promote the transformation and upgrading of traditional industries, advance the mutual promotion between serving the major national strategies and facilitating industrial upgrading. By implementing a batch of long-term beneficial major national projects with strong traction, we will build competitive advantages in high-end, intelligent, and green transformation of traditional industries, and strive to be industry leaders and industrial benchmarks. Secondly, we will accelerate the strategic layout of emerging industries to expand competitive tracks, closely focus on strategic emerging industries and future industries, select 2–3 key areas to strengthen technological breakthroughs, optimize industrial organization, gather industrial elements, and cultivate an industrial ecosystem. Thirdly, we will vigorously promote overseas priority development to make more contribution, and continue to improve the comprehensive contribution of overseas businesses to the Company’s development by prioritizing development, management and supervision. III. Continuing to vigorously promote scientific and technological self-reliance and self-improvement to open up new horizons. Firstly, significant advancements must be made in tackling key core technologies. We will address the issue of scattered investments of the Company’s research and development investments, and strive to have an edge over peers for the creation of high-end equipment and superior technologies in areas such as smart ports, smart highways, smart water management, and smart cities. Secondly, national-level innovation platforms should play a more significant role. We will fully utilize national engineering research centers and key laboratories to seize the battleground in technology and industry competition, and continually enhance the “strong magnetic field” effect of the science and technology platforms in attracting innovative resources. Thirdly, the scientific and technological innovation system and mechanism will be optimized to give full play to the “baton” role of assessment and motivation. We will make good use of R&D investments to promote the achievement of breakthroughs in scientific research and accelerate the realization of the scale of application of industrialization. IV. Coordinating efforts to vigorously promote the deepening of the reform to achieve new breakthroughs. We will deepen the reform by focusing on governance structure to practically enhance the effectiveness of corporate governance. We will deepen the reform by focusing on vitality and efficiency to improve the market-oriented operation mechanism continuously. We will deepen the reform by focusing on internal control system to accelerate the improvement of lean management. We will deepen the reform by focusing on resource allocation optimization to enhance professional management capacity. V. Improving efficiency and making more efforts to achieve new progress in preventing and resolving risks. Firstly, we will take real and tough measures to prevent and control operational risks, comprehensively optimize the financial structure, orderly reduce the scale of perpetual bonds, accelerate the collection of accounts receivable, and increase the efforts to liquidate inventory and revitalize assets. Secondly, we will improve and optimize the compliance management mechanism, further enhance the awareness and initiative to engage in activities in accordance with the law, manage by the rules, and act by regulations. Thirdly, we will relentlessly focus on safety and environmental protection work, recognizing the importance of effective safety and environmental protection management. To solidify the principle of “one position, dual responsibilities”, we will strengthen the standardization of safety and environmental protection inspection at all levels and ensure that all responsible units fulfill their safety and environmental protection obligations. CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 8CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

VI. Making cohesive efforts to promote the party-building windows of state-owned enterprises to highlight the new atmosphere. We will deeply study and comprehend General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important thoughts on the party-building, always remember that central state-owned enterprises are the economic contingent of the Party and the nation, consciously take up the political responsibility as a key point for the party-building, and make every effort to forge a model window of the party-building in state-owned enterprises in the new era. Dear Shareholders, in 2024, the Company will adhere to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, anchoring our goals on becoming a world-class enterprise with “Three Orientations ( 三型 )”. With self-confidence and self-reliance, maintaining integrity and fostering innovation, we will strive to promote high-quality development to a new level. We are committed to contributing greater strength to the comprehensive advancement of strong country construction and the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation! I would like to thank all Shareholders and friends for their support and help! 

Wang Tongzhou 

Chairman Beijing, the PRC 28 March 2024 The “Urban Village” renovation project in Fengxi Community, Huaxin Town, Qingpu District, Shanghai, covers a total area of 1,272 mu, with a total investment of approximately RMB33.6 billion. Fengxi “Urban Village” is currently the largest “Urban Village” renovation project in Shanghai. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 10 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# I. MAIN BUSINESS 

The Company is a leading transportation infrastructure enterprise in the PRC focusing on “big transportation” and “big city” and its core businesses are infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging, respectively. Its scope of business mainly consists of the investment, design, construction, operation and management of port, waterway, road and bridge, railway, urban rail transit, municipal infrastructure, land reclamation, river basin management, water conservancy and hydropower, construction and environmental protection and related projects at home and abroad. The Company is engaged in providing customers with integrated solutions services for each stage of the infrastructure projects leveraging on its extensive operating experience, expertise and known-how accumulated from projects undertaken in a wide range of areas over the decades. 

# II. BUSINESS MODEL 

The business operation process of the Company mainly includes collecting project information, pre-qualification, bidding, executing projects, and delivering projects to customers after completion. The Company has formulated a comprehensive project management system that covers the entire contract process, including the preparation of tenders, bidding price, project organization planning, budget management, contract management, contract performance, project supervision, contract changes, and project completion and delivery. In particular, the Company’s infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging business all fall within the scope of the construction industry, and the main project operation process is basically consistent with the above description. When the Company prepares the project quotation, it carries out a detailed study on the proposed bidding project, including technical and commercial conditions and requirements of the tender followed by a site visit. The Company also invites quotations from suppliers and sub-contractors for various items or activities in respect of the tender. The Company analyses and collects the above information to calculate the costs of each item in the project lists and then marks up gross profit to be obtained according to a certain percentage to calculate the bidding price to the client. After the project is awarded and the contract is signed, the Company usually collects prepayment at 10% to 30% of the total contract amount before the project commences, and then settles the payment on a monthly or regular basis according to the progress. Payments from customers are usually settled within 1 to 3 months. At the same time as the above business was carried out, the Company has begun to develop infrastructure and other investment projects since 2007 to obtain investment profits apart from reasonable design and construction. After years of development, in keeping with changes in the market environment, policy situation, and industry demand, the Company has always strictly controlled the key points in the investment process, and continuously promoted the deepening and implementation of the commitment to “value-oriented investments”. For details, please refer to the section headed “Management’s Discussion and Analysis”. 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD (I) Enhance the Strength and Expertise of the Main Responsibility and Principal Business, and Forge the Integration Advantages of the Full Industry Chain 

The Company is the world’s largest port, road and bridge design and construction company, and the world’s largest dredging company; it is also the largest international contractor and highway investor in China; and the Company also owns the largest engineering fleet in the world. The Company has 35 principal wholly-owned or holding subsidiaries, and operates businesses in China’s all provinces, cities, autonomous regions, Hong Kong and Macau and 139 countries and regions across the world. The Company is the world’s largest port design and construction company. Driven by the advantages of smart port and shipping characteristics, it enhances its leadership in terms of the development of the port and shipping industry by leveraging the smart port and shipping industry alliance. It promotes the construction of industrial chain leader and drives the synergistic development of the industrial chain, to accelerate the building of an independent and controllable whole industrial chain. It undertakes the design and construction of most of medium and large ports in coastal zones since the founding of PRC, and participates in the design and construction of many large ports overseas, fostering a strong competitiveness and brand influence. In China, there are limited peers that can compete with the Company. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 11 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(I) Enhance the Strength and Expertise of the Main Responsibility and Principal Business, and Forge the Integration Advantages of the Full Industry Chain (continued) 

The Company is the world’s largest road and bridge design and construction company, which has designed and constructed six of the top ten long-span bridges in the world, and realizes the service industry pattern with full lifecycle infrastructure and whole-process integration, covering from single industry chain to whole industry chain (including planning, feasibility study, investment and financing, survey and design, project construction, operation and maintenance, and asset disposal), from domestic market to overseas market and from road to civil engineering industry. In the field of design and construction of expressways, high-grade highways as well as river-crossing and sea-crossing bridges, the Company has advantages like leading technologies, adequate financial capacity, outstanding project performance, abundant resource reserves and a good reputation. As social capitals are entering the infrastructure industry at a faster pace amid the country’s greater efforts to deepen the reform of investment and financing circulation system, competitors of the Company are not limited to large central enterprises and local state-owned infrastructure enterprises only, and strong private enterprises, financial institutions and other social capitals will also participate in the competition. The Company is one of the largest railway construction companies in China and has developed into the main force of China’s railway construction by virtue of its outstanding construction level and excellent management capability, but a large gap still exists between the Group and two domestic traditional railway infrastructure enterprises in terms of market shares in China. However, as to the overseas market, the Company has successfully entered into the railway construction markets in Africa, Asia, South America and Oceania. Several major railway projects have been completed or operated or are under construction, and the Group is one of the first batch of engineering construction companies which obtained the “Railway Transportation Permit”, and has become a heavyweight in the market. With regard to the railway infrastructure design, the Company entered the market during the “Eleventh Five-Year” period and it is now making efforts to further improve the market influence and stays in the development stage currently. The Company is the world’s largest dredging company and enjoys absolute influence in China’s coastal dredging market. After years of development, it has strong competitiveness in core equipment, professional advantage, technological strength, credit rating, public image and industry brand, and builds a full industry chain of planning, consultation, investment, design, construction and operation in the fields of port dredging, channel dredging, land reclamation, watershed management, pre-dredging and post-dredging services and environmental protection. Currently, the Company has the largest and most advanced fleet of dredging vessels in China and ranks the first in the global market in terms of the total number of trailing suction hopper dredgers and cutter suction dredgers. 

(II) Actively Advance the Upgrading of “Company Internationalization” and Jointly Build the Belt and Road with High Quality 

During the Reporting Period, based on a global perspective and taking advantage of its main business, the Company actively cooperated with and served national strategies, precisely dovetailed with the deployment of the Belt and Road Initiative, and made every effort to promote the interconnection of transportation infrastructure and improve people’s livelihood along the routes, actively contributed Chinese wisdom and Chinese solutions. General Secretary Xi Jinping recently replied to a letter from Kenyan students studying in China, highly praising the contribution of the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway and pointing out that the railway is a flagship project and a successful example of the joint efforts of China and Kenya in the Belt and Road Initiative. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 12 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(II) Actively Advance the Upgrading of “Company Internationalization” and Jointly Build the Belt and Road with High Quality (continued) 

The Company continued to deepen overseas reforms. Focusing on new milestones and missions of the Belt and Road, it has outlined the development approach for deepening reform of “Company Internationalization”, setting ambitious goals, a clear roadmap and a feasible schedule, optimizing overseas operations and management structure and driving the high-quality development of overseas tertiary companies. The Company also continuously optimized the national organizational layout with “a tailored strategy for each country” and consistently achieved new successes with the overseas “four initiatives”. High-end activities led market development. The Company successively visited the heads of 25 countries, including the Philippines and Malaysia, conducted nearly 100 high-level bilateral meetings, and meticulously organized 111 ambassadors and representatives of international organizations stationed in China to participate in the “Ambassadors to China Step into CCCC” event. During the 3rd “Belt and Road” International Cooperation Summit, it signed more than 19 cooperation agreements. The Company also participated with high quality in 12 international multilateral and bilateral events, including the Global Sustainable Transport Forum, the Hong Kong “Belt and Road” Summit, the China-ASEAN Expo, and the China-Arab States Expo, fully showcasing the comprehensive strength of the Company. The Company continuously strengthened risk prevention and control. In response to the coups in Niger and Gabon, the new round of the Israel-Palestine conflict, the public sentiment in the Philippines, and other incidents, timely and effective measures were taken to mitigate security risks. The Company participated deeply in the high-quality joint construction of “the Belt and Road”. In 2023, the value of new contracts of the Company with countries participating in the joint construction of “the Belt and Road” was USD38,761 million. The value of new contracts with the Middle East region amounted to RMB3,890 million. Since the proposal of jointly building the Belt and Road, the value of new contracts of the Company accumulated to USD234,758 million. The Karnaphuli River Tunnel in Bangladesh officially opened to traffic, the Phnom Penh-Sihanoukville Expressway in Cambodia achieved a safe operation for one year, the Lekki Port in Nigeria commenced operations, and the main structure of Quay No. 1 at the Chancay Port project in Peru was completed ahead of schedule. The construction of the Bogotá Metro Line 1 commenced, and the first section of the Maya Railway in Mexico achieved full line-through. Represented by the Peljesac Bridge in Croatia, a series of the “Belt and Road” flagship projects have shone brilliantly, presenting satisfactory achievements by CCCC for the 10th anniversary of the initiative of joint construction of the “Belt and Road”. 

(III) Continue to Optimize the Business Layout of “Big City” and Take on the Mantle of Steady Growth 

The Company upholds the philosophy of “building, operating, and developing cities”. It seizes the opportunities presented by the “three major projects”, including new urbanization and affordable housing, construction of dual-use (for peacetime and emergencies) public infrastructure, and the redevelopment of urban villages, thereby deeply engaging in urban renewal and urban inspection actions. The Company has seized the market opportunity presented by the urban development shift from large-scale incremental construction to a focus on both the improvement and transformation of existing stocks and the structural adjustment of increments. It has established an upgrade mechanism guided by high-end design, breaking through the constraints of qualifications, performance, and talent, in order to create a high-quality life for urban and rural residents. During the Reporting Period, the Company fully optimized its business layout in “big city”, accelerating the extension from municipal and housing construction to “front-end” and “back-end” services such as urban planning and design, and city operation. This approach has created a favorable situation where the urban business is characterized by “top-tier leadership, first-level support, and comprehensive coverage of specialized qualifications”. The Company organized a special meeting on urban renewal. Its self-developed urban industrial big data platform achieved positive results during the implementation of several projects, including CCCC Sci-tech City. The first national specialized exhibition hall dedicated to urban renewal, the CCCC Urban Renewal Hall, has officially opened in Beijing. In 2023, the value of new contracts of the Company in “big city” business reached RMB744,900 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 18.7%. The value of new contracts of the comprehensive urban development business amounted to RMB124,674 million, and the “village renovation” project in Fengxi community, Huaxin town, Qingpu district, Shanghai was successfully promoted. In June 2023, the Company considered and passed the “Resolution on Issues Relating to the Increase of Registered Capital of CCCC Urban Investment”, agreeing to increase its registered capital from RMB4,099 million to RMB10,000 million. This reflects the Company’s judgment on the “three major projects” and the incremental construction of urbanization, as well as the strategic determination to continuously create an “urban developer” identity. It focuses on comprehensive urban development as the fundamental business platform and development mainline, driving value creation through dual engines of urban operation and integration of industry with cities, with new investments concentrated in core cities and key regions. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 13 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(IV) Accelerate the Transformation and Upgrading of Digital Traditional Industries, and Spare No Effort to Develop Strategic Emerging Industries 

The Company drives the transformation and upgrading of traditional industries through digitization and intelligentization, relying on the construction of a modern industrial chain leader and the establishment of a smart port and shipping industry alliance. We accelerate the integration of digital technologies with traditional industries, actively explore industrial application scenarios such as digital support and intelligent production, participate in the formulation of related standards, and expedite the development of a smart and digital industry system with CCCC characteristics, enhancing our systemic innovation capacity and overall competitiveness. The Company continues to optimize its promotion and application of the CCCC Urban Industry Big Data Platform throughout the entire company, making full and effective use of industrial resources to provide integrated solutions for policy interpretation, urban analysis, and industry introduction. It vigorously advances the integration of smart transportation, smart cities and smart energy into infrastructures. In 2023, the Company launched domestically produced BIM design foundations and more than 10 specialized products for highway, water transport, and airport industries. It continuously built Beidou model projects, with 3 Beidou application entities approved as National Specialized and Innovative “Little Giant” Enterprises. The Company fully utilized the role of CCCG for pilot reform as a state-owned capital invested company, seized the policy opportunities in the development of strategic emerging industries, compiled a directory of guidelines for the development of strategic emerging industries, clearly defined the entry points and development positioning of the industries in the subdivisions, and formed a package of support policies and specific measures for major investments, mergers and acquisitions of industries, technological research and development, and standard formulation. The green energy segment focuses on the application scenario of “big transportation and big cities”, and makes every effort to create a new development mode of “integration of transportation and energy”. The construction technology segment has been promoting its businesses in different areas, such as sand and gravel aggregates, solid waste treatment, and assembled buildings, and constructing a synergistic development model for multiple businesses. Cold chain logistics segment plans to cooperate with leading cold chain operators. The digital intelligence segment aims to “strengthen the industry chain” of the traditional core industry, with a priority focus on the strategic layout in three niche areas: smart urban parking operations, vehicle-to-road cooperation, and intelligent port and shipping logistics. We facilitated the integration and development of the “three new” businesses of the Company, initiated the establishment of the specialized and new science and technology innovation fund, and accelerated the Company’s layout of the strategic emerging industries through the fund’s outward investment and served the Company’s industrial transformation and upgrading. In 2023, the Company successfully won the bidding of pumped storage projects such as Ningxia Niushoushan phase II and offshore photovoltaic projects such as Shandong Kenli; and undertook 15 key technical tasks for the future industries of the SASAC. The Company has perfected its top-level design and supporting system for green and low-carbon initiatives, identified a green and low-carbon center, and selected 10 exemplary model projects and 10 key technological achievements for promotion and application. Three international projects have been selected as national cases for the green “Belt and Road” initiative, demonstrating effectiveness in establishing the industry’s green and low-carbon brand. 

(V) Be the “National Team” of Technological Innovation and Advance towards a World’s Leading “Sci-Tech” Enterprise 

Focusing on its main responsibility and principal business, the Company attaches great importance to the key and core technologies as well as bottleneck problems. It follows the guidance of pilot projects of building national strength in transportation to continuously improve the technological innovation system, strengthen efforts to achieve breakthroughs in core technologies and build a cradle for original technology. It is committed to improving the independent innovation capability, continuously deepening the technology system reform, enhancing technological innovation incentive and talent pool construction, taking multiple measures to promote the strategy of innovation driven development and staying determined to advance towards a world’s leading “Sci-Tech” enterprise by technological innovation. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 14 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(V) Be the “National Team” of Technological Innovation and Advance towards a World’s Leading “Sci-Tech” Enterprise (continued) 

Guided by the national strategic needs and industrial upgrading, the Company conducted technology research and the “National Key Laboratory of Green and Long-life Road Engineering in Extreme Environment ( 極端環境綠色長壽道路工程全國重點實驗室 )” and the “National Key Laboratory of Safe and Long-life, Healthy Operation and Maintenance of Long Bridges ( 長大橋樑安全長壽與健康運維全國重點實驗室 )” have been recognized by the Ministry of Science and Technology. The Company became the only central construction enterprise with two national engineering research centers upon selection of its Long Bridge Engineering Research Center ( 長大橋工程研究中心 ) and Dredging Technology and Equipment Research Center (疏浚技術裝備研究中心 ) into the National Science and Technology Innovation Base ( 國家科技創新基地 ), leading infrastructure construction to a new high end and making great strides on the road of strengthening the country with science and technology. The Company established the general research institute for strategy and innovation, which undertakes 15 key technological tasks for future industries. Furthermore, the Company owns 27 post-doctoral research centres and 4 academician research centres and has systematically nurtured a pool of scientific experts and a professional innovation team by leveraging on innovation platforms and the establishment of key scientific research projects and key engineering projects to create a “three-in-one” model integrating talents, teams and platforms to nurture scientific and technological talents team. Zhang Xigang ( 張喜剛 ), an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, won the Bridge Award of the Mao Yisheng Science and Technology Award and the title of “100 Excellent Engineers by China Highway & Transportation Society”, and Lin Ming ( 林鳴 ), an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, won the Science and Technology Achievement Award of Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation. The Company overcomes a series of world-class technical issues in engineering projects regarding road construction and maintenance under complicated natural conditions, construction of expressway in high-cold permafrost regions, long-span bridge, long and large mountain tunnel, underwater tunnel, highway-railway bridge, offshore deep-water port, rapid island building in open seas, deep-water submerged tube tunnel, installation and construction of wind power infrastructure. The core technology of super large diameter tunnel shield machine manufacturing breaks the foreign technology blockade, realizes the domestication and industrialization of the whole machine, and is comparable to top-ranking enterprises of European and American markets. With the application of BIM and other new technologies, a large number of intelligent transportation infrastructures have been built, represented by the world’s largest single fully automated terminal, Shanghai Yangshan Port Phase IV, and the national first intelligent expressway, Hangzhou-Shaoxing-Ningbo Expressway. Applied technologies including Beidou satellite and high-resolution remote sensing develop rapidly with a leading position in the domestic industry. Over the years, the Company has been accumulatively awarded with 40 National Science and Technology Advancement Awards, 5 National Technological Invention Awards, 130 Luban Awards, 400 National Quality Project Awards (including 46 golden awards), 120 Zhan Tianyou Awards, 2 Chinese Golden Patent Awards and 39 Chinese Outstanding Patent Awards. The Company has accumulatively participated in the compilation of 162 national standards and 528 industry standards that have been promulgated. It has a total of 34,343 granted patents. 1During the Reporting Period, the Group’s R&D cost was RMB27,707 million, accounting for 3.7% of the revenue, representing an increase of 0.4 percentage point compared with last year, and a number of “bottleneck” technologies have achieved breakthroughs. The construction of the 30,000 m 3 hopper suction dredger is being accelerated. The first batch of domestic dedicated offshore wind power operation and maintenance mother vessels has broken the foreign technology monopoly. Significant progress has been made in the localization and replacement of dredging core components and software platforms with domestic alternatives. In the future, the Company’s science and technology innovation should closely keep abreast of the trends of global leading science and technology and cross-border technology in relevant areas. It should closely integrate with the development trend of science and technology, national strategy and security as well as market and field demand, stress value creation and highlight the mutual synergy between the innovation chain and the industrial chain so as to achieve the target of “focusing on priorities, consolidating advantages, addressing inadequacies and shoring up points of weakness”. It will strive to make greater breakthroughs in “bottleneck” technology, in strengthening the country through transportation and manufacturing and other national strategic frontiers and in common key technologies, so as to firmly grasp the initiative of scientific and technological development. The Company should give full play to the national innovation platforms such as the “National Key Laboratory of Green and Long-life Road Engineering in Extreme Environment (極端環境綠色長壽道路工程全國重點實驗室 )”, and build itself into a source of cutting-edge technologies, a chain of independent innovation in science and technology, and a pool of academic and technological talents in this field. It will cultivate the original technologies, endeavor to enhance the technological capabilities related to strategic emerging industries, and stride towards the world’s leading “Sci-tech” enterprise in an all-out effort. 1 Statistics from the awards received by CCCC and its subsidiaries. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 15 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(VI) Make New Achievements in Business Qualifications 

The Company obtains several extra-grade, grade A and comprehensive grade A qualifications for the main businesses. The Company has obtained a total of 62 extra-grade qualifications, including 18 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of port and waterway engineering construction, 38 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of highway project construction, 4 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of architectural engineering construction and 2 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of municipal utilities project construction. The Company now has obtained more than 1,700 qualifications for major engineering construction, nearly 300 qualifications for engineering consulting, survey and design and 8 comprehensive grade A qualifications for engineering design among the engineering design qualifications. During the Reporting Period, the Company obtained a total of 26 grade A and extra-grade qualifications, including 1 extra-grade qualification for general contracting of architectural engineering construction, 4 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of highway project construction; 3 extra-grade qualifications for general contracting of port and waterway project construction and 1 grade A qualification for engineering design of the waterworks industry. 

(VII) Keep Improving the Market Value Management System and Continuously Enhance the Value Creation Capability of Listed Companies 

During the Reporting Period, guided by the pilot reform of state-owned capital investment companies, the Company thoroughly implemented the “Task Plan on Enhancing the Quality of Listed Companies Controlled by Central Enterprises ( 提高央企控股上市公司質量工作方案 )”, persisted in enhancing its capital, scientifically expanded financing channels, increased the proportion of direct financing, established interconnected circulation paths for capital, resources, and industries, and improved a service system that integrates industry and finance to promote industrial development through financing. The Company will continuously improve the quality of its holding listed companies, strengthen the coordination of capital operations for holding listed companies, enhance equity management and market value assessment of the listed companies, actively leverage the platform of the listed companies, and support the development of the Company’s core business through capital operations. The first was to carry out cross-central enterprise reorganization and integration. Based on the Company’s shareholding in subsidiaries (i.e., CCCC Highway Consultants Co., Ltd., CCCC First Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. and CCCC Second Highway Consultants Co., Ltd.), the Company realized the spin-off and listing of the design segment through the asset swap and the issuance of shares to purchase assets for reorganization and integration. CCCC Design & Consulting Group Co., Ltd. (600720.SH) was officially listed on 28 December 2023, and CCCC holds 53.88% of the shares of CCCC Design upon such reorganization. The listing of the design segment is an important step to realize the strategy of “building a country with strong transportation strength”. CCCC Design will become the largest listed company in the design sector domestically, fully leveraging the leading role of the industry chain to support the Company’s business development and upgrading. At the same time, CCCC Design will serve as the “national team” in the design field, representing the Chinese design industry on the global stage, which will further exploit the Company’s significant advantages as a leader in the infrastructure industry and as a forerunner in the Belt and Road initiative, and fully practice the strategy of “building a country with strong transportation strength”. This project is the first market-oriented backdoor listing project among A-shares for state-owned enterprises (SOEs), marking the first spin-off and listing project through restructuring and the first multiple-asset restructuring listing project following the comprehensive implementation of the registration-based system for A+H listed companies. The second was to actively explore equity financing channels and focus on enhancing the Company’s direct financing capability. The proposal on the issuance of 30,000 million preference shares to specific targets by the Company has been approved by SASAC, as well as considered and approved by the general meeting on 30 June 2023. The third was to vigorously grasp the capital cost window on the market and innovate various types of asset-backed securitization business models. The annual general meeting of the Company considered and approved the proposal of RMB120,000 million asset-backed securitization business plan, including but not limited to asset-backed securitization business of underlying assets such as supply chain receivables, leasing assets, partnership shares, government subsidies, infrastructure assets, and commercial real estate. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 16 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. CORE COMPETITIVENESS DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD 

# (CONTINUED) 

(VII) Keep Improving the Market Value Management System and Continuously Enhance the Value Creation Capability of Listed Companies (continued) 

The fourth was to strengthen the control of fund business and promote the transformation and upgrading of industrial funds. Combined with the Company’s fund business and the actual combination of production and financing, the Company comprehensively sorted out the fund business, put forward pressure control adjustment suggestions for the stock business, systematic planning and direction mode suggestions for the incremental business, and simultaneously put forward the follow-up management optimization plan for fund business. At the same time, it promoted the market-oriented transformation of fund business, facilitated the integration and development of the “three new” businesses of the Company, initiated the establishment of the specialized and new science and technology innovation fund, and promoted the Company to accelerate the layout of the strategic emerging industries through the fund’s outward investment and served the Company’s industrial transformation and upgrading. The fifth was to proactively plan for a market value management system, thoroughly implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, earnestly put into practice the “Opinions of the State Council on Further Improving the Quality of Listed Companies” and the requirements of the three-year action plan for the reform of SOEs, and continuously push forward the specialized work of enhancing the quality of central SOEs’ listed companies. The Company will actively study the relevant regulations of the SASAC, and in conjunction with the actual situation of the Company, implement the requirements of the SASAC regarding the market value management work of listed companies owned by central SOEs. 

# IV. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 

During the reporting period, the global economy faced downward pressure and the international situation was complex and severe, resulting in an increase in the unpredictability. However, the economy of China showed a recovery trend with a growth in GDP of 5.2% for 2023. A new round of the reform and high-quality development of state-owned enterprises will lay a foundation for the long-term prosperity and development. The Company implemented the “three majors, two macros and two priorities” business strategy in depth and firmly grasped the cash remittance market, enabling the “big transportation” business maintain the leading position in the industry, the market share of the “big city” business continue to increase, and its advantages in the “rivers, lakes and seas” traditional business are consolidated, and thereby gracing the “gold-lettered signboard” of CCCC in abroad. The main business of the Company has covered important strategic areas at home and abroad, and the core industrial clusters facing the world and focusing on construction are taking shape. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company amounted to RMB1,753,215 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 13.7%, which was mainly due to the increased construction demand from overseas projects, urban construction, ports and bridges, key national strategic projects and other fields. The Company continuously improved the business structure, steadily expanded the scale of cash remittance and significantly enhanced the quality and efficiency of investment. As at 31 December 2023, the backlog of the Company amounted to RMB3,450,659 million. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of all businesses from overseas markets of the Company amounted to RMB319,746 million (equivalent to approximately USD47,526 million), representing a year-on-year increase of 47.5%, and accounting for approximately 18% of the Company’s new contracts value. Wherein, 30 new projects were entered into with each contract value of over USD300 million and a total contract value of USD31,105 million, accounting for 65% of total value of all overseas new contracts of the Company. Statistics showed that as at 31 December 2023, the Company operated businesses in 139 countries and regions. The value of contracts of all businesses from infrastructure and other investment projects amounted to RMB208,618 million, including RMB195,056 million for domestic market and RMB13,562 million for overseas market as recognized in proportion to the Company’s shareholding, and the contract value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company in the design and construction sector was estimated to be RMB150,140 million. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 17 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES 

1. Domestic Market 

During the reporting period, following general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and leveraging on the synergetic effect of macro policies, the economic operation of China showed an overall upturn with a positive trajectory and GDP recorded a year-on-year growth of 5.2%. Driven by the issuance of additional state bonds for supporting post-disaster reconstruction and relevant projects regarding the enhancement of disaster prevention, mitigation, and relief capabilities, the investment in infrastructure grew steadily. Data published by the National Bureau of Statistics showed that from January to November, investment in infrastructure recorded a year-on-year growth of 5.8%, representing a higher rate of 2.9 percentage points as compared to that of all fixed asset investment. Specifically, investment in shipping business increased by 22.0%, investment in railway transport business increased by 21.5%, investment in water conservancy management increased by 5.2%, investment in road transportation business decreased by 0.2% and investment in public facility management decreased by 2.5%. During the reporting period, the economic operation in China faced new challenges and difficulties, mainly arising from insufficient domestic demand and numerous risks and hidden dangers in key areas. The state government proposed to further stabilize the expectation of society, enhance the development confidence, stimulate the market viability, promote the economy to continue to recover and grow, and accelerate the launch of specialized and valuable policies and measures. It also proposed to strengthen macro policy control, enhance the counter-cyclical adjustments as well as the reserve of policies, focus on expanding domestic demand, enhance the citizen’s confidence and prevent risks, continue to implement proactive fiscal policies and prudent monetary policies, make full use of tools of macroscopic and structural monetary policy. It also called for the continuity, optimization, improvement and implementation of the policies on tax reduction and fee reduction, the effective prevention and elimination of local debt risks, the accelerated issuance and utilization of the special bonds of local governments, aiming to continually promote the continuous improvement of economic operation, the continuous enhancement of endogenous power, the continuous improvement of the expectation of society, the continuous defusing of potential risks, and thereby, driving the effective improvement of quality and reasonable growth of quantity in the economy, solidly promoting the high-quality development of economy, and making the overall expectation of the infrastructure construction industry rise steadily. A new round of policy control initiated in the fourth quarter released a host of positive news in terms of policy orientation, financial support, industry cultivation, etc. The accelerated implementation of special bonds had brought a certain leveraging effect, effectively bolstering the growth of infrastructure investment and market liquidity. During the reporting period, bearing its mission of being the “great power of the country”, the Company firmly implemented the national strategy of strengthening the country through transportation, undertook the Pinglu Canal ( 平陸運河 ), a landmark project for the construction of a strong transportation country, and provided an integrated plan of design and construction. The deck closure of Lingdingyang Bridge, the main bridge of the Shenzhen-Zhongshan Bridge, which is a major national project, and the submarine immersed tunnel, were successfully completed, creating a number of “world’s best”; the excavation of main tunnel of Yigong Tunnel ( 易貢隧道 ), the longest railway tunnel in China had commenced; the project of Tianshanshengli Tunnel ( 天山勝利隧道 ), the longest highway tunnel under construction in the world had achieved major breakthroughs; Dalian Bay Submarine Tunnel ( 大連灣海底隧道 ), the first cross-sea immersed tunnel in north of China, had achieved all line run-through. Focusing on the “3060” carbon peaking and carbon neutrality target and relying on digital and intelligent management, the Company continued to build China’s No. 1 brand in offshore wind power, and achieved the value of new contracts of RMB12,496 million in 2023 through signing new contracts in relation to the wind turbine foundations and wind turbine installation works of the 200MW offshore wind power projects in Qinhuangdao and Tangshan of HECIC ( 河北建投 ) as well as Lemen offshore wind power project in Shantou. The Company has been playing an active role in the areas of rural revitalisation and urban renewal for the well-being of the people by fully aligning with the needs of economic and social development as well as the people to successfully implement a number of key projects with strong representative and influential effects, such as the municipal pipe network construction, old town renovation, and living environment and ecosystem upgrade. In addition, the Company promoted the research on advanced technology to traditional industries through relying on the national key laboratories to facilitate the high-end, intelligent and green upgrades of the industry. The Company utilized the advantages on industrial linkage among the “big city” business, the “big transportation” business and the “rivers, lakes and seas” business, to enhance the integration of internal and external resources and provide a comprehensive package of high-quality “CCCC solutions” to the market. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 18 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

2. Overseas Market 

During the reporting period, the world economy recovered slowly and the Russian-Ukrainian conflict continued, the effects of which on global politics and economy were increased. Some economies still faced sovereign debt risks, and as competition in the global infrastructure construction market heated up, the competition among products had progressively evolved into a competition of industrial supply chains and ecosystem, forcing enterprises to accelerate transformation and upgrading. Based on scientific and technological reform and industrial reform, high-quality economic and social development giving rise to many new industries and new models, the development of the infrastructure construction industry is facing a new round of integration, the demand for inter-regional transportation interconnection has increased, and major projects and high-quality projects are further clustered to the leading enterprises. The 10th anniversary of the Belt and Road Initiative with quality will provide more space for growth. During the reporting period, the Company actively coped with the material changes in international and industry situation, steadily promoted the works of “Internationalization of the Company”, continued to consolidate the foundation of interconnection cooperation, taking account of the advantages of the traditional main business and the expansion of emerging markets, forming a sound situation of diversification and making concurrent progress, leading to a steady enhancement of operating quality and business scale. The construction of the Bogota Metro Project has also commenced, while the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway has successfully operated for six years, and the Company had completed various major projects such as ROSHN Riyadh East and Sedera III, IV and V Housing Construction in Saudi Arabia and Operation and Maintenance of Keffi to Makurdi Highway in Nigeria. A number of environmental protection and pipe network projects were successfully signed in Guangdong, Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore and Central Asia areas, and new momentum was added to the development of emerging business, representing the abundant achievements regarding the Belt and Road Initiative. The Company insists on the principle of “jointly negotiate, establish and share ( 共商共建共享 )” and the goal of “building a shared future for mankind (構建人類命運共同體 )”, takes “heart-to-heart bridge ( 連心橋 )”, “road to wealth ( 致富路 )”, “developed port ( 發展港 )”, “happy city ( 幸福城 )” and “Chinese equipment ( 中國裝備 )” as target, plans and implements the livelihood projects along the Belt and Road at a high level to benefit the governments of two countries and local society, and firmly promotes the development of overseas business in the direction of “high quality, benefiting people’s livelihood and sustainability ( 高質量、惠民生、可持續 )”. 

3. Business Summary 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business 

The scope of infrastructure construction business mainly consists of investment, design, construction, operation and management of ports, roads and bridges, railways, water conservancy and hydropower, urban rail transit, municipal infrastructures, buildings, environmental protection and related projects at home and abroad. Categorised by project type, it specifically covers port construction, road and bridge construction, railway construction, urban construction, and overseas projects. During the reporting period, the value of new infrastructure construction contracts entered into by the Company amounted to RMB1,558,482 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 14.0%. The value of new contracts from overseas markets amounted to RMB295,126 million (equivalent to approximately USD43,866 million). Wherein, the confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects was RMB208,197 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB149,257 million. As at 31 December 2023, the backlog of the Company amounted to RMB2,987,922 million. Categorised by project type and location, the value of new contracts in terms of port construction, road and bridge construction, railway construction, urban construction and overseas projects amounted to RMB84,523 million, RMB349,005 million, RMB36,919 million, RMB792,908 million and RMB295,126 million, representing 6%, 22%, 2%, 51% and 19% of the total value of new infrastructure construction contracts, respectively. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 19 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business (continued) 

① Port Construction 

As the largest port construction enterprise in China, the Company has undertaken a majority of medium and large port terminals since the founding of the PRC. With compelling competitive edges, the Company encountered relatively limited substantive competitors. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company for port construction projects in Chinese Mainland amounted to RMB84,523 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 10.2%, and accounting for 6% of that of the infrastructure construction business. The confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects was RMB579 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB2,475 million. Data published by the Ministry of Transport of the PRC showed that fixed asset investment in coastal and inland water transport construction after completion amounted to approximately RMB182,867 million from January to November 2023, representing a year-on-year increase of 23.7%. The major investing targets in coastal ports include the construction of international hub seaports, north-south sea transportation channels, national energy and resource strategic reserve bases and other fields, while as for the inland river regions, the investments are mainly targeting the newly added navigation target of 2,500 kilometers for the “14th Five-Year Plan” period of the “four verticals, four horizontals and two networks”, the national high-grade waterway networks. Replying on the development of modern industrial chain leadership and the establishment of an intelligent port and maritime industry alliance, and following the business layout in strategic regions, the Company deeply got involved in Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei, the Yangtze River Delta, Guangdong, Hong Kong and Macao and other key regions, focused on major projects, and successfully completed the main works of the Pinglu Canal, Phase I of Container Terminal Project of Eastern Operating Area in Yantian Zone, Shenzhen Port and Laomukong Navigation Power Junctions in Minjiang. 

② Road and Bridge Construction 

As one of the largest road and bridge construction enterprises in China, the Company enjoys remarkable technical and scale advantages in construction of expressways, high-grade highways as well as river-crossing and sea-crossing bridges, and is the market leader in the same industry in China. The road business of the Company realizes a consulting service industry pattern of infrastructure sector with full lifecycle and whole-process integration, covering from single industry chain to whole industry chain (planning, feasibility study, investment and financing, survey and design, project construction, operation and maintenance, and asset disposal). With the advantages of leading technical strength, sufficient capital resources, outstanding project performance, abundant resource reserves and good reputation in the highway business, the Company is able to provide integrated consulting services across the whole industry chain. The Company has made important breakthroughs in key technologies such as the construction of mega-span suspension bridges, and has developed a comparative advantage over its competitors in the research of alpine frozen soil technologies, along with the whole industry chain and integrated services covering bridge, island and tunnel projects. Major competitors of the Company are some large-scale central enterprises and local state-owned infrastructure enterprises. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company for road and bridge construction projects in Chinese Mainland reached RMB349,005 million, representing a year-on-year decrease of 2.5%, and accounting for 22% of that of the infrastructure construction business. Wherein, the confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects amount to RMB38,077 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB35,995 million. Data published by the Ministry of Transport of the PRC showed that fixed asset investment in road transport construction amounted to approximately RMB2,648,708 million from January to November 2023, representing a year-on-year increase of 1.2%. During the “14th Five-Year Plan” period, China will construct its expressways with a target of accelerating the construction of a country with strong transportation network and guided by developing integrated and multi-dimensional transportation networks. China will alleviate the imbalance of road network development needs between regions, so as to enhance the quality of national expressway networks and develop a modern and integrated transportation system. Following the mid-term plan adjustment for the “14th Five-Year Plan”, there is an enhanced focus on front-end leadership and green, low-carbon transformation, requiring the implementation of regional governance on key projects such as the urbanization reconstruction of expressways that run through the cities, upgrading and expansion of busy road sections, trunk routes and cross-harbor crossings. From the perspective of market layout, Guangdong, Hong Kong and Macao, the Yangtze River Delta, Central China, Northeast China, Northwest China and Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei regions have a relatively broad market. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 20 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business (continued) 

② Road and Bridge Construction (continued) 

During the reporting period, following the construction of a country with strong transportation network and a national integrated and multi-dimensional transportation networks, the Company focused on the incremental markets of comprehensive transportation hubs, highway urbanization reconstruction, smart transportation and “transportation + new energy”, and has engaged in the construction of a number of high-quality highway projects such as works of Qi County-Lishi Expressway in Lvliang, Shanxi Province, Zhaosu-Wensu Highway and Wenquan-Horgos Highway of Line G219 in Xinjiang, Beijing-Taipei Expressway – Huanghua Port Section of Qugang Expressway in Hebei Province and Concession Project of He County-Wuwei Section of Nanjing–Jiujiang Expressway of G4231. The Company continued to lead the core technology of long bridges and long-diameter shields, created many “world’s best ( 世界之最 )” showpiece, and successfully won the tender for National Highway 209 Wangguan Yellow River Bridge, Jinsha River Bridge and Quanzhou Baiqi Channel, with the world’s leading technology, constantly refreshing the world record in road and bridge construction. 

③ Railway Construction 

As one of the largest railway construction enterprises in China, the Company sticks to the strategic target of completely becoming a first-class rail transportation comprehensive service provider with leading technology, advanced management and outstanding quality. As for the domestic market, the Company has developed into the main force of China’s railway construction by virtue of its outstanding construction level and excellent management capability, but a large gap still exists between the Company and the two domestic traditional railway infrastructure enterprises in terms of market shares in China. As for the overseas market, the Company has successfully entered into the railway construction markets in Africa, Southeast Asia, etc., and several major railway projects have been completed or operated or are under construction by the Company, and the brand of “CCCC Railway” shows vital influence in the international market. During the reporting period, the railway business focused on improving the construction of the “eight verticals and eight horizontals” high-speed railway network, actively promoting intercity railways, accelerating the development of urban railways, enhancing the road network layout, and the excavation of main tunnel of Yigong Tunnel, the longest railway tunnel in China had commenced. The Company has formed a full industry chain layout of rail transportation business around design and consult, construction, equipment manufacturing, operation and maintenance. Relying on the Company’s industrial advantages in highways and airports, the Company innovated to build “rail+” integrated urban operation solutions. The Company firmly implemented the national strategy of strengthening the country through transportation and successfully won the bidding for the construction projects of Section TYZQ-4 of Pre-Station and Related Project of the Advance Section of the New Nantong-Ningbo High Speed Railway, civil works of the New Jinan-Zaozhuang Railway in Shandong Province, polishing the brand of “CCCC Railway”. During the reporting period, China promoted the railway construction in a scientific and orderly manner with an investment on fixed assets of national railway field of RMB764,500 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 7.5%. According to statistics, a total of 167 railway projects were successfully tendered nationwide, with a total bidding amount of RMB501,695 million. In terms of the value of contracts awarded, the Company’s market share amounted to 3.8%, ranking third in the industry and first among non-railway sectors. The value of new contracts of the Company for railway construction projects in Chinese Mainland amounted to RMB36,919 million, representing a year-on-year decrease of 17.7%, and accounting for 2% of that of the infrastructure construction business. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 21 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business (continued) 

④ Urban Construction 

The Company actively participated in urban construction for building construction, comprehensive urban development and urban rail transit extensively, with considerable influence in the market. Meanwhile, the Company accelerated the layout of emerging industries, such as ecological and environmental protection, urban water environment treatment, etc., and endeavored to cultivate new growth points. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company for urban construction projects in Chinese Mainland reached RMB792,908 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 16.8%, and accounting for 51% of that of the infrastructure construction business. The confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects was RMB155,979 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB99,199 million. In 2023, the State indicated that the renovations of villages in super-large and mega cities should be actively and steadily promoted. We accelerated new urbanization process, and urban construction ushered in new challenges and opportunities. We will adhere to “maintaining stability while pursuing progress, fostering stability through progress, and establishing before dismantling”, which sets higher developmental requirements in the areas such as new urbanization and the realization of rural revitalization values in 2024. A variety of national policies have been implemented to actively and cautiously eliminate the risks in real estate industry, and to accelerate the construction of “three major programs”, aiming to bolster the overall stability and positive momentum in the city clusters with advantages, the real estates in metropolitan areas and urban renewal markets. People’s livelihood projects released new momentum for the development of the industry, and the market demand for the old community renovation, collective rental house, affordable house, hospitals and schools, public services continued to increase. Under the strategy of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality target, the way of housing construction transformed quickly, and digital construction, green construction and construction industrialization developed fast. The gathering of urban population put forward higher requirements for public supporting facilities, and the market demand for urban renewal, comprehensive development of underground space, intelligent parking and pipe network renovation continued to be released. During the reporting period, the Company catered to a new round of demands for district development and construction brought by the strategy of new type of urbanization, national land space planning and adjustment and urban renewal actions. The Company signed a number of large urban complex projects such as Haikou Henggou Village Urban Renewal, one of the first batch of pilot projects for urban renewal in Haikou city, and projects for the renovation of villages in Fengxi community, Huaxin town, Qingpu district, Shanghai. Our district development model has been refined, and our business scale has been growing. Focusing on the needs of people’s livelihood and taking up its corporate responsibility, the Group has signed resettlement housing projects in Anhui and Hainan, and promoted renovation and expansion projects in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, so as to deepen and expand in the field of livelihood housing construction. The Company entered areas with high technology such as complex urban transportation and smart parking. The Company implemented municipal projects including the Design and General Contracting Project for the Construction and Renovation of Intelligent Car Parks (Phase I) in Pengjiang District to improve the urban modernization and build livable, resilient and smart cities. The Company is committed to building a beautiful China and has participated in watershed management and sewage treatment projects in Yunan and Chongqing. Focusing on the carbon peaking and carbon neutrality target and building a professional platform of “CCCC Offshore Wind Power ( 中交海風 )”, and achieved the value of new contracts amounted to RMB12,496 million in 2023 through completing the installation, operation and maintenance works for offshore wind power projects in Qinhuangdao, Yingkou, Shantou and Fangchenggang, etc., the Company has obtained a number of national leading offshore construction and operation and maintenance technologies, and has initially realized the scale effect of emerging businesses. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 22 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business (continued) 

⑤ Overseas Projects 

The Company’s scope of overseas projects in the infrastructure construction business includes all kinds of large-scale infrastructure projects such as roads and bridges, ports, railways, airports, environmental protection, subways, buildings, etc., with remarkable competitive edges in the market. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company for overseas projects in the infrastructure construction business amounted to RMB295,126 million (equivalent to approximately USD43,866 million), accounting for 19% of that of the infrastructure construction business. Wherein, the confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects was RMB13,562 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB11,588 million. Categorised by project type, the value of contracts for urban construction, roads and bridges, urban rail transit, ports, railways and others accounted for 33%, 25%, 11%, 11%, 8% and 12% of the value of new contracts for overseas projects, respectively. Categorised by project location, the value of new infrastructure construction contracts for Africa, Asia (excluding Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan), Oceania, Latin America, Europe, as well as Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, and other regions accounted for 34%, 32%, 12%, 11%, 8% and 3% of the value of new contracts for overseas projects, respectively. Based on a global perspective and taking advantage of its main business, the Company actively cooperated with and served national strategies, took the third “Belt and Road Summit” as an opportunity to give full play to its advantages in the fields of “big cities”, “big transportation”, as well as “rivers, lakes and seas”, and made every effort to promote the interconnection of transportation infrastructure and improve people’s livelihood along the routes, actively contributed Chinese wisdom and Chinese solutions. During the reporting period, the rehabilitation and widening works for Kayonza-Rusumo road in Rwanda have been successfully accepted, which was an important artery traffic between Rwanda and Tanzania; the entire Kuala Lumpur Metro Line 2 in Malaysia has been opened to traffic; E763 New Belgrade-Sur čin section in Serbia has been opened to traffic, which was the fastest road connecting Belgrade to the southern cities; the first phase of the Kaifei Road project in Nigeria has been completed and accepted, which was an important channel connecting Abuja, the capital of Nigeria, and the golden triangle region in the southeast; the Karnaphuli tunnel project in Bangladesh has been officially accepted, which was of great significance to promoting the construction of the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar economic corridor as an important fulcrum project of “the Belt and Road” construction and an important part of the “Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar” economic corridor. The Company has participated in the construction of the Sedera III, IV and V infrastructure projects in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia and other series of landmark projects, making important contributions to the high-quality development of China-Saudi Arabia economic and trade cooperation. During the reporting period, the Company steadily promoted the international development and the pilot of localization and separate operations. The coordination of major projects was strongly promoted. We optimized the business structure with larger contracting projects and stronger investments, enhanced the operating structure continuously and controlled the investment risks effectively. We coordinated the construction of overseas “smart site (智慧工地 )” control platform, and the refinement and digital transformation of the projects under construction took a new step. The Company has done well in the prevention and control of overseas risks, accelerated the improvement of overseas compliance systems, conducted comprehensive checks on overseas operation risks and implemented list management by levels and classification. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 23 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(2) Infrastructure Design Business 

The scope of infrastructure design business mainly includes consulting and planning service, feasibility study, survey and design, engineering consultancy, engineering measurement and technical research, project management, project supervision, general project contracting, compilation of industry standards and codes, etc. As the largest port design enterprise in China, as well as the world’s leading highway, bridge and tunnel design enterprise, the Company enjoys remarkable competitive edges in related business fields. As compared with the Company, other participants in the market have relatively weak competitiveness. During the reporting period, the Company’s design business had successfully listed by reorganization, and CCCC Design & Consulting Group Co., Ltd. (600720.SH) was officially listed on 28 December 2023. After the completion of asset swap, the preliminary professional integration of CCCG’s design segment was completed, and CCCC Design will become the largest listed company in China engaged in design business, it will fully playing its leading role in the industry chain, vigorously expanding the high-end markets, and aiding the growth and upgrade of the Group’s business. In terms of the railway infrastructure design business, the Company has entered into the market during the “11th Five-Year Plan” period, and its operations mainly involve overseas railway projects and domestic rail transit projects. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company in infrastructure design business reached RMB55,972 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 2.0%. Wherein, the value of new contracts from overseas markets amounted to RMB3,186 million (equivalent to approximately USD474 million). As at 31 December 2023, the backlog of the Company amounted to RMB154,256 million. During the reporting period, the Company continued to strengthen the role of ballast stone of traditional infrastructure design business, focusing on integrated and multi-dimensional transportation networks and large-scale integrated projects, and marching steadfastly in the field of large transportation and big cities; strengthened the leading role of the front-end of the design consulting, and closely surrounded the industrial pattern formed by the national strategy and the new growth points, increased high-end planning, and led by scientific and technological innovations, explored the synergistic joint efforts of the whole industry chain, and fully developed the comprehensive advantages of the whole industry to promote the landing of large projects. In the construction of the Pinglu Canal ( 平陸運河 ), the Company fully participated in the hubs, waterways, bridges and other relevant projects with an integrated solution, and played an important role in the planning and implementation of such projects. In terms of water transportation business, the Company focused on “carbon peaking and carbon neutrality target”, and successfully signed the Design, Procurement and Construction of General Contracting Projects of Supporting Terminal Project of LNG Receiving Station Project in Huizhou, Terminal Project of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Phase III Expansion Project in Guangxi around the construction of new energy ports to promote the green transformation of energy structure. The Company focused on the market opportunities in upgrading and reconstruction of seaports and improvement of inland waterways, and signed contracts such as the 2*50,000-ton Terminal Project of Luoyuan Bay of Fuzhou Port and the Passenger and Cargo Ro-ro Terminal Project of Xuwen Port of Zhanjiang Port, etc., and continued to consolidate its market share in its traditional main business. In terms of road and bridge business, the Company gave full play to its absolute leading edge in highway design, landing a number of highway construction projects with strong regional influence, such as the highway construction projects of G309 Heshui (Laocheng)-Xifeng section and G217 Altay-Burqin in Xinjiang. In response to the national strategy of rural revitalization, the Company signed contracts for rural road construction, such as the supporting rural road of the Yibin Sanjiang New District Modern Agricultural Industrial Park to expand its sinking market share. In terms of urban business, the Company continued to root in cities, cultivate cities and operate at the cities, and signed contracts for urban development projects such as the Infrastructure Construction Project of the Intelligent Science and Technology Industrial Park in Xingwen County, Yibin City, and the Bundled Project of Upgrading the Capacity of Urban Renewal in Jiuqing District, Xingwen County. In terms of emerging industries, the Company continued to build the “CCCC Offshore Wind Power” brand and carry out offshore wind power survey, supervision and consulting in Shantou, Fangchenggang, Weihai and other parts of China. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 24 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

3. Business Summary (continued) 

(3) Dredging Business 

The scope of dredging business mainly includes infrastructure dredging, maintenance dredging, environmental dredging, reclamation and watershed management, as well as supporting projects related to dredging and land reclamation. As the largest dredging enterprise in China and even in the world, the Company enjoys absolute influence in China’s coastal dredging market. The Company won the bidding for the Dongting Lake Ecological Restoration Pilot Project. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company in dredging business reached RMB119,193 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 11.8%. Wherein, the value of new contracts from overseas markets amounted to RMB20,807 million (equivalent to approximately USD3,093 million), the confirmed contract value from infrastructure and other investment projects amounted to RMB421 million, and the value of construction and installation contracts to be undertaken by the Company was estimated to be RMB883 million. As at 31 December 2023, the backlog of the Company amounted to RMB278,577 million. During the reporting period, the Company continued to optimize its asset structure by investing in the construction and acquisition of major dredging vessels and equipment, eliminating some old and inefficient outdated vessels, optimizing the dispatching mechanism of equipment such as cutter suction dredgers to improve the construction utilization rate. Currently, the Company has the largest and most advanced fleet of dredging vessels in China and ranks in the forefront in the global market in terms of the total number of trailing suction hopper dredgers and cutter suction dredgers. National coastal investment gradually slowed down and the traditional reclamation business was relatively sluggish due to the impact of water transport and environmental protection policies. However, as the country rolled out the blueprint for “four horizontals, four verticals and two networks” and the green development concept was widely accepted, smart upgrading of coastal ports, improvement of high-grade inland waterways, ecological improvement and protection of watershed brought out new market opportunities. During the reporting period, the Company focused on its strengths and promoted the operation of major projects, winning bids for a number of major projects such as the Waterway Engineering of the Pinglu Canal, the Land Reclamation Works of Niukengwan Port and Processing and Logistics Area in Luoyuan County, Fujian Province and Chongqing Zaodu Reservoir, and making breakthroughs in the areas of lake and reservoir desilting, inland waterways, water conservancy projects and other areas of restructuring. To promote green development and build a beautiful China, the Company actively put efforts in the large ecological and environmental protection and water resources incremental market, promoting the implementation of a number of target-oriented key projects with global drive, such as the Ecology Restoration Pilot Project of Donting Lake, the Soil Pollution Treatment and Remediation, Ecological Restoration Projects of Mines and the Marine Ecological Protection and Restoration Project in Tianjin City, and the Upgrading and Renovation of Daxi Governance Project in Lishui City. 

(4) Other Businesses 

Other businesses mainly include the equipment manufacturing of shield machines along the Company’s entire industrial chain, centralized procurement of materials and financial industry support, etc. During the reporting period, the Company’s shield machine equipment and complete set of technologies realized the development of the whole industry chain, manufactured and repaired over 100 shield machines with a diameter ranging from 3.64 meters to 16.07 meters, and competed and innovated with international first-class shield machine manufacturers in large shield machine projects such as the Nanjing Weisan Road/Heyan Road, the Shanghai Airport Liaison Line, the Reconstruction Project of the Sixth Eastern Ring Road in Beijing, and the Karnaphuli Tunnel Project in Bangladesh, and built up a core advantage in the field of intensive development of mega and ultra mega cities across rivers and lakes. In the construction of the Fuzhou Metro, the Company utilized the dual-model shield tunneling machines, which enabled us to cope with a range of hydrogeological conditions by adjusting its operational mode, leading to a substantial improvement in construction efficiency and ensuring the safety and quality of the projects as compared to conventional techniques. The Company continues to optimize the procurement mode of materials, establish the control scheme for domestic trade enterprises, and strengthen the source procurement in practice; dynamically adjust the procurement catalog, explore the regional procurement of different categories, and implement the procurement of flooring materials, so as to expand the benefits of procurement; and carry out regional procurement with overseas markets to improve the system construction of the Company’s overseas supply chain, and enhance the internationalization of the procurement management standard. During the reporting period, the value of new contracts of the Company in other businesses amounted to RMB19,568 million, representing a year-on-year increase of 43.5%. As at 31 December 2023, the backlog of the Company amounted to RMB29,904 million. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 25 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

4. Some Major Contracts Entered into during the Reporting Period (Unit: RMB million) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business 

Port Construction No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Section NO.SN3 of the Waterway Engineering Construction of the Pinglu Canal 5,278 2 Section NO.SN5 of the Waterway Engineering Construction of the Pinglu Canal 4,146 3 Phase I of Changshan River (Huibu-Shuanggangkou) Navigation-power Junction EPC Project (Changshan Section), Middle and Upper Reaches of Qiantang River (Section NO.SJSG) 3,580 4 Section NO.SN12 of the Waterway Engineering Construction of the Pinglu Canal 3,028 5 Section 3 of Dalu Line East Extension Channel Renovation Project 2,151 

Road and Bridge Construction No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Comprehensive Development Project of Tongxiang High-Tech Town in Xiamen City, Fujian Province 19,023 2 Project of G1816 Wuhai-Maqin Cooperation – Saierlong Expressway (Gansu-Qinghai) in Gansu Province 13,514 3 The package of projects for Highways including Taihangshan Highway in Hebei Province (I) Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) Project – Zunhua-Qinhuangdao Section of Beijing-Qinhuangdao Expressway 13,482 4 General Contracting Project of Dejiang-Yuqing Highway in Guizhou Province 10,216 5 Project of Guigang – Bobai (via Xingye) Expressway in Guangxi Autonomous Region 8,969 

Railway Construction No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Section TYZQ-4 of Pre-Station and Related Project of the Advance Section of the New Nantong-Ningbo High Speed Railway 7,058 2 Civil Engineering Project of the New Jinan-Zaozhuang Railway in Shandong Province 3,388 3 Project of Chizhou Bridge (Bid I) in Anhui Province 2,845 4 Section XCTJ 10 of Pre-Station Project of Gansu-Qinghai Section of the New Xining-Chengdu Railway 2,665 5 Project of Xiong’an New District Underground Civil Engineering and Related Ancillary Works (Bid VI) of Xiongan-Xinzhou High Speed Railway in Heibei Province 2,603 

Urban Construction No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Renovation Project of “Urban Villages” in Fengxi Community, Huaxin Town, Qingpu District, Shanghai 30,186 2 EPC Project of Urban Renewal Project (Taihua Area) in Kuiwen District, Weifang City, Shandong Province 13,300 3 City-industry Integration Comprehensive Development Project of Junshan New City in Wuhan Economic Development Zone 9,000 4 Development Project of Lehuo Town in Fengquan District, Xinxiang City, Henan Province 9,000 5 Construction General Contracting for the Phase I Project of Urban Rail Transit Line 4 in Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province 8,491 BUSINESS OVERVIEW 26 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (I) BUSINESS REVIEW AND MARKET STRATEGIES (CONTINUED) 

4. Some Major Contracts Entered into during the Reporting Period (Unit: RMB million) (continued) 

(1) Infrastructure Construction Business (continued) 

Overseas Projects No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 ROSHN Riyadh East and Sedera III, IV and V Housing Construction Projects, Saudi Arabia 15,874 2 Standard-gauge Railway (Lamu Port – Garissa Section) of the Lapsset Corridor in Kenya 12,741 3 Road Project of Rajaa-Timsa, Rumbek, Avier, Wau and Kwajok in South Sudan 10,085 4 Project of Phnom Penh-Bavet Expressway in Cambodia 9,258 5 Improvement and Upgrade Project of M7-M12 Highway in Sydney, Australia 6,170 

(2) Infrastructure Design Business 

No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Construction Project of the Highway of G309 Heshui (Old Town) to Xifeng Section in Qingyang City, Gansu Province 4,683 2 Highway Construction Project of G217 Altay- Burqin in Xinjiang (Contractual Section I) 1,270 3 EPC Project of Guaranteed Rental Housing in the New Town of Power Battery of Sanjiang New Special District, Yibin City, Sichuan Province 1,200 4 Section SG03 of the Project of Yangpushu Port Access Highway in Danzhou City, Hainan Province 1,172 5 City-industry Integration Development and Infrastructure Construction Projects in Hi-Tech District, Yibin City, Sichuan Province 1,093 

(3) Dredging Business 

No. Contract Name Contract Value 

1 Iron Ore Project Offshore Cagayan, Philippines 6,605 2 Niukengwan Port and Processing Logistics Area Reclamation Project in Luoyuan County, Fujian Province 3,587 3 EPC Project of the Zaodu Reservoir in Chongqing 3,232 4 EPC Project of Infrastructure of Hongqiao Industrial Park, Fenghuangshan Industrial Park and Yangchang Industrial Park in Xuanwei Economic and Technological Development Zone, Yunnan Province 3,203 5 EPC General Project Contracting for Ecology Restoration Pilot Project of Donting Lake 2,986 BUSINESS OVERVIEW 27 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA 

1. Values of Contracts Newly Entered into during the Reporting Period (RMB million) 

Business Segment October – December 2023 Accumulated in 2023 Aggregate for the same period of 2022 Year-on-year change Number Amount Number Amount Amount (%) 

Infrastructure Construction Business 1,119 513,946 3,853 1,558,482 1,367,070 14.0% 

Port Construction 60 21,417 430 84,523 76,700 10.2% Road and Bridge Construction 165 101,692 537 349,005 357,875 -2.5% Railway Construction 12 15,814 33 36,919 44,873 -17.7% Urban Construction, etc. 743 282,694 2,510 792,908 678,981 16.8% Overseas Projects 139 92,329 343 295,126 208,641 41.5% 

Infrastructure Design Business 1,514 19,702 5,381 55,972 54,899 2.0% Dredging Business 401 42,133 1,136 119,193 106,654 11.8% Other Businesses N/A 5,691 N/A 19,568 13,633 43.5% 

Total N/A 581,471 N/A 1,753,215 1,542,256 13.7% 

Values of infrastructure construction contracts newly entered into outside the PRC during the reporting period (RMB million) 

Region of projects Number of projects Total value 

Africa 115 100,344 Asia (excluding Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) 124 95,489 Oceania 19 36,317 Latin America 36 32,018 Europe 14 23,554 Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and other regions 35 7,404 

Total 343 295,126 Note: The above data of infrastructure construction business was calculated by region. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 28 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

2. Completed and Accepted Projects during the Reporting Period (RMB million) 

Total number of projects N/A 

Total project value 247,044 

Number Value Categorised by region Domestic N/A 243,171 Overseas N/A 3,873 

Categorised by business type Infrastructure construction business 732 210,622 Infrastructure design business 197 6,748 Dredging business 132 29,614 Other businesses N/A 60 Note: Calculated based on projects whose main construction has been completed or projects that have generated more than 95% of their output. 

3. Projects under Construction during the Reporting Period (RMB million) 

Total number of projects N/A 

Total project value 5,091,585 

Number Value Categorised by region Domestic N/A 4,327,187 Overseas N/A 764,398 

Categorised by business type Infrastructure construction business 5,645 4,567,924 Infrastructure design business 16,703 228,904 Dredging business 1,281 265,491 Other businesses N/A 29,266 BUSINESS OVERVIEW 29 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

4. Outstanding Projects during the Reporting Period (RMB million) 

Contracted but not yet commenced Under construction and not yet completed Total number of projects N/A N/A 

Total project value 877,596 2,573,063 

Number Value Number Value Categorised by region Domestic N/A 666,387 N/A 2,112,315 Overseas N/A 211,209 N/A 460,748 

Categorised by business type Infrastructure construction business 1,715 780,257 5,254 2,207,665 Infrastructure design business 299 27,453 15,367 126,803 Dredging business 381 69,867 1,196 208,710 Other businesses N/A 19 N/A 29,885 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects 

In 2023, China introduced a new PPP mechanism, promoting the lawful, compliant, and orderly implementation of government and social capital cooperation projects. The optimization of the state-owned economy layout and the in-depth promotion of structural adjustments brought about both investment opportunities and challenges. In March 2023, the Report on the Work of the Government pointed out that the government launched several major projects set out in the “14th Five-Year Plan” ahead of schedule, expedited the processes of issuing and utilising local government special-purpose bonds, and replenished the capital for construction of major projects. The state ministries and committees have intensively issued a number of policy documents, organised and carried out various special actions, and gradually detailed the regulatory requirements for PPP, fund business, non-main business investments, overseas investments, and financing guarantees, etc., under which it is required to fully and faithfully apply the new development philosophy on all fronts, focus on promoting high-quality development, highlight the work of stabilizing investment, effectively prevent and resolve investment risks, and achieve effective qualitative improvement and reasonable quantitative growth in investment. Since the “14th Five-Year Plan”, the Company has strengthened top-level design and coordination and strictly controlled total investment to guide all kinds of resources to invest in key businesses and areas, and to prevent industrial, regional and model-related system risks; improved system construction through comprehensively reviewing and upgrading the existing systems and establishing a unified investment system covering the entire process; strengthened lifecycle management by emphasizing on project selection, strict pre-investment review, enhancing intra-investment management and control, proper risk diffusion and severe accountability for negligence, in an effort to steadily improve project quality and business structure; and strengthened the capability to “invest smartly and sell effectively” by actively planning for asset revitalization, thereby enhancing the efficiency of asset turnover. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 30 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects (continued) 

During the reporting period, the Company adhered to the concept of valuable investment and oriented towards enhancing capital returns to control the total investment and optimize the incremental investment, optimised the “regional structure, business structure, cycle structure, profit structure, and cash flow structure” of investment, focused on driving the Company’s core competitiveness of “entering cities” to continuously improve, promoted the development and growth of the “three new” businesses, and cultivated more growth points for the Company’s high-quality development. The Company had landed a series of high-quality road and bridge projects including the Project of Guigang–Bobai (via Xingye) Expressway in Guangxi Province, and the advantages of the main business in the field of “big transportation” had been consolidated. The Company participated in major projects with regional influence, such as the Renovation Project of “Urban Villages” in Fengxi Community, Huaxin Town, Qingpu District, Shanghai, and the City-industry Integration Comprehensive Development Project of Junshan New City in Wuhan Economic Development Zone in Wuhan, Hubei Province, and had successfully invested in projects such as the Old Village Reconstruction of Zhujiang Village in Guangzhou and the Renewal of Minzhi Street in Shenzhen, successfully entering the urban renewal market in Shenzhen and other core areas. The investment model in the field of “big city” continued to mature and the quality and efficiency of investment continued to improve. By implementing projects such as Ningxia Cloud Data Center, Guangdong Yingde Sand and Stone Mine, Dalian Marine Pasture and Heilongjiang High-Standard Farmland Improvement, the Company had achieved breakthroughs in the fields of the digital economy, mineral resources, marine economy and rural revitalization, practicing the concept of sustainable development in the fields of “rivers, lakes and seas” and “three new” businesses. Meanwhile, the Company had been facing numerous new risks and challenges in promoting business development. In 2023, affected by the continuous decline in local government fund revenues and the new PPP mechanism, the demand for pre-financing funds for infrastructure investment projects of local governments and investment platforms had been increasing. Key provinces had strengthened the management of government investment projects, posing challenges to the sustainable and healthy development of the infrastructure construction industry. There had been changes in the supply and demand relationship in the real estate market in the PRC, and the real estate market was undergoing a continuous downward trend. Despite frequent policy interventions by the state and local governments to control and optimize the real estate industry, facilitate the urban renewals, and improve the renovations of villages and affordable housing, the market’s rebound had been relatively slow, and the industry was still facing challenges. 

(1) New Contracts of Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects 

During the reporting period, the Company actively adjusted market development and operation strategies according to macro policies, followed the main direction of “controlling the total investment, improving the structure, managing the risk and improving the quality and efficiency”, and focused resources on key projects, important regions, major markets and short-and mid-cycle projects. The confirmed value of contracts from infrastructure and other investment projects was RMB195,056 million for domestic projects and RMB13,562 million for overseas projects. The value of total construction and installation contracts to be undertaken was estimated to be RMB150,140 million, among which, the confirmed values of contracts from BOT projects, government paid projects and urban comprehensive development projects were RMB56,536 million, RMB27,408 million and RMB124,674 million respectively, accounting for 27%, 13% and 60% of that of infrastructure and other investment projects respectively. 

(2) Government Paid Projects and Urban Comprehensive Development Projects 

The accumulative completed investment in government paid projects by the Company amounted to RMB379,100 million with cumulatively RMB69,300 million recovered. The accumulative completed investment in urban comprehensive development projects by the Company was RMB167,900 million and RMB152,300 million had been received by the Company. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 31 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects (continued) 

(3) Concession Projects 

As at 31 December 2023, according to statistics of the consolidated items contracted and financed by the Company (the latest statistics shall prevail if there was any change), the accumulative completed investment in concession projects amounted to RMB200,100 million. 31 concession projects together with 34 share-participation projects had been put into operation, and the operating revenue and net loss for the reporting period were RMB7,694 million and RMB1,945 million, respectively. As at 31 December 2023, the uncompleted investment amounted to RMB51,388 million. 

① Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects Newly Entered into (RMB million) 

No. Project Name Project Type Total Investment Budget Estimate Contract Value according to Shareholding Ratio of the Company Expected Construction and Installation Contract Value Operating Project or Not Consolidated or Not Construction Period Toll Collection/ Operation Period 

(Year) (Year) 1 Renovation Project of “Urban Villages” in Fengxi Community, Huaxin Town, Qingpu District, Shanghai Comprehensive urban development 33,540 30,186 11,086 Yes Yes 9 32 Project of Guigang–Bobai (via Xingye) Expressway in Guangxi Province BOT 13,200 13,200 9,073 Yes Yes 3 30 3 City-industry Integration Comprehensive Development Project of Junshan New City in Wuhan Economic Development Zone Comprehensive urban development 12,479 10,800 8,440 Yes Yes 4 84 Common Prosperity Demonstration Project in Tanghe New Town, Rui’an City, Zhejiang Province Comprehensive urban development 10,474 9,427 5,918 Yes Yes 8 25 Guxing Urban Renewal Project (Phase I) in Huiji District, Zhengzhou City Comprehensive urban development 10,865 9,323 6,999 Yes Yes 6 26 Project of Phnom Penh-Bavet Expressway in Cambodia BOT 9,258 9,258 7,415 Yes Yes 4 50 7 Renovation Project of Old Village of Zhujiang Village, Xiasha Community, Huangpu Street, Huangpu District, Guangzhou City Comprehensive urban development 9,179 9,179 4,857 Yes Yes 4 0.5 8 Comprehensive Development Project of Changgouhe Area, West of Wujin District, Changzhou City Comprehensive urban development 8,338 8,406 4,579 Yes Yes 6 29 Urban Renewal Project of Henggou Village in Meilan District, Haikou City Comprehensive urban development 8,118 8,118 3,782 Yes Yes 5 2.5 10 Wushan-Guandu Expressway and Mineral Resources Development Project in Chongqing BOT 7,850 7,850 5,245 Yes Yes 4 30 11 Project of Jiangjin-Yibin (via Luzhou) (Sichuan Section) Expressway BOT 19,262 6,833 4,415 Yes No 3 30 BUSINESS OVERVIEW 32 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

No. Project Name Project Type Total Investment Budget Estimate Contract Value according to Shareholding Ratio of the Company Expected Construction and Installation Contract Value Operating Project or Not Consolidated or Not Construction Period Toll Collection/ Operation Period 

(Year) (Year) 12 Urban Renewal Project in Xiyingmen Area, Nankai District, Tianjin Municipality Comprehensive urban development 14,560 5,708 6,300 Yes No 5 013 Mining Right Project of Gneiss Mine for Construction in Fenghuangling Mining Area Phase II, Xitou Town, Yangxi County, Yangjiang City BOT 5,408 5,408 1,146 Yes Yes 2 18 14 Urban Renewal Project A and B of the Initial Development Area of Phase I of “Riverside” Project in Yelin Town, Lingshui County Comprehensive urban development 6,257 5,000 2,419 Yes Yes 4 3.5 15 Comprehensive Development Project of Linping International Future Industrial and Residential Eco-city Comprehensive urban development 5,456 4,959 4,159 Yes Yes 4 216 Comprehensive Development Project of the Ecological Smart City in Tianqiao District, Jinan City Comprehensive urban development 4,851 4,926 2,956 Yes Yes 7 017 Urban Organic Renewal Project of Liangerku Area, Erqi District, Zhengzhou City Comprehensive urban development 4,497 4,500 1,817 Yes Yes 4 118 Project of the Ningxia (Zhongwei) Cloud Data Centre BOT 3,798 3,797 3,253 Yes Yes 8 10 19 New Construction of Xingyang-Xinmi Section of Jiaozuo-Pingdingshan Highway in Henan Province Government paid project 9,953 3,733 4,483 No No 3 520 Supporting Project of Infrastructure and Public Services in Jingkai New City (South Area) in Jingzhou Comprehensive urban development 8,646 3,186 5,069 Yes No 8 221 Others 177,687 44,821 46,729 – – – –Total 383,676 208,618 150,140 – – – –

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects (continued) 

(3) Concession Projects (continued) 

① Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects Newly Entered into (RMB million) (continued) BUSINESS OVERVIEW 33 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects (continued) 

(3) Concession Projects (continued) 

② Concession Projects under Development 2(RMB million) 

No. Project Name Contract Value according to Shareholding Ratio Accumulated Investment Value Investment Amount in the Period 

1 Highways including Taihangshan Highway in Hebei Province 14,570 Share participation –2 PPP Project of Quanzhou-Rongxian Highway (Pingnan-Rongxian Section) in Guangxi Province 12,755 582 546 3 Chengde (Lijiaying)-Pinggu (Hebei and Beijing Conjunction) Section Project of the Capital Region Ring Expressway (G95) 11,453 5,668 1,514 4 Highways including Urumchi-Yuli Highway in Xinjiang 10,616 Share participation –5 Project of Guiyang-Jinsha-Gulin (between Guizhou and Sichuan) Highway in Guizhou Province 9,999 Share participation –6 Project of Chongqing-Hunan Parallel Line (City Center to Youyang Section) and Wulong-Daozhen (Chongqing Section) Highway in Chongqing 9,687 Share participation –7 Project of Dejiang-Yuqing Highway in Guizhou Province 9,388 Share participation –8 Project of Quanzhou-Rongxian Highway (Pingle-Zhaoping Section) in Guangxi Province 9,192 1,840 1,416 9 Project of Chongqing-Wuhan Highway Expansion in Chongqing 9,080 7,317 2,911 10 PPP Project of Gansu G1816 Wuhai-Maqin Cooperation-Saierlong Expressway (between Gansu and Qinghai) 8,581 592 590 11 Jianglu North Line Expressway in Chongqing 8,498 Share participation –12 Phase I of Project of Urumchi Rail Transit Line 4 in Xinjiang 8,287 Share participation –13 PPP Project of Health Production Area in Jinxian Medical Park in Nanchang, Jiangxi 6,558 133 96 14 Project of Wushan – Guandu Section of Xuanhan – Kaizhou – Yunyang – Wuxi – Wushan Expressway in Chongqing 6,225 5 515 Tong’an Expressway in Chongqing 6,047 Share participation –16 Project of Phase I of Expressway from Lingtai to Huating of Line S28 in Gansu Province 4,050 Share participation –17 Project of Mengxi Industrial Park-Sanbei Yangchang Railway in Ordos, Inner Mongolia 3,383 Share participation –18 Project of Naomao Lake-Jiangjun Temple Railway in Xinjiang 3,313 Share participation –19 Others 29,076 3,216 668 Total 180,758 19,353 7,746 2 The breakdown of concession projects under development does not include the concession projects acquired overseas. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 34 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) MAJOR PRODUCTION AND OPERATIONAL DATA (CONTINUED) 

5. Infrastructure and Other Investment Projects (continued) 

(3) Concession Projects (continued) 

③ Concession Projects in Operation Period (RMB million) 

No. Project Name Accumulated Investment Value Operating Revenue in the Period Toll Collection Rights Period Completed Toll Collection Rights Period 

(Year) (Year) 1 New Songming-Kunming Expressway, Xuanwei-Qujing Expressway, and Mengzi-Wenshan-Yanshan Expressway in Yunnan Province 27,359 1,126 30 6.0 2 Daozhen-Weng’an Expressway in Guizhou Province 26,599 762 30 8.0 3 Jiangkou-Weng’an Expressway in Guizhou Province 14,246 843 30 8.0 4 Phnom Penh-Port of Sihanoukville Expressway in Cambodia 12,843 249 50 0.5 5 Guiyang-Qianxi Expressway in Guizhou Province 9,223 452 30 7.0 6 Yanhe-Dejiang Expressway in Guizhou Province 7,523 147 30 8.0 7 Guiyang-Duyun Expressway in Guizhou Province 7,435 524 30 12.8 8 Concessions of Lekki Port in Nigeria 6,271 260 45 0.7 9 Yulin-Jiaxian Expressway in Shaanxi Province 6,138 289 30 10.0 10 Yongchuan-Jiangjin Expressway in Chongqing 6,024 113 30 9.0 11 Fengdu-Fuling Expressway in Chongqing 5,982 301 30 10.0 12 Fengdu-Shizhu Expressway in Chongqing 5,570 163 30 10.0 13 Foshan-Guangming Expressway in Guangdong Province 5,186 614 25 14.5 14 South-North Highway in Jamaica 5,137 384 50 8.0 15 Quanzhou Section of Quanzhou-Xiamen-Zhangzhou City Alliance Expressway in Fujian Province 4,950 110 24 3.0 16 Zhuankou Yangtze River Bridge Project in Wuhan, Hubei Province 4,860 255 30 6.0 17 BOT Project of Expressway in Nairobi, Kenya 4,691 200 27 0.5 18 Xianning-Tongshan Expressway in Hubei Province 3,125 123 30 10.0 19 Others 17,626 779 – –Total 180,788 7,694 – –BUSINESS OVERVIEW 35 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (III) BUSINESS PLAN AND PROSPECT 

In 2023, according to statistics, the value of new contracts of the Group reached RMB1,753,215 million, indicating 104% of the annual target has been realized and meeting expectations. The revenue amounted to RMB755,646 million, indicating 98% of the annual target has been realized and meeting expectations. The Group plans to achieve a year-on-year growth rate of not less than 13.5% in the value of new contracts for the year of 2024, and the planned year-on-year growth rate of revenue is not less than 8.2%. From a domestic perspective, China’s economy has shifted from the stage of high-speed growth to high-quality development, despite that triple pressures of shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations still exist, given its strong resilience, China’s economy maintains the favorable long-term fundamentals. Since the fourth quarter of 2023, a series of incremental policies and stock policies have provided support for economic recovery. In 2024, the national conference highlighted the approach of “maintaining stability while pursuing progress, fostering stability through progress, and establishing new systems before dismantling the old”, which proposes a higher level of developmental demand in areas such as industrial infrastructure, new infrastructure, new urbanization, rural revitalization and realization mechanism of ecological product values. The state will actively and cautiously address the risks in real estate sector and accelerate the “three major projects” construction, aiming to bolster the overall stability and positive momentum in the real estate and urban renewal markets of leading urban agglomerations and metropolitan areas. It will also actively and cautiously put efforts in meeting the requirements of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality, and keeping the construction of new energy and energy resource reserve bases at a high level; continuously pursue the “scope expansion and effectiveness enhancement” on fiscal policies, with expectations that the fiscal deficit rate will surpass 3%, and the amount of new special bonds will reach around RMB4 trillion, moderately increasing and expanding the scope of capital utilization, as well as being strongly supported by local government’s special refinancing bonds and trillions of treasury bonds. At the same time, the scale of social financing will match the economic growth targets, with costs being stable and moderately declining, collaboratively ensuring the funding needs for public infrastructure construction. In 2024, the investment scale of road construction will reach RMB8.4 trillion, and the investment in railway construction will remain at around RMB800 billion; the investment in urban rail transit will exceed RMB500 billion; the construction scale of municipal business will be around RMB2 trillion; and the market scale of comprehensive urban development business will remain at around RMB1.5 trillion. In the next two years, the water conservancy and hydropower business is expected to complete an investment of approximately RMB2.5 trillion. At the same time, there are a number of new risks and challenges in promoting the business development. Firstly, subject to dwindling local government fund revenues and the new PPP policy, there is a rising demand for financing infrastructure investment projects undertaken by local governments and investment platforms. Recently, key provinces have strengthened the management of government investment projects, posing a challenge to the sustainable and healthy development of the infrastructure construction industry. Secondly, the supply and demand relationship in the real estate market has undergone significant changes. In 2024, with a more pronounced segmentation within regional markets and a considerable uncertainty in the market’s expected recovery, it is expected that there will still be downward pressure on real estate sales, which will also affect the housing construction market. Thirdly, the proportions of new energy, new infrastructure and water conservancy and hydropower in the infrastructure market continue to increase, together with a high level of industry barriers and industry concentration, leading to the increased market competition. Fourthly, the business fields of central construction enterprise are mutually infiltrating, with their competition reaching a critical point. Driven by the integration model of investment, construction and operation, local platform enterprises achieve the goal of expanding their own construction sectors through internal cooperation, thereby reducing the market space. From an overseas perspective, the world is experiencing profound and rapid changes, and the changes to the world, to our times and to history are taking place in an unprecedented way. The ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict and the Israel-Palestine conflict have led to an increase in instabilities in specific regions. The superpower games have led to the accelerated evolution of international relations, increasing political and economic risks. The competition in the global infrastructure market is becoming increasingly fierce, with product competition gradually escalating into competition over supply chains and industry ecosystems, thereby forcing enterprises to accelerate their transformation and upgrading. As developed countries transform and upgrade, and developing countries march towards industrialization, opportunities are provided to infrastructure enterprises. In emerging economies and some countries (regions), based on people’s rigid demand for public facilities and services, infrastructure investment will be gradually released along with the economic recovery, and the outsourcing business will usher in a new round of development opportunities. Opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation have increased in drinking water safety, water environment protection, environmental health, poverty alleviation, food safety, solid waste disposal and other “small, outstanding and beneficial” livelihood projects. The business prospects for deep-sea pipeline deployment and decommissioning, and the construction, operation and maintenance of floating production storage and offloading units (FPSOs) are vast. The demand for new energy businesses, including offshore wind energy, continues to grow. As digitization and de-carbonization technologies rapidly advance, technological innovation and self-evolution become decisive factors for business success. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 36 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (III) BUSINESS PLAN AND PROSPECT (CONTINUED) 

In 2024, with a comprehensive, dialectical and long-term perspective, the Company will navigate opportunities and challenges by embracing the new prospects of industrial transformation and bolstering its bottom-line thinking and awareness of unexpected development, to strive to overcome various risks and challenges. The Company will continue to take advantage of the traditional main business of “big transportation”, become a standard enterprise focusing on “big city”, and keep as a leader of international development. It will seek to expand international influence by further expanding domestic and foreign markets and adjusting the business layout, thereby fully promoting the high-quality development of the Company. 

Firstly, the Company will actively implement the national strategy of “strengthening the country through transportation”, and proactively march towards “innovation+”. As for the “big transportation” business, the Company will seize the development opportunity of accelerating the construction and upgrading the quality of the integrated and multi-dimensional transportation networks, strengthen the traction role of design and consultation in providing overall solutions and integration of new processes and technologies, and accelerate the green and low-carbon transformation; it will also pay high attention to future growth poles, such as big transportation hubs, and actively enter into the smart highways, “highway+” and other new business forms and modes, to grasp the development opportunities. The Company will proactively pursue growth by embracing innovation and refining tis business models, and constantly strengthen business model innovation in response to the challenges and opportunities brought by the new PPP mechanism; It will also promote technological innovation, pay more attention to the supporting and driving role of scientific and technological innovation in market operation, rely on scientific and technological innovation to reduce technology costs, improve bidding efficiency, and depend on core equipment and core technology to enhance the core competitiveness of market development. In the field of road and bridge , the Company will seize the development opportunity of accelerating the construction and upgrading the quality of the integrated and multi-dimensional transportation networks, enhance the front-end leadership and green, low-carbon transformation, and sort out key projects such as the municipal transformation of expressways through the cities, upgrading and expansion of busy road sections, trunk line corridors and river-crossing and sea-crossing projects by districts, to maintain an absolute lead in major transportation strategic project contracting, high-end project operation, and spot market share. In the field of railway , the Company will seize the new opportunity of the state to appropriately advance the development of railway investment, and focus on the “Transportation of Xinjiang Coal to External Regions ( 疆煤外運 )” and “Reserved Space for Western Railways ( 西部鐵路留白 )”, to improve the operational capacity of the railway business. 

Secondly, the Company will be fully engaged in the urban business and provide services for urban renewal initiatives. As for “big city” business, the Company will seize the market opportunity of urban development changing from large-scale incremental construction to the simultaneous improvement of the quality of stock and incremental structural adjustment, establish a high-end and design-oriented renewal mechanism, overcome the barriers of quality, performance and talents, to craft a lifestyle of excellence for the residents of both cities and countryside. In the field of municipal utilities project , the Company will focus on the construction of dual-use (for peacetime and emergencies) public infrastructure in ultra-large metropolitan areas, focus on smart cities and sponge cities, gives full play to the leading role of design front-end, and pay attention to the infrastructure projects such as urban rapid transit corridors, bus station, logistics facilities, landscaping, environmental health and renovation of old residential areas, and the infrastructure projects such as water supply and sewerage systems, underground pipe network and utility tunnels, and also take steps in the infrastructure projects such as heat and gas supply, power communication, an dual-use (for peacetime and emergencies) projects. In the field of building construction , the Company will be highly concerned about the demand for government-subsidized housing construction in 35 cities with a resident population over 3 million, and focus on tracking, planning and participating in “high-precision, specialized and cutting-edge” construction projects such as tall buildings, extensive span constructions, steel infrastructure, large-scale public institutions, arenas and deep trenches. In the field of comprehensive urban development , the Company will take urban renewal and transformation of urban villages as the main direction, consolidate and expand industrial parks, TOD, parking complexes and cold chain complexes, thoroughly research the policies of various places, innovate the mode according to local conditions, and actively make arrangements for the high-quality lots in the central city to lay the foundation for sustainable development. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 37 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (III) BUSINESS PLAN AND PROSPECT (CONTINUED) 

Thirdly, the Company will dedicate all efforts to advancing the national strategy of strengthening the country through ocean, upgrading and optimizing “rivers, lakes and seas” structure. The Company will consolidate the leading position in the field of port and waterway dredging, accelerate the integration of resources in the deep and remote ocean engineering, equipment and technology and other fields by relying on the leading edge in the port and waterway dredging, ocean engineering equipment and other fields, to enhance the core competitiveness of the “deep and remote ocean” field, and make due contribution to the national “ocean economy developing ( 經略海洋 )”. The Company will invest more resources in water conservancy and hydropower, ecological and environmental protection, ocean engineering and other business areas, so as to seize the first chance for development, grasp market initiative, and maintain the advantageous position. The cultivation of ocean strategic emerging industries such as ocean engineering equipment manufacturing industry, comprehensive seawater utilization industry, ocean new energy industry and modern ocean service industry will be accelerated, while offshore wind power, marine pasture, desalination of seawater, ocean engineering equipment manufacturing and other subdivisions are ushering in the incremental development space. In the field of port and waterway dredging , the Company will continue to consolidate its leading position, give full play to its advantages of entire industry chains in planning and consultation, survey and design, construction, intelligent port and shipping, pay close attention to the important regions and key projects, dynamically adjust the allocation of market resources, and continue to expand the “basic situation” of cash remittance, so as to be the leader in its professional field. In the field of ecological and environmental protection , the Company will focus on the demand for systematic and comprehensive treatment of aquatic resources, aquatic ecology and aquatic environment, focus on the treatment of key watersheds such as the Yangtze River, the Yellow River and the Pearl River, as well as urban and rural water treatment and sewage networks and the utilization of resources, and give full play to its strengths in preventing and treating pollution and in reducing carbon and pollution, so as to consolidate its leading position in the industry. The Company will also continue to pay attention to the ecological restoration of mines, marine ecological protection and restoration, soil remediation and other integrated protection and restoration markets of mountains, waters, forests, fields, lakes, grasslands and deserts, to boost the sustainable development of the ecological and environmental protection business. In the field of water conservancy and hydropower , the Company will seize the opportunity of comprehensively promoting the national water network and the treasury bond funds for flood prevention and drainage, systematically study the competition strategy and implementation path, strengthen the extended cooperation with power groups, which belong to “five leading government-run power enterprises, and six major power industry players”, and rapidly enhance the credit capacity of the personnel performance. In the field of offshore business , the Company will focus on the construction of eight major offshore wind power bases, enhance its overall competitiveness through innovation in technology and methods and market-oriented resource allocation, and accelerate the market expansion for survey and consultation, operation and maintenance services, and the bottom cable laying. As for ocean engineering equipment, the Company will adhere to the direction of high-end, intelligent and green development, and seize the opportunity of recovering market in ocean engineering equipment. 

Fourthly, the Group will vigorously develop the “overseas priority” strategy and make every effort to promote the upgrading of the “company internationalization”. Adhering to the principle of “refraining from entering dangerous zones and disorderly areas”, the Company will focus on key countries and regions, provide forward-looking and systematic services for the high-quality joint construction of “the Belt and Road”, proactively lay out interconnection projects such as key corridors, key ports, key airports and other infrastructure, and strengthen the development in urban water supply and drainage, watershed management, garbage disposal, desalination of seawater and other businesses, to improve the overseas business system. By utilizing the four leading international platform companies, the Company will collaborate with its subsidiaries to enhance their ability of “going out” and “bringing in” in terms of complete set of technologies, business models and management systems, to build a global three-dimensional industrial ecosystem, and to accelerate the transformation and upgrading from “business internationalization” to “company internationalization”. The Company will promote the upgrading plan of company internationalization, deepen the reform of the overseas business system, and develop an integrated and streamlined approach to overseas expansion. The Company will actively contribute to the new development pattern, focus on the eight actions for high-quality joint construction of “the Belt and Road”, target major landmark projects and “small but outstanding” livelihood projects, plan major projects such as the Trans-Caspian International Transport Corridor ( 跨里 海國際運輸走廊 ) from a high starting point, consolidate the leading position in the field of “big transportation” and “big city”, and strengthen the “hard power” in new energy, watershed management, garbage disposal, desalination of seawater and other fields, so as to continuously enhance the competitiveness and right of speech in the global industry. BUSINESS OVERVIEW 38 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (III) BUSINESS PLAN AND PROSPECT (CONTINUED) 

Fifthly, the Company will fully accelerate the development of new quality production and continue to increase the proportion of “strategic and new” businesses. The Company will identify the entry point of the “9+6” layout system, specify the subdivisions and development responsibilities of key areas such as smart transportation, high-end equipment, clean energy and ecological and environmental protection, accelerate the formation of the development trend of “achieving breakthroughs on multiple fronts”, and develop a “specialized, refined, differential and innovative” and “little giant” enterprise in each subdivision of the strategic emerging industries. The Company will speed up the formation of CCCC strategic emerging industry development fund, concentrate resources in strategic emerging industries, make arrangements in energy conservation, carbon emission reduction, new infrastructure, agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fishery and other fields that expand domestic demand and protect people’s livelihood, and promote the incremental development of the company’s “three new” businesses through making breakthroughs in the relevant industries and related industries. The onshore new energy field will realize a leapfrog development. The Company will take a forward-looking approach to positioning in strategic emerging industries such as onshore wind power and photovoltaics and advanced energy storage, strengthen the survey, design and resources cultivation of new energy, focus on the wind power and photovoltaic bases in seven deserts, as well as the infrastructure construction in the Gobi, the coal mining subsidence area and the “water, wind and photovoltaic integration” base in the southwest China, to secure a strategic position in the development of new energy. The new infrastructure business field will achieve an integrated development. The Company will actively plan and respond to the demand for transformation and upgrading of traditional infrastructure, and vigorously advance the integration of smart transportation, smart cities and smart energy into infrastructures. The Company will increase the integration and development of the Eastern Data Western Computing Data Center ( 東數西算數據中心 ) and new energy construction, seize the industrial opportunities of the national computing hub node data center cluster by relying on the traditional advantages in civil engineering, mechanical and electrical systems and system integration, further sort out the experience of expanding the implementation of the 5G base station project, and accelerate the development of the related information infrastructure business. The agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishery business field will be advanced steadily. The Company will fully utilize the its advantages in resource integration of the entire industrial chain, focus on participating in the first batch of 20 pilot projects of high-standard farmland construction in the entire region, actively participate in the comprehensive transformation of saline-alkali soil in conjunction with the national water network construction plan, and deeply plan and promote the implementation of landmark projects. The Guangxi Pinglu Canal, with a length of 134.2 kilometers, is designed for an annual single-direction throughput capacity of 89 million tons. The project mainly includes the renovation of navigation channels, shipping hubs, water conservancy facilities, and the construction of supporting infrastructure along the canal. The Pinglu Canal is the first canal project in new China with the highest navigation grade that connects to both rivers and the sea. It is a landmark project for a country with strong transportation network and a key component of the new western land-sea corridor. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 40 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# I. OVERVIEW 

During the reporting period, under the guidance of high-quality development goals, the business scale grew steadily. The operating revenue reached a new high, and shareholder returns steadily increased. The quality and efficiency of operations have improved, and positive cash flow from operations was recorded. The net profit and operating cash ratio further improved, and the asset-to-liability ratio remained stable. The Group has put the high-quality development philosophy into practice and made progress. For the year 2023, revenue of the Group increased by 5.1% to RMB755,646 million, among which revenue from external customers attributed to the regions other than PRC amounted to RMB115,936 million, representing 15.3% of the total revenue. Infrastructure construction business, infrastructure design business, dredging business and other businesses accounted for 84.7%, 6.0%, 6.8% and 2.5% of the total revenue in 2023 (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions), respectively. Gross profit in 2023 amounted to RMB94,528 million, representing an increase of 12.9% from RMB83,692 million in 2022. Gross profit from infrastructure construction business, infrastructure design business, dredging business and other business increased by 14.8%, 5.4%, 3.4% and 9.6%, respectively. Gross profit margin for infrastructure construction business, infrastructure design business, dredging business and other businesses in 2023 was 11.6%, 18.5%, 13.3% and 7.3%, respectively, as compared with 10.6%, 16.5%, 13.5% and 7.1% in 2022. For the year 2023, profit attributable to owners of the parent amounted to RMB24,734 million, representing an increase of 22.3%, compared with RMB20,226 million in 2022. For the year 2023, earnings per share of the Group were RMB1.45, compared with RMB1.15 in 2022. The asset-to-liability ratio in 2023 increased to 72.7%, compared with 71.8% in 2022. In 2023, the net cash flows presented an inflow, amounting to RMB6,521 million, compared with RMB6,844 million in 2022. The overall decrease mainly due to less cash inflow from disposal of subsidiaries. The following is a comparison of financial results between the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

# II. CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Revenue 

Revenue in 2023 increased by 5.1% to RMB755,646 million from RMB719,084 million in 2022. Revenue from infrastructure construction business and dredging business and other businesses amounted to RMB667,802 million, RMB53,506 million and RMB19,328 million (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated cost), respectively representing a year-on-year increase of 5.3%, 4.9% and 6.1%; revenue from infrastructure design business amounted to RMB47,302 million (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated cost), representing a year-on-year decrease of 5.9%. The decrease of infrastructure design business and other businesses respectively attributed to the adjustment of business structure and the reduction of trading business. Revenue from external customers attributed to the regions other than PRC amounted to RMB115,936 million, representing 15.3% of total revenue. 

Cost of Sales and Gross Profit 

Cost of sales in 2023 amounted to RMB661,118 million, representing an increase of 4.0%, from RMB635,392 million in 2022. Cost of sales from infrastructure construction business and dredging business and other businesses amounted to RMB590,623 million, RMB46,370 million and RMB17,915 million (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions) respectively, representing an increase of 4.2%, 5.1% and 5.8% from 2022; cost of sales from infrastructure design business amounted to RMB38,571 million (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions), representing a decrease of 8.2% from 2022. Cost of sales consisted mainly of subcontracting costs, cost of raw materials and consumables used and employee benefit expenses. For the year 2023, subcontracting costs, employee benefit expenses and cost of raw materials and consumables used increased by 6.6%, 5.9% and 4.8%, respectively. As a result of the increase in both revenue and cost of sales, gross profit in 2023 amounted to RMB94,528 million, representing an increase of 12.9% from RMB83,692 million in 2022. Gross profit from infrastructure construction business, infrastructure design business, dredging business and other business increased by 14.8%, 5.4%, 3.4%, 9.6% respectively, from the corresponding period of 2022. Gross profit margin for the infrastructure construction business, infrastructure design business, dredging business and other businesses were 11.6%, 18.5%, 13.3% and 7.3% respectively, as compared with 10.6%, 16.5%, 13.5% and 7.1% in the corresponding period of 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 41 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# II. CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (CONTINUED) 

Administrative Expenses 

Administrative expenses in 2023 amounted to RMB47,588 million, representing an increase of 7.8% from RMB44,139 million in 2022. This growth was primarily attributable to the increase in research and development expenses. 

Operating Profit 

Operating profit in 2023 amounted to RMB38,955 million, representing an increase of 14.6% from RMB34,002 million in 2022. For the year 2023, operating profit from infrastructure construction business and dredging business increased by 20.9% and 3.7% (all before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated cost), respectively from 2022; operating profit from infrastructure design business and other businesses decreased by 3.1% and 12.9% (before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated cost), respectively from 2022. Operating profit margin increased to 5.2% in 2023 from 4.7% in 2022. 

Finance Income 

Finance income in 2023 amounted to RMB23,896 million, representing an increase of 12.1% from RMB21,320 million in 2022, mainly due to the increase of contract assets and trade receivables from PPP contracts. 

Finance Costs, Net 

Net finance costs in 2023 amounted to RMB24,310 million, representing an increase of 10.9% from RMB21,911 million in 2022, mainly due to the increase in interest expenses for bank and other borrowings. 

Share of Losses of Joint Ventures 

Share of loss of joint ventures in 2023 amounted to RMB1,409 million, as compared with a loss of RMB666 million in 2022, mainly due to the increase in share of loss of joint ventures. 

Share of Profits of Associates 

Share of profit of associates in 2023 amounted to RMB406 million, as compared with a profit of RMB343 million in 2022. 

Profit before Income Tax 

Profit before income tax in 2023 amounted to RMB37,538 million, representing an increase of 13.4% from RMB33,088 million in 2022. 

Income Tax Expense 

Income tax expense in 2023 amounted to RMB6,397 million, representing a decrease of 10.1% from RMB7,117 million in 2022. Effective tax rate for the Group in 2023 decreased to 17.0% from 21.5% in 2022, mainly due to extra tax deductions for research and development expenses and more preferential tax treatment as high-tech enterprises. 

Profit Attributable to Non-Controlling Interests 

Profit attributable to non-controlling interests in 2023 amounted to RMB6,407 million compared to RMB5,745 million in 2022. 

Profit Attributable to Owners of the Parent 

Profit attributable to owners of the parent in 2023 amounted to RMB24,734 million, representing an increase of 22.3% from RMB20,226 million in 2022, mainly due to the increased profit for the year. Profit margin with respect to profit attributable to owners of the parent increased to 3.3% in 2023 from 2.8% in 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 42 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. DISCUSSION OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS 

The following table sets forth the segment breakdown of revenue, gross profit and operating profit of the Group for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Revenue Year ended 31 December Gross Profit Year ended 31 December Gross Profit Margin Year ended 31 December Operating Profit (1) Year ended 31 December Operating Profit Margin Year ended 31 December Business 2023 (RMB million) 

2022 (RMB million) 

2023 (RMB million) 

2022 (RMB million) 

2023 (%) 

2022 (%) 

2023 (RMB million) 

2022 (RMB million) 

2023 (%) 

2022 (%) 

Infrastructure Construction 667,802 634,246 77,179 67,237 11.6 10.6 34,061 28,183 5.1 4.4 % of total 84.7 84.1 81.7 80.4 – – 84.2 81.4 – –Infrastructure Design 47,302 50,279 8,731 8,281 18.5 16.5 3,660 3,776 7.7 7.5 % of total 6.0 6.7 9.2 9.9 – – 9.1 10.9 – –Dredging 53,506 51,017 7,136 6,904 13.3 13.5 2,505 2,415 4.7 4.7 % of total 6.8 6.8 7.6 8.2 – – 6.2 7.0 – –Other businesses 19,328 18,225 1,413 1,289 7.3 7.1 209 240 1.1 1.3 % of total 2.5 2.4 1.5 1.5 – – 0.5 0.7 – –

Subtotal 787,938 753,767 94,459 83,711 12.0 11.1 40,435 34,614 5.1 4.6 Intersegment elimination (32,292) (34,683) 69 (19) – – 18 27 – –

Unallocated profit/(costs) (1,498) (639) 

Total 755,646 719,084 94,528 83,692 12.5 11.6 38,955 34,002 5.2 4.7  

> (1)

Total operating profit represents the total of segment profit less unallocated costs or add unallocated profit. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 43 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. DISCUSSION OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS (CONTINUED) 

Infrastructure Construction Business 

The financial information for the infrastructure construction business presented in this section is before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated costs. The following table sets out the principal profit and loss information for the infrastructure construction business for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Revenue 667,802 634,246 Cost of sales (590,623) (567,009) Gross profit 77,179 67,237 Selling and marketing expenses (1,311) (1,042) Administrative expenses (37,864) (34,772) Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets (5,779) (7,669) Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net 1,836 4,429 

Segment result 34,061 28,183 

Depreciation and amortisation 10,385 10,943 

Revenue. Revenue from the infrastructure construction business in 2023 was RMB667,802 million, representing an increase of 5.3% from RMB634,246 million in 2022. The increase was mainly due to the expanding scale of overseas business and the increase of domestic contracting projects. 

Cost of sales and gross profit. Cost of sales for the infrastructure construction business in 2023 was RMB590,623 million, representing an increase of 4.2% from RMB567,009 million in 2022. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue slightly decreased to 88.4% in 2023 from 89.4% in 2022. Gross profit from the infrastructure construction business in 2023 increased by 14.8% to RMB77,179 million from RMB67,237 million in 2022. Gross profit margin increased to 11.6% in 2023 from 10.6% in 2022, mainly due to the improved project management. 

Selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses for the infrastructure construction business in 2023 were RMB1,311 million, as compared with RMB1,042 million in 2022. 

Administrative expenses. Administrative expenses for the infrastructure construction business were RMB37,864 million in 2023, representing an increase of 8.9% from RMB34,772 million in 2022. The growth was primarily attributable to the increase in research and development expenses. Administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue slightly increased to 5.7% in 2023 from 5.5% in 2022. 

Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets. Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets for the infrastructure construction business were RMB5,779 million in 2023, representing a decrease of 24.6% from RMB7,669 million in 2022. The decrease was primarily due to no large-scale provision of certain projects in this period as compared to the last corresponding period and the collection of parts of long-term accounts receivable. 

Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net. Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net for the infrastructure construction business decreased to RMB1,836 million in 2023 from RMB4,429 million in 2022. The decrease was mainly attributable to changes in fair value and less one-time gains. 

Segment result. As a result of the above, segment result for the infrastructure construction business in 2023 was RMB34,061 million, representing an increase of 20.9% from RMB28,183 million in 2022. Segment result margin slightly increased to 5.1% in 2023 from 4.4% in 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 44 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. DISCUSSION OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS (CONTINUED) 

Infrastructure Design Business 

The financial information for the infrastructure design business presented in this section is before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated costs. The following table sets out the principal profit and loss information for infrastructure design business for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Revenue 47,302 50,279 Cost of sales (38,571) (41,998) 

Gross profit 8,731 8,281 Selling and marketing expenses (456) (444) Administrative expenses (3,634) (3,611) Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets (1,086) (1,050) Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net 105 600 

Segment result 3,660 3,776 

Depreciation and amortization 574 671 

Revenue. Revenue from the infrastructure design business in 2023 was RMB47,302 million, representing a decrease of 5.9% from RMB50,279 million in 2022, mainly due to the adjustment of business structure. 

Cost of sales and gross profit. Cost of sales for the infrastructure design business in 2023 was RMB38,571 million, representing a decrease of 8.2% from RMB41,998 million in 2022. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased to 81.5% in 2023 from 83.5% in 2022. Gross profit from the infrastructure design business in 2023 was RMB8,731 million, representing an increase of 5.4% as compared with RMB8,281 million in 2022. Gross profit margin increased to 18.5% in 2023 from 16.5% in 2022, mainly due to the adjustment of business structure. 

Selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses for the infrastructure design business in 2023 increased to RMB456 million from RMB444 million in 2022. 

Administrative expenses. Administrative expenses for the infrastructure design business in 2023 were RMB3,634 million, representing an increase of 0.6% from RMB3,611 million in 2022. Administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 7.7% in 2023 from 7.2% in 2022. 

Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets. Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets for the infrastructure design business were RMB1,086 million in 2023, representing an increase of 3.4% from RMB1,050 million in 2022. 

Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net. Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net for the infrastructure design business in 2023 was RMB105 million, as compared with RMB600 million in 2022, which mainly attributed to the no one-time gains from disposal of subsidiaries in this period as compared to the last corresponding period and less gains on foreign exchange and investment. 

Segment result. As a result of the above, segment result for the infrastructure design business in 2023 was RMB3,660 million, representing a decrease of 3.1% from RMB3,776 million in 2022. Segment result margin increased to 7.7% in 2023 from 7.5% in 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 45 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. DISCUSSION OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS (CONTINUED) 

Dredging Business 

The financial information for the dredging business presented in this section is before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated costs. The following table sets out the principal profit and loss information for the dredging business for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Revenue 53,506 51,017 Cost of sales (46,370) (44,113) 

Gross profit 7,136 6,904 Selling and marketing expenses (394) (251) Administrative expenses (3,731) (3,763) Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets (803) (688) Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net 297 213 

Segment result 2,505 2,415 

Depreciation and amortization 1,322 1,288 

Revenue. Revenue from the dredging business in 2023 was RMB53,506 million, representing an increase of 4.9% from RMB51,017 million in 2022. 

Cost of sales and gross profit. Cost of sales for the dredging business in 2023 was RMB46,370 million, representing an increase of 5.1% as compared with RMB44,113 million in 2022. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue for the dredging business in 2023 increased to 86.7% from 86.5% in 2022. Gross profit from the dredging business in 2023 was RMB7,136 million, representing an increase of 3.4% from RMB6,904 million in 2022. Gross profit margin for the dredging business slightly decreased to 13.3% in 2023 from 13.5% in 2022. 

Selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses for the dredging business in 2023 were RMB394 million, as compared with RMB251 million in 2022, mainly due to the increased marketing. 

Administrative expenses. Administrative expenses for the dredging business in 2023 were RMB3,731 million, representing a decrease of 0.9% from RMB3,763 million in 2022. Administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased to 7.0% in 2023 from 7.4% in 2022. 

Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets. Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets for the dredging business were RMB803 million in 2023, representing an increase of 16.7% from RMB688 million in 2022, mainly due to the increase of provision for individual long-term accounts receivables. 

Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net. Other income/(expense), net and other gains/(losses), net in 2023 increased to RMB297 million from RMB213 million in 2022. 

Segment result. As a result of the above, segment result for the dredging business in 2023 was RMB2,505 million, representing an increase of 3.7% from RMB2,415 million in 2022. Segment result margin remained at 4.7% in 2023. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 46 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# III. DISCUSSION OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS (CONTINUED) 

Other Businesses 

The financial information for the other businesses presented in this section is before elimination of inter-segment transactions and unallocated costs. The following table sets out the revenue, cost of sales and gross profit information for the other businesses for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Revenue 19,328 18,225 Cost of sales (17,915) (16,936) 

Gross profit 1,413 1,289 

Revenue. Revenue from the other businesses in 2023 was RMB19,328 million, representing an increase of 6.1% from RMB18,225 million in 2022, due to the reduction of trading business. 

Cost of sales and gross profit. Cost of sales for the other businesses in 2023 was RMB17,915 million, representing an increase of 5.8% from RMB16,936 million in 2022. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased to 92.7% in 2023 from 92.9% in 2022. Gross profit from the other businesses in 2023 was RMB1,413 million, representing an increase of 9.6% from RMB1,289 million in 2022. Gross profit margin increased to 7.3% in 2023 from 7.1% in 2022, mainly attributed to the reduction of trading business and the increase in the proportion of businesses characterized by high gross profit. 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 

The Group’s business requires a significant amount of working capital to finance the purchase of raw materials and to finance the engineering, construction and other work on projects before payment is received from clients. The Group historically met its working capital and other capital requirements principally from cash provided by operations, while financing the remainder of the Group’s requirements primarily through borrowings. As at 31 December 2023, the Group had unutilized credit facilities in the amount of RMB1,846,378 million. The Group’s access to financial markets since its public offering in Hong Kong Stock Exchange and Shanghai Stock Exchange has provided additional financing flexibility. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 47 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Cash Flow Data 

The following table presents selected cash flow data from the Group’s consolidated cash flow statements for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) Restated 

Net cash flows from operating activities 12,074 1,139 Net cash flows used in investing activities (55,885) (46,927) Net cash flows generated from financing activities 50,332 52,632 

Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 6,521 6,844 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 103,663 96,121 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes, net 174 698 

Subtotal 110,358 103,663 

Less: held for sale-cash and cash equivalent 154 –

Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 110,204 103,663 

Cash flow from operating activities 

During the year 2023, net cash generated from operating activities presented as an inflow at RMB12,074 million, compared with an inflow at RMB1,139 million in 2022. The improvement was primarily attributable to the enhanced management of cash flow and solidified the value of assets. 

Cash flow from investing activities 

Net cash used in investing activities in 2023 increased to RMB55,885 million, representing an increase of 19.1% from RMB46,927 million in 2022, mainly due to the combined effects of the no one-time gains from the disposals of subsidiaries in this period as compared to the last corresponding period and the increase of intangible assets and property, plant and equipment. 

Cash flow from financing activities 

Net cash generated from financing activities in 2023 was RMB50,332 million, representing a decrease of 4.4% from RMB52,632 million in 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 48 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Cash Flow Data (continued) 

Capital Expenditure 

The Group’s capital expenditure principally comprises expenditure from investment in BOT projects, purchases of machinery, equipment and vessels, and the building of plants. The following table sets forth the Group’s capital expenditure by business for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Infrastructure Construction Business 37,741 35,409 – BOT projects 20,507 24,580 Infrastructure Design Business 1,319 989 Dredging Business 2,737 1,703 Others 1,089 781 

Total 42,886 38,882 

Capital expenditure in 2023 was RMB42,886 million, as compared with RMB38,882 million in 2022. 

Working Capital 

Trade and bills receivables and trade and bills payables 

The following table sets forth the turnover of the Group’s average trade and bills receivable and average trade and bills payable for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(Number of days) (Number of days) 

Turnover of average trade and bills receivables (1) 56 55 Turnover of average trade and bills payables (2) 206 193  

> (1)

Average trade and bills receivables equals trade and bills receivables net of provisions at the beginning of the year plus trade and bills receivables net of provisions at the end of the year divided by 2. Turnover of average trade and bills receivables (in days) equals average trade and bills receivables divided by revenue and multiplied by 365. (2) Average trade and bills payables equals trade and bills payables at the beginning of the year plus trade and bills payables at the end of the year divided by 2. Turnover of average trade and bills payables (in days) equals average trade and bills payables divided by cost of sales and multiplied by 365. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 49 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Working Capital (continued) 

Trade and bills receivables and trade and bills payables (Continued) 

The following table sets forth an ageing analysis of trade and bills receivables, net of provision, as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

Years ended 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Within 6 months 71,583 63,564 6 months to 1 year 13,188 9,781 1 year to 2 years 14,284 22,389 2 years to 3 years 11,390 6,206 Over 3 years 8,748 9,189 

Total 119,193 111,129 

Management closely monitors the recovery of the Group’s overdue trade and bills receivables on a regular basis, and, when appropriate, provides for impairment of these trade and bills receivables. As at 31 December 2023, the Group had a provision for impairment of RMB23,987 million, as compared with RM22,375 million as at 31 December 2022. The following table sets forth an ageing analysis of trade and bills payables as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

As at 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Within 1 year 343,316 321,250 1 year to 2 years 33,762 18,641 2 years to 3 years 6,595 5,912 Over 3 years 8,116 7,361 

Total 391,789 353,164 

The Group’s credit terms with its suppliers for the year ended 31 December 2023 remained the same as that for the year ended 31 December 2022. Payments to suppliers and subcontractors may be delayed as a result of delays in settlement from the Group’s customers. Nevertheless, there have been no material disputes arising from the non-timely payment of outstanding balances under the Group’s supplier contracts or contracts with subcontractors. 

Retentions 

The following table sets forth the carrying amount of the retentions as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

As at 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Current 13,625 11,118 Non-current 43,131 36,247 

Total 56,756 47,365 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 50 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Indebtedness 

Borrowings 

The following table sets out the maturities of the Group’s total borrowings as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

As at 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Within 1 year 111,912 93,704 1 year to 2 years 58,984 50,035 2 years to 5 years 119,367 94,480 Over 5 years 221,363 228,131 

Total borrowings 511,626 466,350 

The Group’s borrowings are primarily denominated in Renminbi, U.S. dollars, and to a lesser extent, Euro, Japanese Yen and Hong Kong dollar. The following table sets out the carrying amounts of the Group’s borrowings by currencies as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 

As at 31 December 2023 2022 

(RMB million) 

(RMB million) 

Renminbi 481,310 435,073 U.S. dollar 23,850 26,176 Euro 3,159 3,038 Hong Kong dollar 91 241 Japanese Yen 37 41 Others 3,179 1,781 

Total borrowings 511,626 466,350 

The Group monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio. This ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total capital. Net debt is calculated as total borrowings as shown in the consolidated balance sheet, less cash and cash equivalents. Total capital is calculated as total equity as shown in the consolidated balance sheet plus net debt. The Group’s gearing ratio, calculated as net debt divided by total capital, as at 31 December 2023 was 46.6%, as compared with 45.9% as at 31 December 2022. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 51 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Contingent Liabilities and Financial Guarantee Commitment 

(i) Claims 

The Group has been named defendants in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business. Provision has been made for the probable losses to the Group on those claims when management can reasonably estimate the outcome of the lawsuits taking into account the legal advice. No provision has been made for those pending lawsuits with a maximum compensation amount of RMB2,894 million (31 December 2022: RMB2,554 million) related mainly to disputes with customers and subcontractors, as the outcome of the lawsuits cannot be reasonably estimated or management believes the outflow of resources is not probable. Pending lawsuits of which the probability of loss is remote or the claim amount is insignificant to the Group were not included in the above. 

(ii) Loan Guarantees 

(a) The Group has acted as the guarantor for several borrowings of RMB3,714 million (31 December 2022: RMB3,378 million) made by certain joint ventures and associates of the Group. The above amount represents the maximum exposure to default risk under the loan guarantee. (b) The Group provides guarantees to banks for the mortgage loans of the property buyers in certain real estate projects. As at 31 December 2023, the outstanding balance of guarantees provided by the Group was approximately RMB4,462 million (31 December 2022: RMB3,815 million). 

(iii) Liquidity Support 

(a) Beijing North Huade Neoplan Bus Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company, provides liquidity support to Changchun Public Transportation (Group) Co., Ltd. for sale-leaseback rent payable to Huaxia Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. As at 31 December 2023, the outstanding balance of rent payable by Changchun Public Transportation (Group) Co., Ltd. to Huaxia Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. was RMB48 million (31 December 2022: RMB97 million). (b) The Group has entered into certain agreements with financial institutions to set up asset-backed securities (ABS) and asset-backed notes (ABN) arrangements. As at 31 December 2023, out of the ABS and ABN in issue with an aggregate amount of RMB72,543 million (31 December 2022: RMB59,390 million), RMB67,089 million (31 December 2022: RMB54,284 million) had been issued to preferential investors. Under the clauses of the agreements, the Group is subject to the obligations of liquidity supplementary payments to preferential investors when the cash available for distribution of the principal and return to preferential investors at the due date is not sufficient. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 52 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Market Risks 

The Group is exposed to various types of market risks, including changes in interest rate risks and foreign currency risks in the normal course of business. 

1. Macroeconomic volatility risk 

The Group’s main businesses are closely related to the development of macro-economy, especially for infrastructure design and infrastructure construction business, of which the industry development is subject to the effects of macroeconomic factors including investment scale of social fixed assets and the process of urbanisation. The current external environment is complex and severe, and China’s economic development is under triple pressure of economic contraction, supply shock and weakening expectations. If the pace and efforts of growth stabilisation is not as strong as expected, it may have a great impact on the Group’s development. To cope with the risks of macroeconomic fluctuations, the Group will further strengthen its research on macro policies and development trends of related industries, follow closely the national strategic deployment, focus on “big transportation” and “big city”, firmly hold on to the market advantages of traditional businesses, promote the scale of emerging industries to grow year by year and strive to cultivate new growth levels. 

2. Internationalisation risk 

The Group conducts its business in over 130 overseas countries and regions. Subject to the complex and diverse political, economic, social and religious environments and legal systems of different countries and regions, as well as fluctuations in exchange rates, increasingly stringent environmental protection requirements and intensifying trade frictions among some countries, there may be fluctuations and volatility in the international trade order and economic situation in the future, resulting in performance risks for the Group’s overseas compliance, investment and project contracting. The Group carried out various risk management, prevention and control work continuously in accordance with the principles of “practical planning, internationalization of resources, normalization of management, diversification of approaches, and visualization of command, advance forecasting, advance warning, advance deployment and advance action”. The Company fully leveraged on its overall overseas advantages, enhanced international resources and cross-regional coordination capabilities, continuously raised the protection of security interests and the ability to address overseas emergencies, properly dealt with overseas public security threats, and optimized the organization system, institutional system, team building system, planning system, training and drill system, protection system and information-based risk control measures. 

3. Investment risk 

The Group began to develop infrastructure and other investment projects in 2007 to obtain investment profits apart from those from reasonable design and construction. However, such projects are generally characterised by large scale investments, long construction cycles, extensive areas of involvement, high complexity, stringent schedule and quality requirements, and are significantly affected by policies. The implementation and operation of the above-mentioned investment projects may expose the Group to certain risks and affect the expected benefits and the achievement of strategic objectives if the feasibility studies of the projects are incomplete, understanding of policies is inaccurate, financing is inadequate and process management is not standardised, under the influence of internal and external circumstances such as increased control in policies by the national and local governments, increasingly standardised regulation, tightened financial supervision, increasing debt pressure and intensified market competition. In order to effectively prevent and control investment risks, the Group insists on “value-oriented investments” and strictly controls non-main business investments. It strictly implements the investment project justification and decision-making process, properly controls investment costs, strengthens risk control throughout the life cycle of investment projects and steadily promotes the construction of an investment execution information system to achieve real-time and dynamic project monitoring and pre-warning. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 53 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Market Risks (continued) 

4. Raw material risk 

The operation of the Group’s business depends on the timely procurement of raw materials that meet the Group’s quality requirements at reasonable prices, such as steel, cement, fuel, sand and gravel and asphalt, etc. The market prices of such raw materials may fluctuate to a certain extent, or appropriate procurement planning arrangements may be made to ensure the normal conduct of business. When there is a shortage of supply of raw material or a significant price increase resulting in cost increases that cannot be fully counteracted by customers, the Group may face the risk of reduced profit or even loss in respect of a single project. In this regard, the Group has enhanced cost awareness, strengthened refined management, vigorously promoted the centralised procurement of major raw materials including steel, cement, asphalt, fuel oil, etc., and has continuously improved the bargaining power of the Company to minimise the risk of rising raw material prices. 

5. Interest rate risk 

The Group’s interest rate risk mainly arises from borrowings. Borrowings obtained at variable rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk which is partially offset by cash held at variable rates. During 2023 and 2022, the Group’s borrowings at variable rates were mainly denominated in RMB, USD, Euro and Hong Kong dollar. Borrowings obtained at fixed rates expose the Group to fair value interest rate risk. Increases in interest rates will increase the cost of new borrowings and the interest expense with respect to the Group’s outstanding floating rate borrowings, and therefore could have an adverse effect on the Group’s financial position. As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s borrowings of approximately RMB315,954 million (31 December 2022: RMB281,850 million) were at variable rates. As at 31 December 2023, if interest rates on borrowings had been 1% higher/lower with all other variables held constant, profit before tax for the year would have decreased/increased by RMB3,160 million (31 December 2022: RMB2,819 million), mainly as a result of higher/lower interest expense on floating rate borrowings. The Group continuously monitors the interest rate position, and makes decisions with reference to the latest market conditions, including entering into interest rate swap agreements from time to time to mitigate its exposure to interest rate risks in connection with the floating rate borrowings. 

6. Exchange rate risk 

The Group has focused on international markets in its past operations and future strategies. The relatively large scale of its overseas operations has resulted in a relatively large foreign exchange receipts and payments by the Company. The Company’s operations mainly involve foreign currencies such as USD, the Euro and Hong Kong dollar. Fluctuations in the exchange rates between these currencies and Renminbi may result in higher costs or lower revenues, which in turn may have an impact on the Company’s profitability. As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s aggregate net liabilities of RMB432 million, including trade and other receivables, cash and bank balances, trade and other payables and borrowings, were denominated in foreign currencies, mainly USD. To manage the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations, the Group continually assesses its exposure to currency risks, and a portion of those risks is hedged by using derivative financial instruments when management considers necessary. As at 31 December 2023, if RMB had strengthened/ weakened by 5% against USD with all other variables held constant, pre-tax profit for the year would had been decreased/increased by approximately RMB224 million (2022: RMB563 million), mainly as a result of foreign exchange losses/gains on translation of USD-denominated trade and other receivables, cash and cash equivalents. 

7. Production safety risk 

The Group insists on safety first and regards production safety as the prerequisite and foundation of all its work. However, as a construction and production enterprise with many subsidiaries and projects, production safety risks exist in all aspects of the production and operation process. Safety incidents may occur as a result of unsafe human behaviour, unsafe physical conditions and unsafe environmental factors, resulting in injury to the health and safety of employees and exposing the Company to the risk of damage to its brand image, economic loss and external regulatory penalties. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 54 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# IV. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (CONTINUED) 

Market Risks (continued) 

8. Risk of price fluctuation in the securities markets 

The Group’s investments in equity instruments are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss and equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income. As these financial assets are required to be stated at fair value, the Group is exposed to the risk of price fluctuation in the securities markets. To cope with such risk, the Group sets limits to diversify its investment portfolio. 

9. Force Majeure Risks 

The infrastructure construction and dredging business principally engaged by the Group are mostly outdoor work. Natural disasters and public health emergency including rainstorm, flooding, earthquake, typhoon, tsunami, fire and epidemic occurred on the construction sites may cause damages to the site workers as well as property, and adversely affect the quality and progress of relevant businesses of the Group. 

10. Network risk and security 

With the in-depth application of “Internet +” in informatisation, the topology of enterprise network has been becoming more and more complex, the number of information systems has surged, and the possibility of network interruption and system failure has also increased rapidly. At the same time, the Group has been actively exploring overseas markets, and its international influence has been increasing day by day. Therefore, the risk of network-attacks on the information system has been also increasing, which may have a serious impact on the Group’s production and operation in the event of a risk event. In order to effectively prevent network risks, the Group has continuously optimized and improved the network security system and professional team building, improved the information system, enhanced protection and emergency response capabilities, implemented network monitoring and carried out regular upgrades and protections in accordance with the requirements of the competent authorities. The Lekki Deep Sea Port in Nigeria is located within the Lagos Lekki Free Trade Zone, which is jointly constructed by China and Nigeria. The total investment amounts to USD1.044 billion. The port features a 680-meter quay wall and capable of berthing container ships with a capacity of 18,000 TEUs. It is designed for an annual throughput of 1.2 million TEUs. The Lekki Deep Sea Port is Nigeria’s first modern deep-water port, one of the largest ports in West Africa, and a flagship project of the China-Africa “Belt and Road” initiative. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 56 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

The Board is pleased to present its report together with the audited financial statements of the Group prepared in accordance with IFRS for the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# PRINCIPAL BUSINESS 

We are a leading transportation infrastructure group in the PRC and are principally engaged in infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging businesses. 

# RESULTS 

Results of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 and the consolidated financial position of the Group as at 31 December 2023 are set out in the audited consolidated financial statements in this report. 

# DIVIDEND POLICY 

In accordance with the Company Law and other relevant laws and regulations, the Company has been implementing a continuous, sustainable and stable dividend distribution policy, and placing emphasis on the reasonable investment return to the investors while securing the sustainable development of the Company. The Company actively promotes the way to distribute dividends with cash bonus. The profit distributed to the ordinary Shareholders in cash by the Company for each year shall not be less than 10% of the distributable profit available for the ordinary Shareholders realized in such year. The dividend distribution plan of the Company shall be drawn up and reviewed by the Board, taking comprehensive consideration of the factors including the industry characteristics, development stage, operation mode, profitability level and whether there is any significant payment arrangement for funds etc., make the differentiated cash bonus policy according to the program prescribed by the Articles of Association, and identify the proportion of the cash bonus in the profit distribution in the current year, with proportion in compliance with the relevant stipulations of laws, administrative regulations, normative documentation and stock exchanges. 

# DIVIDENDS 

On 28 March 2024, the Board recommended a final dividend totaling approximately RMB4,762 million which represents approximately 20% of the distributable profit available for the ordinary Shareholders out of the net profit realized in 2023 (including tax), on the basis of the total registered share capital of the Company on the record date, which is RMB0.29253 (equivalent to HK$0.32258 including tax) per share calculated based on the total issued share capital of the Company of 16,280,111,425 shares as at the latest practicable date prior to the printing of this report (i.e. 22 April 2024). The recommended final dividends are subject to Shareholders’ approval at the annual general meeting to be held on 17 June 2024. The H Share register of members of the Company will be closed for the purpose of determining H Shareholders’ entitlement to attend the annual general meeting of the Company from Wednesday, 12 June 2024 to Monday, 17 June 2024 (both days inclusive). In order to attend the annual general meeting, H Shareholders shall complete the registration of H Share not later than 4:30 p.m. on Tuesday, 11 June 2024. The final dividends are expected to be paid to Shareholders whose names appear on the register of members of the Company on 26 June 2024. The register of members will be closed from 21 June 2024 to 26 June 2024 (both days inclusive), during which period no transfers will be registered. In an event of any change in the total issued share capital of the Company before the record date for the payment of the proposed dividend distribution, the total distribution amount will remain unchanged and the proposed final dividend per share will be adjusted accordingly with specific adjustments to be announced separately. Dividends will be denominated and declared in Renminbi and will be paid to holders of H Shares in Hong Kong dollars. The relevant exchange rate is determined at RMB0.90685 equivalent to HK$1.00 as the middle rate of Renminbi to Hong Kong dollars as announced by the People’s Bank of China on the date when such dividends were declared. Under relevant regulations of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation Limited (“CSDC”) Shanghai Branch and in line with the market practice regarding dividend distribution for A shares, the Company will publish a separate announcement in respect of its final dividends distribution for A Shares after the Company’s AGM for 2023, which, among others, will set out the record date and ex-entitlement date of dividend distribution for A Shares. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 57 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# DIVIDENDS (CONTINUED) 

Pursuant to relevant laws and regulations including the Individual Income Tax Law of the People’s Republic of China ( 《中華人民共和國個人所得稅法》 ) and the Regulations for the Implementation of the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Individual Income Tax ( 《中華人民共和國個人所得稅法實施條例》 ), and the Notice of the State Administration of Taxation on the Collection and Management of Personal Income Tax After the Abolishment of Document Guo Shui Fa No. [1993]045 (《國家稅務總局關於國稅發 [1993]045 號文件廢止後有關個人所得稅徵管問題的通知》 ), as a withholding agent, the Company is required to withhold and pay the individual income tax at the tax rate of 10% in general on behalf of the individual H Shareholders. For individual H Shareholders who are citizens from countries under agreements to be entitled to tax rates lower than 10%, the Company can process applications on their behalf to seek entitlement of the relevant agreed preferential treatments pursuant to relevant regulations, and upon approval by the tax authorities, over withheld tax amounts will be refunded. For individual H Shareholders receiving dividends who are citizens from countries under agreements to be entitled to tax rates higher than 10% but lower than 20%, the Company will withhold the individual income tax at the agreed-upon effective tax rate when distributing dividends, and no application procedures will be necessary. For individual H Shareholders receiving dividends who are citizens from countries without taxation agreements with the PRC or are under other situations, the Company will withhold the individual income tax at a tax rate of 20% when distributing dividends. In respect of the non-resident corporate shareholders, in accordance with the Law on Corporate Income Tax of the People’s Republic of China revised in 2018, the Implementing Rules of the Law on Corporate Income Tax of the People’s Republic of China revised in 2019 (collectively, the “Corporate Income Tax Law”) and other laws and regulations, starting from 1 January 2008, enterprises established in the PRC which distribute dividend to the non-resident corporate shareholders (namely, the legal person shareholders) for the accounting period from 1 January 2008 onwards shall withhold for payment of the corporate income tax, and the payer shall be the withholding agent. Therefore, the Company is required to withhold corporate income tax at the rate of 10% when distributing the 2023 final dividend to non-resident enterprise Shareholders whose names appear on the H Share register of members of the Company on the record date. The Company will distribute 2023 final dividend following withholding corporate income tax at the rate of 10% to all H Shareholders (including HKSCC Nominees Limited, other business agents or trustees, or other groups or organizations, all deemed as the non-resident corporate Shareholders) who register in the name of a non-person Shareholder on the H Share register of members as of the record date. Any resident enterprise (as defined under the Corporate Income Tax Law) whose name appears on the H Share register of members of the Company and which is set up in the PRC in accordance with the PRC law, or which is set up in accordance with the law of a foreign country (region) whose actual administration institution is in the PRC, in the event of being unwilling for the Company’s withholding corporate income tax at the rate of 10%, should lodge with the Company’s H Share registrar, Computershare Hong Kong Investor Services Limited the PRC organization code certificate issued by the relevant PRC government authority or the equivalent copy certified by the Hong Kong lawyer or accountant to certify the place of establishment or the relevant legal documents that it is a resident enterprise incorporated in the PRC (as defined under the Tax Law of the People’s Republic of China), on or before 4:30 p.m. on Thursday, 20 June 2024. The Company will withhold for payment of the income tax strictly in accordance with the relevant laws or requirements of the relevant government departments and strictly based on what has been registered on the Company’s register of members for H Shares on Wednesday, 26 June 2024. Investors and potential investors in the H Shares of the Company are recommended to consult their professional tax advisors if they are in any doubt as to the implications of the above mechanism of withholding, and the Company does not accept responsibility for any effect the above mechanism of withholding may have on any person. 

# DISTRIBUTION OF FINAL DIVIDEND TO INVESTORS OF NORTHBOUND TRADING 

For investors of Hong Kong Stock Exchange, including enterprises and individuals, investing in the A Shares of the Company listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (the “Investors of Northbound Trading”), their final dividends will be distributed in RMB by the Company through CSDC Shanghai Branch to the account of the nominees holding such shares. The Company will withhold and pay income taxes of 10% on behalf of those investors and will report to the tax authorities. For Investors of Northbound Trading who are tax residents of other countries and whose country of domicile is a country which has entered into a tax treaty with the PRC stipulating a dividend tax rate of lower than 10%, those enterprises and individuals may, or may entrust a withholding agent to, apply to the competent tax authorities of the Company for the entitlement of the rate under such tax treaty. Upon approval by the tax authorities, the paid amount in excess of the tax payable based on the tax rate according to such tax treaty will be refunded. The record date, the ex-entitlement date and the date of distribution of final dividend and other arrangements for the Investors of Northbound Trading will be the same with those for the A Shareholders of the Company. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 58 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# DISTRIBUTION OF FINAL DIVIDEND TO INVESTORS OF SOUTHBOUND TRADING (1) Distribution of Final Dividend to Investors of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange 

For investors of the Shanghai Stock Exchange, including enterprises and individuals, investing in the H Shares of the Company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (the “Investors of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange”), the Company has entered into “the Agreement on Distribution of Cash Dividends of H Shares for Southbound Trading” ( 《港股通 H股股票現金紅利派發協議》 ) with CSDC Shanghai Branch, pursuant to which, CSDC Shanghai Branch, as the nominee holders of H Shares for the Investors of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange, will receive the final dividends distributed by the Company and distribute the final dividends to the relevant Investors of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange through its depository and clearing system. The cash dividends for the investors of H Shares of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange will be paid in RMB. Pursuant to the relevant requirements under the “Notice on the Tax Policies Related to the Pilot Program of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect” ( 《關於滬港股票市場交易互聯互通機制試 點有關稅收政策的通知》 ) (Caishui [2014] No. 81), for dividends received by domestic investors from investing in H shares listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange through Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, the company of such H shares shall withhold and pay individual income tax at the rate of 20% on behalf of the investors. For dividends received by domestic securities investment funds from investing in shares listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange through Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, the tax payable shall be the same as that for individual investors. The company of such H shares will not withhold and pay the income tax of dividends for domestic enterprise investors and those domestic enterprise investors shall report and pay the relevant tax themselves. 

(2) Distribution of Final Dividend to Investors of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange 

For investors of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, including enterprises and individuals, investing in the H Shares of the Company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (the “Investors of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange”), the Company has entered into “the Agreement on Distribution of Cash Dividends of H Shares for Southbound Trading” ( 《港股通 H股股票現金紅利派發協議》 ) with CSDC Shenzhen Branch, pursuant to which, CSDC Shenzhen Branch, as the nominee holders of H Shares for the Investors of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange, will receive the final dividends distributed by the Company and distribute the final dividends to the relevant Investors of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange through its depository and clearing system. The cash dividends for the investors of H Shares of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange will be paid in RMB. Pursuant to the relevant requirements under the “Notice on the Tax Policies Related to the Pilot Program of the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect” ( 《關於深港股票市場交易互聯互通機制試 點有關稅收政策的通知》 ) (Caishui [2016] No. 127), for dividends received by domestic investors from investing in H shares listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange through Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect, the company of such H shares shall withhold and pay individual income tax at the rate of 20% on behalf of the investors. For dividends received by domestic securities investment funds from investing in shares listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange through Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect, the tax payable shall be the same as that for individual investors. The company of such H shares will not withhold and pay the income tax of dividends for domestic enterprise investors and those domestic enterprise investors shall report and pay the relevant tax themselves. The record date, the ex-entitlement date and the date of distribution of final dividend and other arrangements for the Investors of Southbound Trading on Shanghai Stock Exchange and Investors of Southbound Trading on Shenzhen Stock Exchange will be the same with those for the H Shareholders. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 59 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# UTILISATION OF PROCEEDS FROM THE ISSUANCE OF CORPORATE BONDS BY THE COMPANY 

On 26 October 2023, the Company publicly issued renewable corporate bonds (bond short name: 23 CCCC YK01) of RMB1.0 billion to qualified investors. All of the proceeds from the bond issuance, after deducting issuance expenses, were proposed to be used to supplement the liquidity of the Company. The proceeds from the bond issuance above were fully used as scheduled. On 7 December 2023, the Company publicly issued renewable corporate bonds (bond short name: 23 CCCC YK02, 23 CCCC YK03) of RMB2.0 billion to qualified investors. All of the proceeds from the bond issuance, after deducting issuance expenses, were proposed to be used to supplement the liquidity of the Company. The proceeds from the bond issuance above were fully used as scheduled. 

# SHARE CAPITAL 

Please refer to Note 35 of the audited consolidated financial statements for movements in share capital of the Company for the year ended 31 December 2023. As at 31 December 2023, the share capital structure of the Company was as follows: 

Shareholding structure No. Item Number of shares Percentage 

1 A Shares 11,845,185,425 72.83% 2 H Shares 4,418,476,000 27.17% Total 16,263,661,425 100.00% 

# PROPOSED ISSUANCE OF PREFERENCE SHARES IN THE PRC 

On 12 January 2023 and 21 March 2023, the Board approved to issue not more than 300 million preference shares to specific subscribers in the PRC under the general mandate to raise total proceeds not exceeding RMB30 billion (the “Proposed Issuance”). The net proceeds after deducting issuance expenses are intended to be used for replenishing working capital. The Proposed Issuance was approved by the SASAC on 1 June 2023, and was considered and approved by the Shareholders at the 2023 third extraordinary general meeting of the Company held on 30 June 2023. As at the date of this report, the Proposed Issuance is subject to the approval from the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the registration with the China Securities Regulatory Commission. For details, please refer to the announcements of the Company dated 12 January 2023, 21 March 2023, 1 June 2023 and 30 June 2023 and the circular of the Company dated 9 June 2023. 

# PUBLIC FLOAT 

As at the date of this report, based on the information that is publicly available to the Company and within the knowledge of the Directors, the Company has maintained the prescribed public float under the Hong Kong Listing Rules and as agreed with the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 60 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT OF THE COMPANY 

The following table sets out certain information concerning the Directors, Supervisors and senior management of the Company as at the date of this report. 

Name Age Position in the Company Date of appointment Emoluments for the year ended 31 December 2023 (before tax) 

> (Note 10)

(RMB’000) WANG Tongzhou 58 Executive Director and chairman of the Board 22 October 2020 975 WANG Haihuai 55 Executive Director and president 10 June 2021 and 7 April 2021 975 LIU Xiang 55 Executive Director 10 June 2021 780 MI Shuhua (Note 6) 61 Non-executive Director 25 February 2022 –LIU Hui 63 Independent non-executive Director 25 February 2022 55 CHAN Wing Tak Kevin 57 Independent non-executive Director 25 February 2022 92 WU Guangqi 66 Independent non-executive Director 25 February 2022 55 ZHOU Xiaowen 62 Independent non-executive Director 25 February 2022 55 WANG Yongbin 58 Chairman of the Supervisory Committee (representative of the Shareholders) 22 November 2017 and 25 February 2022 671 LU Yaojun 53 Supervisor (representative of the Shareholders) 18 November 2021 1,063 YAO Yanmin (Note 8) 60 Supervisor (representative of the employees) 22 November 2017 774 YANG Xiangyang (Note 8) 52 Supervisor (representative of the employees) 11 January 2024 N/A WANG Jian 59 Vice president 22 November 2017 763 YANG Zhichao 42 Vice president 26 August 2021 1,256 SUN Liqiang (Note 1) 54 Vice president 11 September 2023 167 ZHOU Changjiang (Note 7) 58 Secretary of the Board and company secretary 22 November 2017 and 13 December 2017 1,086 SUN Ziyu (Note 2) 61 Executive Director 25 February 2022 248 LI Maohui (Note 3) 61 Vice president 30 October 2019 879 ZHOU Jingbo (Note 4) 60 Vice president 30 October 2019 962 ZHU Hongbiao (Note 5) 53 Chief financial officer 30 October 2019 839 LIU Zhengchang (Note 9) 55 Chief financial officer 26 January 2024 N/A Note 1: Mr. Sun Liqiang was appointed as the vice president of the Company on 11 September 2023. Note 2: Mr. Sun Ziyu retired as the executive director on 26 April 2023. Note 3: Mr. Li Maohui retired as the vice president of the Company on 26 April 2023. Note 4: Mr. Zhou Jingbo retired as the vice president of the Company on 11 October 2023. Note 5: Mr. Zhu Hongbiao resigned as the chief financial officer of the Company on 30 August 2023. Note 6: Mr. Mi Shuhua retired as the non-executive director of the Company on 15 January 2024. Note 7: Mr. Zhou Changjiang retired as the Board secretary and the company secretary of the Company on 22 March 2024. Note 8: Mr. Yao Yanmin retired as the staff representative supervisor of the Company on 11 January 2024. On the same date, Mr. Yang Xiangyang was elected as the staff representative supervisor of the Company. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 61 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT OF THE 

# COMPANY (CONTINUED) 

Note 9: Mr. Liu Zhengchang was appointed as the chief financial officer of the Company on 26 January 2024. Note 10: Please refer to Note 9 of the audited financial statements for details of the emoluments (including basic salaries, housing allowances and other allowances, contributions to pension plans and discretionary bonuses) of the Directors and Supervisors of the Company in 2023. The emoluments payable to the Directors, Supervisors and senior management are determined with reference to responsibilities, years of service and performance of each individual, the results of the Group and prevailing market rate. As at 31 December 2023, details of the emoluments (before taxes) of each senior management of the Company (excluding Directors who also hold executive positions) in 2023 are set out below: 

Name Basic salaries, housing allowances and other allowances Contributions to pension plans Discretionary bonuses Total 

RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 WANG Jian 251 63 449 763 SUN Liqiang (Note 1) 68 16 83 167 LI Maohui (Note 2) 127 20 732 879 ZHOU Jingbo (Note 3) 322 57 583 962 ZHU Hongbiao (Note 4) 254 41 544 839 YANG Zhichao 353 63 840 1,256 ZHOU Changjiang (Note 5) 384 – 702 1,086 Note 1: Mr. Sun Liqiang was appointed as the vice president of the Company on 11 September 2023. Note 2: Mr. Li Maohui retired as the vice president of the Company on 26 April 2023. Note 3 Mr. Zhou Jingbo retired as the vice president of the Company on 11 October 2023. Note 4: Mr. Zhu Hongbiao resigned as the chief financial officer of the Company on 30 August 2023. Note 5: Mr. Zhou Changjiang retired as the Board secretary and the company secretary of the Company on 22 March 2024. The biographical details of the Directors, Supervisors and senior management of the Company are set out in the “Profiles of Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management” in this report. 

# INDEPENDENCE OF THE INDEPENDENT NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS 

The Company has confirmed its receipt of a confirmation from each of the independent non-executive Directors of the Company of its independence pursuant to Rule 3.13 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. The Company considers all of the independent non-executive Directors to be independent. 

# BOARD COMMITTEES 

Committees under the Board include Strategy and Investment Committee, Audit and Internal Control Committee, Remuneration and Appraisal Committee as well as Nomination Committee. The composition of each committee is set out in the “Corporate Governance Report” in this report. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 62 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# MATERIAL INTERESTS AND SHORT POSITIONS IN SHARES AND UNDERLYING SHARES OF THE COMPANY 

As at 31 December 2023, the interests or short positions of Shareholders (other than Directors, Supervisors and chief executive of the Company) who have an interest or short position in the shares, underlying shares and debentures of the Company which would fall to be disclosed by the Company as recorded in the register required to be maintained under Section 336 of the SFO are as follows: 

Name of Shareholder  

> (Note 1)

Number of shares held Type of shares Percentage of the respective type of shares 

> (Note 2)

Percentage of the total number of shares in issue 

> (Note 3)

Capacity in which the shares are held 

(%) (%) 

CCCG 9,374,616,604 (Long position) A Shares 79.14 57.64 Beneficial owner 297,387,000 (Long position) H Shares 6.73 1.83 Beneficial owner Note 1: The table is prepared based on the disclosure of interest fillings of the substantial Shareholders published on the website of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange for the relevant events as at 31 December 2023. Note 2: The percentage of respective type of shares is based on 11,845,185,425 A Shares and 4,418,476,000 H Shares of the Company as at 31 December 2023, respectively. Note 3: The percentage of total number of shares in issue is based on 16,263,661,425 shares of the total issued share capital of the Company as at 31 December 2023. As at 31 December 2023, there were 12,029 H Shareholders and 155,194 A Shareholders as shown on the register of members of the Company. Particulars of the top 10 Shareholders of the Company as at 31 December 2023 were as follows: 

Name of Shareholder Nature Percentage Number Number of shares subject to trading restriction Number of shares pledged or frozen 

1. CCCG State 57.64 9,374,616,604 Nil 2. HKSCC NOMINEES LIMITED Foreign legal person 26.92 4,377,734,962 Unknown 3. China Securities Finance Corporation Limited State-owned legal person 2.98 483,846,064 Unknown 4. Central Huijin Asset Management Ltd. State-owned legal person 0.59 95,990,100 Unknown 5. Hong Kong Securities Clearing Company Limited Foreign legal person 0.17 27,016,026 Unknown 6. Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Co., Ltd. – Huatai Bairui CSI 300 Trading Index Securities Investment Open-ended Fund Unknown 0.16 26,360,300 Unknown 7. Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. – GF China Securities Infrastructure Project Index ETF Unknown 0.16 26,321,368 Unknown 8. China Life Insurance (Group) Company – Traditional – Normal insurance product – Southbound Trading (Innovation Strategy) Unknown 0.16 25,444,508 Unknown 9. Aeon Life Insurance Co. Ltd. – Owned Fund Unknown 0.13 20,999,901 Unknown 10. National Social Security Fund Portfolio 503 Unknown 0.11 18,000,000 Unknown Note: As of 31 December 2023, CCCG increased its shareholding in the Company by 32,921,000 H Shares in aggregate through Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, representing approximately 0.75% of the H Shares of the Company. The number of Shares held by CCCG amounted to 9,672,003,604 (including 9,374,616,604 A Shares and 297,387,000 H Shares), representing approximately 59.47% of the total share capital of the Company. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 63 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S INTERESTS AND 

# SHORT POSITIONS IN SHARES, UNDERLYING SHARES AND DEBENTURES 

As at 31 December 2023, none of the Directors, Supervisors or chief executive of the Company had any interest or short position in the shares, underlying shares of equity derivatives or debentures of us or any of our associated corporations (within the meaning of Part XV of the SFO) which will have to be notified to the Company and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange pursuant to Divisions 7 and 8 of Part XV of the SFO (including interests and short positions which they are taken or deemed to have under such provisions of the SFO), or which will be required, pursuant to section 352 of the SFO, to be entered in the register referred to therein or which will be required to the Company notified to us and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange pursuant to the Model Code contained in Appendix 10 to the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As at 31 December 2023, the Company had not granted its Directors, Supervisors or chief executive or their respective spouses or children below the age of 18 any rights to subscribe for the shares or debentures of the Company or any of its associated corporations and none of them has ever exercised any such right to subscribe for shares or debentures. 

# 2022 RESTRICTED SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME 

On 27 April 2023, the Company has adopted the 2022 Restricted Share Incentive Scheme (the “Incentive Scheme”) at the 2023 second extraordinary general meeting, the 2023 first H Share class meeting and the 2023 first A Share class meeting (collectively, the “Meetings”). 

(I) Summary of the Incentive Scheme 

The Incentive Scheme is a share scheme involving the issuance of new shares by the Company under Chapter 17 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. The principal terms of the Incentive Scheme are summarized as follows. 

(1) Purposes of the Incentive Scheme 

The purpose of the Incentive Scheme is to further promote the establishment and improvement of the long-term incentive mechanism of the Company, attract and retain talents, fully mobilise the enthusiasm of the Directors, senior management, middle management and core personnel of the Company, and effectively align the interests of the Shareholders, the Company with the individual interests of the operators to focus on and work collectively for the long-term development of the Company. 

(2) Participants 

The participants are the incumbent directors, senior management, middle management and core personnel of the Company (including its branches and holding subsidiaries) at the time of the implementation of the Incentive Scheme (the “Participants”). 

(3) Total number of shares available for issue 

The incentive instruments adopted in the Incentive Scheme are the restricted shares. The source of the restricted shares is the ordinary A Shares to be issued to the Participants by the Company (the “Restricted Shares”). A total number of up to 117 million Restricted Shares (including the first grant and the reserved grant) are proposed to be granted under the Incentive Scheme, representing 0.719% of the total issued ordinary shares of the Company (i.e. 16,280,111,425 ordinary shares) as at the date of this report. 

(4) Maximum entitlement of each Participant under the Incentive Scheme 

The total number of Restricted Shares to be granted under all effective share incentive schemes to any one of the Participants under the Incentive Scheme shall not exceed 1% of the total issued ordinary A Shares of the Company. Save for the Incentive Scheme, the Company has not adopted any other share schemes as at the date of this report. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 64 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# 2022 RESTRICTED SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME (CONTINUED) 

(I) Summary of the Incentive Scheme (continued) 

(5) Grant price and basis of determination 

The grant price under the first grant shall be RMB5.33 per A Share, i.e. upon fulfilment of grant conditions, Participants are entitled to purchase the ordinary A Shares of the Company granted to the Participants by the Company at the price of RMB5.33 per A Share. According to the Article 23 of the Administrative Measures on Share Incentives of Listed Companies and the Article 26 of the Guidelines for the Implementation of Share Incentive Schemes by the State-Owned Listed Companies, the grant price under the first grant shall not be less than the nominal value of the shares, and shall not be lower than 60% of the fair market value. The fair market value shall be the higher of the following prices: (1) the average trading price of the A Shares of the Company on the last trading day prior to the date of announcement of the Incentive Scheme (i.e. RMB8.875 per share); (2) any of the average trading prices of the A Shares of the Company for the last 20 trading days, 60 trading days or 120 trading days prior to the date of announcement of the Incentive Scheme (i.e. RMB8.837 per share, RMB8.413 per share and RMB8.449 per share). The grant of the reserved Restricted Shares is subject to the consideration and passing of related resolutions by the Board meeting and the disclosure of related information. The grant price of the reserved Restricted Shares shall not be less than the nominal value of the shares, and shall not be lower than 60% of the higher of the following prices: (1) the average trading price of the A Shares of the Company on the last trading day prior to the date of announcement of Board resolutions on the grant of the reserved Restricted Shares; (2) any of the average trading prices of the A Shares of the Company for the last 20 trading days, 60 trading days or 120 trading days prior to the date of announcement of Board resolutions on the grant of the reserved Restricted Shares. The Participants shall pay the consideration for subscribing the Restricted Shares into the account designated by the Company and have it verified and confirmed by a certified public accountant, otherwise such Participant shall be deemed as having waived his/her rights to subscribe for the granted Restricted Shares. The Company shall not provide loans or financial assistance in any other forms, including guarantee for loans, to the Participants to obtain or unlock the relevant Restricted Shares under the Incentive Scheme. 

(6) Term of the Incentive Scheme 

The Term of the Incentive Scheme shall commence from the completion date of registration of the Restricted Shares under the first grant (i.e. 5 June 2023) and end on the date of all the Restricted Shares granted to the Participants having been unlocked or repurchased, the maximum period of which shall not exceed 72 months. 

(7) Lock-up period of the Incentive Scheme 

The Restricted Shares granted under the Incentive Scheme shall be unlocked in three batches, and the Lock-up Period of each batch is 24 months, 36 months and 48 months respectively from the completion date of registration of the corresponding grant. During the Lock-up Period, the Restricted Shares granted to the Participants under the Incentive Scheme shall be restricted for sale and shall not be transferred, used as security or for repayment of debts. The shares entitled by the Participants as a result of the capitalisation issue, bonus issue and sub-division of shares, etc. in connection with the granted Restricted Shares that have not yet been unlocked are simultaneously locked in accordance with the Incentive Scheme. Upon unlocking, the Company will handle the unlocking matters for the Participants who meet the conditions, and the Restricted Shares held by the Participants who do not meet the unlocking conditions will be repurchased by the Company. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 65 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# 2022 RESTRICTED SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME (CONTINUED) 

(I) Summary of the Incentive Scheme (continued) 

(7) Lock-up period of the Incentive Scheme (continued) 

The unlocking schedule for the Restricted Shares of the Incentive Scheme under the first grant and the reserved grant are set out below: 

Unlocking arrangements Unlocking schedule Percentage of the number of Restricted Shares to be unlocked to the number of the Restricted Shares granted 

The first unlocking period for the first grant and the reserved grant Commencing from the first trading day after expiry of the 24-month period from the date of completion of registration of the corresponding grant and ending on the last trading day of the 36-month period from the date of completion of registration of such grant 34% The second unlocking period for the first grant and the reserved grant Commencing from the first trading day after expiry of the 36-month period from the date of completion of registration of the corresponding grant and ending on the last trading day of the 48-month period from the date of completion of registration of such grant 33% The third unlocking period for the first grant and the reserved grant Commencing from the first trading day after expiry of the 48-month period from the date of completion of registration of the corresponding grant and ending on the last trading day of the 60-month period from the date of completion of registration of such grant 33% 

(II) Adjustments for the First Grant of the Incentive Scheme 

According to the Incentive Scheme, the Company intended to issue a total number of up to 117 million ordinary A Shares to the Participants. Wherein: (i) a maximum of 99.40 million Restricted Shares will be issued to not more than 668 Participants under the first grant; and (ii) a maximum of 17.60 million Restricted Shares will be issued to Participants who shall be determined within 12 months from the date of the Meetings under the reserved grant. As six Participants were no longer within the scope of the Participants under the first grant of the Incentive Scheme, the Board, pursuant to the authorization granted by the Meetings, adjusted the number of Participants under the first grant from 668 to 662 and the number of Restricted Shares under the first grant from 99.40 million to 98.55 million. Accordingly, the total number of Restricted Shares to be granted under the Incentive Scheme was adjusted from 117.00 million to 116.15 million and the number of Restricted Shares under the reserved grant remained unchanged. The Board determined to grant a total of 98.55 million Restricted Shares to 662 Participants on 4 May 2023 at a price of RMB5.33 per A Share (the “First Grant”). On 5 June 2023, the Company had completed the registration of the First Grant of the Incentive Scheme with Shanghai Branch of the China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation Limited for an actual grant of 97.95 million Restricted Shares to 658 Participants under the First Grant, because four Participants voluntarily waived their subscription for a total of 0.6 million Restricted Shares due to personal reasons. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 66 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# 2022 RESTRICTED SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME (CONTINUED) 

(II) Adjustments for the First Grant of the Incentive Scheme (continued) 

The table below sets out particulars of the Restricted Shares granted and registered under the Incentive Scheme during the reporting period (i.e. the First Grant): 

Name of the participants Category of the participants Unlocking period As at 1 January 2023 Granted and registered during the reporting period Unlocked during the reporting period Cancelled/ Lapsed during the reporting period As at 31 December 2023 

(0’000 shares) (0’000 shares) (0’000 shares) (0’000 shares) (0’000 shares) ZHU Hongbiao Chief financial officer 06/06/2025– 05/06/2028 Nil 35 Nil (35) –YANG Zhichao Vice president 06/06/2025– 05/06/2028 Nil 35 Nil Nil 35 ZHOU Changjiang Secretary to the Board 06/06/2025– 05/06/2028 Nil 30 Nil Nil 30 Middle management personnel and core personnel (no more than 655) 06/06/2025– 05/06/2028 Nil 9,695 Nil (65) 9,630 Total Nil 9,795 Nil (100) 9,695 Notes: (1) The total number of the Company’s shares granted under all effective share incentive schemes to any of the aforesaid Participants does not exceed 1% of the total share capital of the Company. The total number of underlying shares involved in all effective share incentive schemes of the Company does not exceed 10% of the total share capital of the Company. (2) For details of the performance targets, please refer to the section headed “II.(viii) 2. Unlocking conditions for the Incentive Scheme” as set out in the circular of the Company dated 4 April 2023. (3) The grant price of the Restricted Shares under the First Grant is RMB5.33 per share. The closing price of the Restricted Shares under the First Grant immediately before the date of grant is RMB11.41 per share. (4) On 30 August 2023, Mr. Zhu Hongbiao resigned as the chief financial officer of the Company due to work reallocation. The 350,000 Restricted Shares granted to Mr. Zhu Hongbiao shall be repurchased by the Company pursuant to the terms of the Incentive Scheme. On 26 January 2024, among the Participants in the First Grant, 8 Participants (including Mr. Zhu Hongbiao) were transferred from the Company and ceased to take office in the Company due to organizational arrangements, or became disqualified for the Incentive Scheme due to change of position, according to which, the Company decided to repurchase from these Participants all the Restricted Shares granted but not yet unlocked (totalling 1.50 million shares) and cancel the same at the grant price of RMB5.33 per share plus the interests on fixed bank deposits in the same period in accordance with the Incentive Scheme. For details, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 26 January 2024. (5) On 22 March 2024, Mr. Zhou Changjiang, due to work re-allocation, resigned as secretary to the Board of the Company. The 300,000 Restricted Shares granted to Mr. Zhou Changjiang shall be repurchased by the Company pursuant to the terms of the Incentive Scheme. For more details, please refer to the section headed “II.(xiii) 4. Changes to the individual circumstances of the Participants” as set out in the circular of the Company dated 4 April 2023. The Company will comply with the applicable laws and regulations including the Hong Kong Listing Rules when conducting repurchase of A Shares. During the reporting period, the aggregate fair value of the Restricted Shares granted under the First Grant of the Incentive Scheme as at the date of the First Grant was RMB629 million. The accounting standard and policy to estimate the fair value of the Restricted Shares is set out in Note 2.5 to the financial statements of this report. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 67 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# 2022 RESTRICTED SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME (CONTINUED) 

(II) Adjustments for the First Grant of the Incentive Scheme (continued) 

As at 1 January 2023 and at 31 December 2023, the total number of Restricted Shares available for grant under the Incentive Scheme is nil and 17.60 million shares (i.e. the number of Restricted Shares under the reserved grant), respectively. The number of shares that may be issued in respect of Restricted Shares granted under the Incentive Scheme during the reporting period divided by the weighted average number of ordinary A Shares in issue for the reporting period is approximately 0.8%. For details of the Incentive Scheme, please refer to the announcements of the Company dated 15 December 2022, 27 April 2023, 4 May 2023 and 7 June 2023 and the circular of the Company dated 4 April 2023. 

# COMPETING BUSINESS 

None of the Directors of the Company, directly or indirectly, has any interest in any business which constitutes or may constitute a competing business of the Company. 

# FINANCIAL, BUSINESS AND FAMILY RELATIONS OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 

There are no relationships among the Directors, Supervisors and senior management of the Company, including financial, business, family or other material relationships. 

# DIRECTORS’ AND SUPERVISORS’ INTERESTS IN TRANSACTIONS, ARRANGEMENTS OR CONTRACTS 

Each of the Directors and Supervisors has entered into a service contract with the Company for a term of three years and may be re-elected upon expiry of the term. None of the Directors or Supervisors has any existing or proposed service contract with any member of the Group which is not terminable by the Group within one year without payment of compensation (other than statutory compensation). Apart from the service contracts with the Company or its subsidiaries (if applicable), for the year ended 31 December 2023, none of the Directors or Supervisors of the Company was materially interested, whether directly or indirectly, in any transaction, arrangement or contract of significance to which the Company, its subsidiary or holding company or a subsidiary of the Company’s holding company is a party. 

# ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES AND PERFORMANCE 

CCCC has been in strict compliance with the Environmental Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China and local environmental protection laws and regulations. The Company continued to strengthen energy conservation and environmental protection management, improve the utilization efficiency of energy and resource, promote energy conservation and emission reduction, actively respond to climate change, boost low carbon development and advocate green office. It is determined to be a major participant, contributor and leader in green development. Adhering to the concept of “lucid waters and lush mountains are invaluable assets”, CCCC firmly grasps the trend of comprehensive green transformation of economic and social development, deeply implements the carbon peak carbon neutral “3060” action, actively participates in the battle to protect blue sky, clear water and clean land, continues to expand the ecological and environmental protection industry, and strives to provide more high-quality ecological products to meet the people’s growing needs for a beautiful ecological environment. In 2023, the energy conservation and environmental protection work of the Company maintained stable in general without emergency environmental incidents above common level. For details of the Group’s environmental policies and performance, please refer to the “2023 Environmental, Social and Governance Report of China Communications Construction Company Limited” to be published on the websites of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and the Company, and the “2023 Environmental, Social and Governance Report of CCCC” published on the websites of the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Company. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 68 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# COMPLIANCE WITH RELEVANT LAWS AND REGULATIONS 

The Group recognizes the importance of compliance with regulatory requirements. During the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group had complied in all material respects with relevant PRC laws and regulations, and the Company and all of its direct subsidiaries had obtained all licenses, approvals and permits from appropriate regulatory authorities that are material for its business operations in the PRC. As a result of our international activities, we are subject to the laws and regulations of the various countries and regions in which we do business, in addition to the laws of the PRC. Meanwhile, as the Company is listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, therefore we are also required to comply with the listing rules and applicable laws and regulations of listing places. As far as the Company is aware, the Group has also complied with overseas laws and regulations, as well as the listing rules and applicable laws and regulations of listing places during the year ended 31 December 2023. The Group has more sound internal control system in place, so as to monitor and ensure the legitimacy and compliance of our production, construction and operating activities. 

# KEY RELATIONSHIPS 

The Group’s success also depends on the support from employees, customers, suppliers and etc. 

Employees 

CCCC always insists on putting people first, attracts talents with an open, equal and inclusive attitude, respects and protects the legitimate rights and interests of employees. It builds a platform for employees to realize their dreams, shares the fruits of development with them and works together for a happy future. By adhering to the approach of putting people first, and in strict compliance with the Labour Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Labour Contract Law of the People’s Republic of China and other relevant legal requirements, CCCC has established various labour protection systems to fully protect the rights of its employees in terms of equal employment, reasonable remuneration, rest and leave as well as democratic communication. CCCC focuses on talents in the three important areas of a strong transportation country, rivers, lakes and seas as well as international operation so as to achieve the full utilization of human resources and talents. CCCC is actively building a harmonious enterprise, constructing a warm “staff home” and creating a comfortable working environment for employees. It cares for special groups such as employees in difficulty and retired employees, provides help at the first instance in times of crisis and carries out various forms of staff activities to balance the work and life of employees, striving to enhance employees’ satisfaction and sense of belonging. 

Customers 

CCCC is committed to providing prime-quality services to its customers, establishing a sound customer service system, facilitating customer communication channels, tapping into customer needs thoroughly and enhancing customer satisfaction. Adhering to the customer-centric principle, the Group provides a comprehensive package of “CCCC solutions” to solve the pain points and difficult problems of its customers, and enhances the customer experience to win their trust. The Group respects the privacy of its customers and requires its staff to keep customer information strictly in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Market Operation Management Measures ( 《市場經營管理辦法》 ) and Measures on the Management of Liaison of Government Affairs and Large Customers ( 《政府事務與大客戶商務對接管理 辦法》 ), and conducts relevant training to strengthen the legal concept of its staff and enhance their awareness of confidentiality, with a view to fully safeguarding the security, confidentiality and integrity of customer information and data. The Group has established a strong communication mechanism with its customers, which allows the Group to treat customer feedback seriously and handle related complaints in a timely manner, thereby continuously improving customer satisfaction and loyalty. 

Suppliers 

CCCC insists on the principle of “optimise the total cost for supply chain”, concentrates on the five-in-one idea for supply chain strategic of “innovation, coordination, safety, green, and wisdom”, and implements nine major tasks including “online rate, concentration, payment guarantee, overseas supply chain, supply, compliance, system and evaluation system, informatisation support and green supply chain” to comprehensively build a new-era supply chain management and development system. The Company establishes a supplier “white list” and “red list” management system, and defines a series of full-cycle dynamic management mechanisms such as supplier access standards and evaluation standards. The Company builds an intelligent supplier evaluation system, completes the big data platform test, and strengthens the big data analysis and intelligent monitoring of procurement risk and supply risk. The Company implements the green supplier cultivation action to enhance the green supply chain awareness of suppliers. 

# PERMITTED INDEMNITY PROVISION 

As at 31 December 2023, all directors of the Company were covered under the liability insurance purchased by the Company for its directors. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 69 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# PURCHASE, SALE AND REDEMPTION OF SHARES 

Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has purchased, sold or redeemed any securities of the Company during the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS 

The tables below set out a summary of the operating results, assets and liabilities of the Group for each of the years in the five-year period ended 31 December 2023. 

Consolidated Income Statement 

2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 

RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million (Restated) 

Revenue 755,646 719,084 682,785 624,495 553,114 Gross profit 94,528 83,692 84,524 80,036 69,297 Profit before tax 37,538 33,088 29,787 26,957 27,349 Profit for the year 31,141 25,971 23,859 19,629 21,525 Attributable to: – Owners of the parent 24,734 20,226 18,349 16,475 19,999 – Non-controlling interests 6,407 5,745 5,510 3,154 1,526 Earnings per share for profit attributable to the equity holders of the parent (expressed in RMB) Basic – For profit for the year 1.45 1.15 1.04 0.92 1.16 – For profit from continuing operations 1.45 1.15 1.04 0.92 1.16 Diluted – For profit for the year 1.45 1.15 1.04 0.92 1.16 – For profit from continuing operations 1.45 1.15 1.04 0.92 1.16 Dividends 4,762 3,509 3,293 2,924 3,765 

Note: As affected by the business combination of Zhongjiao Dingxin Equity Investment Management Co., LTD, China Southwest Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd., China Northeast Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. and CCCC Urban Energy Research and Design Institute Co. Ltd. under common control in 2023, the comparative statements of profit or loss of the Group for 2022 have been restated. 

Consolidated Balance Sheet 

2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 

RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million (Restated) 

Total assets 1,684,262 1,516,713 1,391,109 1,304,169 1,123,414 Total liabilities 1,225,138 1,089,221 999,714 946,365 827,004 Equity attributable to owners of the Company 301,734 282,500 260,391 245,071 229,916 Non-controlling interests 157,390 144,992 131,004 112,733 66,494 

Note: As affected by the business combination of Zhongjiao Dingxin Equity Investment Management Co., LTD, China Southwest Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd., China Northeast Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. and CCCC Urban Energy Research and Design Institute Co. Ltd. under common control in 2023, the financial figures of the Group for 2022 have been restated. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 70 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# BANK LOANS AND OTHER BORROWINGS 

Please refer to Note 31 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of bank loans and other borrowings of the Group. 

# ISSUANCE OF SUBORDINATED PERPETUAL SECURITIES 

The subordinated perpetual securities in the aggregate principal amount of USD1,000,000,000 with an initial distribution rate of 3.425% per annum (the “Series A Securities”) and the subordinated perpetual securities in the aggregate principal amount of USD500,000,000 with an initial distribution rate of 3.650% per annum (the “Series B Securities”, and together with the Series A Securities, the “Securities”) guaranteed by the Company have been issued by CCCI Treasure Limited, a subsidiary of the Company. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Series A Securities, unless redeemed, the distribution rate of the Series A Securities will first be reset on 21 February 2025 and thereafter be reset every five years. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Series B Securities, unless redeemed, the distribution rate of the Series B Securities will first be reset on 21 February 2027 and thereafter be reset every five years. The distribution of the Securities will be payable semi-annually in equal instalments in arrears on 21 February and 21 August of each year commencing on 21 August 2020. For more details, please refer to the announcements of the Company dated 11 February 2020, 14 February 2020 and 21 February 2020. 

# ISSUANCE OF DEBENTURES 

In order to optimize the debt structure and reduce the financing costs, the Company issued the following debentures in 2023: 1. The first tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 12 January 2023 with the maturity date on 13 June 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.18%. 2. The second tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 13 January 2023 with the maturity date on 15 June 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.16%. 3. The third tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 23 February 2023 with the maturity date on 23 August 2023. The issuance scale is RMB3.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.28%. 4. The fourth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 20 March 2023 with the maturity date on 18 September 2023. The issuance scale is RMB3.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.22%. 5. The fifth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 18 May 2023 with the maturity date on 15 November 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.12%. 6. The sixth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 22 May 2023 with the maturity date on 17 November 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.11%. 7. The seventh tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 9 June 2023 with the maturity date on 6 December 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.00%. 8. The first tranche of 2023 mid-term notes was issued on 19 July 2023 with the maturity date on 21 July 2026. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.68%. 9. The eighth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 21 August 2023 with the maturity date on 27 December 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 1.92%. 10. The ninth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 24 August 2023 with the maturity date on 26 December 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.5 billion and the interests rate is 1.97%. 11. The tenth tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 9 November 2023 with the maturity date on 26 December 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.10%. 12. The eleventh tranche of 2023 ultra-short-term financing bonds was issued on 10 November 2023 with the maturity date on 27 December 2023. The issuance scale is RMB2.0 billion and the interests rate is 2.04%. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 71 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# FIXED ASSETS 

Please refer to Note 15 of the audited consolidated financial statements for movements in the property, plant and equipment of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# CAPITALISED INTEREST 

Please refer to Note 8 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of the capitalised interest expense of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# RESERVES 

Please refer to Notes 38 and 52 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of the movements in the reserves of the Group and the Company for the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# DISTRIBUTABLE RESERVES 

Distributable reserves of the Company as at 31 December 2023 amounted to approximately RMB48,476 million. 

# DONATIONS 

For the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group made charitable and other donations in a total amount of approximately RMB274 million. 

# SUBSIDIARIES 

Please refer to Note 39 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of the Company’s principal subsidiaries as at 31 December 2023. 

# SIGNIFICANT INVESTMENTS AND ACQUISITIONS 

Please refer to Notes 15, 16, 17(a), 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 42 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of significant investments and acquisitions incurred during the year ended 31 December 2023. 

# CHANGE IN EQUITY 

Please refer to Notes 35, 37 and 38 of the audited consolidated financial statements for detail of changes in equity. 

# RETIREMENT BENEFITS 

Please refer to Note 33 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of retirement benefits. 

# PRE-EMPTIVE RIGHTS 

There are no provisions for pre-emptive rights in the Company’s Articles of Association which require the Company to offer new shares to the existing Shareholders in proportion to their shareholdings. 

# MAJOR CUSTOMERS AND SUPPLIERS 

The diversified business structure of the Company had provided an extensive base of suppliers and customers with low concentration. There is no reliance of the Company on a single supplier or customer. As at 31 December 2023, the sales of the Group to the five largest customers amounted to RMB33,544 million, representing 4.4% of the Group’s revenue; the aggregate purchase from the five largest suppliers by the Group amounted to RMB26,991 million, representing 5.7% of the Group’s aggregate purchase for the year. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 72 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# PROPOSED ASSETS REORGANIZATION AND PROPOSED SPIN-OFF 

On 11 May 2022, the Company entered into the agreement on assets swap and acquisition of assets by issuance of shares (the “Agreement”, as further amended by the supplemental agreements entered into on 28 December 2022 and 28 February 2023, collectively the “Agreements”) with China Urban & Rural Holding Group Limited (“China Urban-Rural”) and Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. (“Qilianshan”). According to the Agreements, the parties agreed that: (i) the Company shall dispose of its 100% equity interest in three wholly-owned subsidiaries to Qilianshan, namely CCCC Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. (“CCCC Highway Institute”), CCCC First Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. (“CCCC First Highway Institute”) and CCCC Second Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. (“CCCC Second Highway Institute”) (collectively the “Three Highway Institutes”), at a consideration of approximately RMB7,200.30 million, RMB6,183.27 million and RMB6,779.85 million, respectively; (ii) China Urban-Rural shall dispose of its 100% equity interest in three wholly-owned subsidiaries to Qilianshan, namely China Southwest Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. (“Southwest Institute”), China Northeast Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. (“Northeast Institute”) and CCCC Urban Energy Research and Design Institute Co. Ltd. (“Energy Institute”) (collectively the “Three Municipal Institutes”), at a consideration of approximately RMB2,278.52 million, RMB941.06 million and RMB120.14 million, respectively; (iii) in consideration of the acquisition of the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes, Qilianshan shall transfer its 100% equity interest in Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Ltd. (“Qilianshan Ltd.”) to the Company and China Urban-Rural at a consideration of approximately RMB10,430.43 million, and issue a total of 1,285,418,199 new A shares to pay the shortfall against the value of the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes at an issue price of RMB10.17 per consideration share. The Company and China Urban-Rural further agreed on the allocation of the equity interests of Qilianshan Ltd. and the Consideration Shares as follows: (i) Qilianshan Ltd. will be owned as to approximately 85% and 15% by the Company and China Urban-Rural, respectively; and (ii) the Company and China Urban-Rural will hold 1,110,869,947 Consideration Shares and 174,548,252 Consideration Shares respectively, representing approximately 53.88% and 8.47% equity interest in Qilianshan as enlarged by the issuance of the Consideration Shares (the “Proposed Assets Reorganization”). Upon completion of the Proposed Assets Reorganization, the financial results of the Three Highway Institutes, the Three Municipal Institutes and Qilianshan Ltd. will be consolidated into the consolidated financial statements of the Company. China Urban-Rural is a wholly-owned subsidiary of CCCG, the controlling Shareholder of the Company which holds approximately 59.63% interests in the issued ordinary Shares of the Company as at the date of the Agreements. China Urban-Rural is thus a connected person of the Company under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As China Urban-Rural is a party to the Agreements, the Proposed Assets Reorganization constitutes a connected transaction of the Company. As the highest applicable percentage ratios of the acquisition and the disposal are both higher than 5% but less than 25%, the Proposed Assets Reorganization constitutes a discloseable transaction and a connected transaction of the Company and is subject to the reporting, announcement and the independent Shareholders’ approval requirements under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. The Proposed Assets Reorganization has been approved by the independent Shareholders at the extraordinary general meeting held by the Company on 10 March 2023. The Company has applied for and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange has confirmed that the Company may proceed with the Proposed Spin-off and granted a waiver from strict compliance with the requirements under Paragraph 3(f) of Practice Note 15 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. The Proposed Assets Reorganization and the Proposed Spin-off have been completed on 30 November 2023. 

# PERFORMANCE COMMITMENT 

On 28 December 2022, the Company entered into the performance commitment and compensation agreement with China Urban-Rural and Qilianshan (the “Compensation Agreement”) in relation to the Proposed Assets Reorganization, pursuant to which, the Company and China Urban-Rural made commitments in respect of the performance of the assets of the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes (the “Performance Commitment Assets”) appraised in the income approach upon completion of the Proposed Assets Reorganization and, if such commitments are not fulfilled, shall compensate Qilianshan. In accordance with the Compensation Agreement, the performance commitment period will be 2023, 2024 and 2025. According to the “Special Audit Report on the Special Explanation on the Completion of Performance Commitments for 2023” issued by Zhongshen Zhonghuan Certified Public Accountants, all the Performance Commitment Assets have completed the performance commitment for 2023, and there are no circumstances that require compensation. The details of their performance fulfilment are set out below: Items 2023 (RMB’0000) CCCC Highway Institute CCCC First Highway Institute CCCC Second Highway Institute Southwest Institute Northeast Institute Energy Institute Performance commitment amount 46,409.95 43,022.48 43,489.74 12,726.93 5,663.56 772.98 Fulfilled amount 55,073.54 44,633.89 53,773.81 18,043.67 5,988.09 1,274.34 Difference 8,663.59 1,611.41 10,284.07 5,316.74 324.53 501.36 Fulfilment rate (%) 118.67 103.75 123.65 141.78 105.73 164.86 Note: The performance commitment amount and the fulfilled amount are the net profit attributable to the owners of the parent company at the level of the consolidated statements of the target company after deducting the net profit of the subsidiaries for the period as assessed using the asset-based method and extraordinary profit or loss. For details, please refer to the announcements of the Company dated 11 May 2022, 28 December 2022, 10 January 2023, 28 February 2023, 9 March 2023, 4 August 2023, 10 September 2023, 18 September 2023, 26 September 2023, 30 October 2023, 23 November 2023 and 30 November 2023 and the circular of the Company dated 21 February 2023. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 73 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS 

The Company has entered into the following connected transactions in the year 2023. 1. On 28 August 2023, CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd.* ( 中交一公局集團有限公司 , “CFHEC”), China Highway Engineering Consultants Co., Ltd. * ( 中國公路工程諮詢集團有限公司 , “CHECC”), CCCC Industrial Investment Holding Limited * ( 中交產業投資控股有限公司 , “CCCC Industrial Investment”), and Yangjiang Transportation Investment Group Co., Ltd.* ( 陽江市交通投資集團有限公司 , “Yangjiang Transportation Investment”) entered into a joint venture agreement to jointly invest in and establish a project company, Yangjiang Shitong Green Construction Material Co., Ltd. * ( 陽江市世通綠色建 材有限責任公司 , “Project Company”). Pursuant to the joint venture agreement, the registered capital of the Project Company is RMB409.66 million, of which RMB208.93 million, RMB61.45 million, RMB36.87 million, and RMB102.41 million will be contributed by CFHEC, CHECC, CCCC Industrial Investment and Yangjiang Transportation Investment, accounting for 51%, 15%, 9% and 25% of the total registered capital of the Project Company, respectively. On 28 August 2023, CCCC Industrial Investment was a subsidiary of CCCG, the controlling shareholder of the Company which held approximately 59.37% interests in the issued ordinary shares of the Company. Therefore, CCCC Industrial Investment was a connected person of the Company under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As such, the formation of the Project Company under the joint venture agreement constituted a connected transaction of the Company under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As the highest applicable percentage ratio in respect of the formation of the Project Company under the joint venture agreement exceeded 0.1% but was less than 5%, the transaction contemplated under the joint venture agreement was subject to the announcement requirement but exempted from the independent Shareholders’ approval requirement under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For details of the aforesaid connected transaction, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 28 August 2023. 2. On 28 August 2023, CCCC Capital, ZPMC, Chuwa Bussan Company Limited* ( 中和物產株式會社 , “Chuwa Bussan”), CCCC International Holding Limited (中交國際 (香港 )控股有限公司 , “CCCI”), China Airport Construction Group Company Limited* ( 中國民航機場建設集團有限公司 , “CACC”), RB Industrial Park Investment & Development (Hong Kong) Limited * ( 中路 (香港 )園區投資發展有限公司 , “RB Investment”) and CCCC Leasing entered into a capital increase agreement. Pursuant to the capital increase agreement, CCCC Capital, ZPMC, Chuwa Bussan, CCCI, CACC and RB Investment agreed to make a capital increase to CCCC Leasing in accordance with the terms and conditions of the capital increase agreement, respectively, of which, (i) CCCC Capital shall make a capital increase of RMB2,033.7905 million, comprised of the capital contributions of RMB1,190.3105 million in cash, RMB765.3848 million by way of capitalisation of undistributed profits and RMB78.0952 million by way of capitalisation of the surplus reserve; (ii) ZPMC shall make a capital contribution of RMB10.6493 million by way of capitalisation of the surplus reserve; (iii) Chuwa Bussan shall make a capital increase of RMB191.7000 million, comprised of the capital contributions of RMB173.9511 million by way of capitalisation of undistributed profits and RMB17.7489 million by way of capitalisation of the surplus reserve; (iv) CCCI shall make a capital increase of RMB127.8000 million, comprised of the capital contributions of RMB115.9674 million by way of capitalisation of undistributed profits and RMB11.8326 million by way of capitalisation of the surplus reserve; (v) CACC shall make a capital contribution of RMB394.1857 million in cash; and (vi) RB Investment shall make a capital contribution of RMB860.0418 million in cash. On 28 August 2023, CCCC Leasing is owned as to 91% by the Company through its subsidiaries CCCC Capital, Chuwa Bussan and CCCI, and as to 9% by ZPMC. Upon completion of the capital increase, CCCC Leasing will be owned as to 90.2% by the Company through its subsidiaries CCCC Capital, Chuwa Bussan, CCCI and RB Investment. On 28 August 2023, CACC and ZPMC are subsidiaries of CCCG, the controlling Shareholder of the Company which held approximately 59.37% equity interests in the issued ordinary shares of the Company. CACC and ZPMC were thus connected persons of the Company under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As such, the capital increase under the capital increase agreement constituted a connected transaction of the Company under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As the highest applicable percentage ratio in respect of the capital increase exceeded 0.1% but was less than 5%, the Capital Increase was subject to the announcement requirement but exempted from the independent Shareholders’ approval requirement under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For details of the aforesaid connected transaction, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 28 August 2023. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 74 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

3. On 19 October 2023, China Harbour (HK) Zhen Hua Engineering Company Limited* ( 中國港灣 (香港 )振華工程有限公司 , “Zhen Hua HK”) (a subsidiary of the Company) entered into an equity transfer agreement with CCCG Overseas Real Estate Pte. Ltd (“CORE”), pursuant to which, Zhen Hua HK has conditionally agreed to acquire and CORE has conditionally agreed to sell 17.25% equity interest in CORE (USA) Investment Holding LLC (“CORE (USA)”) at a consideration of USD67,826,137.50. On 19 October 2023, CORE (USA) is owned as to 77.9% and 4.85% by Zhen Hua HK and China Communications USA Limited* ( 中交美國有限公司 ) (both being subsidiaries of the Company), respectively, and as to 17.25% by CORE. Upon completion of the acquisition, CORE (USA) will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. On 19 October 2023, CORE was a subsidiary of CCCG, the controlling Shareholder which held approximately 59.47% equity interest in the issued ordinary shares of the Company. CORE was thus a connected person of the Company under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As such, the acquisition under the equity transfer agreement constituted a connected transaction of the Company under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As the highest applicable percentage ratio in respect of the acquisition exceeded 0.1% but was less than 5%, the acquisition was subject to the announcement requirement but exempted from the independent Shareholders’ approval requirement under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For details of the aforesaid connected transaction, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 19 October 2023. The Company is listed on both the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Matters involving connected transactions will comply with the relevant provisions of the listing rules of both places and the requirements of the Administrative Measures of Related-Party (Connected) Transactions of the Company. To promote the coordinated development of CCCG as a whole and based on market demands, the Company, as a major subsidiary of CCCG, also conducts business cooperation with other subsidiaries of CCCG in a coordinated and complementary way to achieve win-win results when necessary, which results in connected transactions. The Company has been in place strict internal control mechanisms before, during and after a connected transaction to safeguard the interests of minority shareholders. The connected transactions of the Company are generally divided into two types, namely continuing connected transactions (daily connected transactions) and one-off connected transactions, subject to the review and decision-making procedures. In 2023, in response to the challenges encountered in managing connected transactions in the course of the Company’s reform and development, the Company focused on the following tasks: 1. Amending and formulating relevant administrative measures for connected transactions to solidify its governance system. The Company implemented the Working Manual for Independent Directors of Listed Companies, actively utilized the supervision functions of the audit and internal control committee under the Board, and effectively strengthened the supervision over significant connected transactions through expressing independent opinions on the fairness of connected transactions of the listed company, thereby safeguarding the legal interests of the Company and all Shareholders. According to its “1+3” institutional system centered on the administrative measures on connected transactions, and supported by the rules for the implementation for continuing connected transactions, the rules for the implementation for one-off connected transactions as well as the rules for evaluation and punishment, the Company has formulated annual special work plans for connected transaction management for three consecutive years, and has established a lifecycle closed- loop management mechanism of “planning at the beginning of the year, monthly supervision, quarterly communication and annual assessment”, thereby creating a comprehensive group- wide vertical management system that aims to achieve “horizontal to the edge, vertical to the bottom and responsibility to the person”. 2. Focusing on tough tasks such as accurate measurement of continuing connected transactions, closed-loop management of one-off connected transactions and addressing disposal for connected subsidiaries from four aspects, namely responsibility administration, training and communication, service support and supervision and assessment, in addition to the Work Plan for Intensifying Risk Management for Related-Party (Connected) Transactions. To this end, the Company adhered to the principle of no occurring unless necessary, made good use of the information system, further strengthened business coordination with relevant departments of the headquarters and raised the awareness of all staff on the compliance of connected transactions. 3. Summarizing and enhancing the performance on the management of connected transactions. The Company invited domestic and overseas legal counsel to introduce the compliance regulatory requirements, key regulatory aspects as well as the regulating processes on connected transactions issued by the regulatory authorities, and to make analysis on certain cases on penalties for breaches of rules occurred recently in the market. 4. Conducting the appraisal work on the management of connected transactions of subsidiaries for the year. To further improve the internal control of the Company, the Company organized its subsidiaries to conduct the self-appraisal on the management of connected transactions for the year, arranged the relevant responsible departments to review the appraised results. At the same time, the Company took the audit results provided by external third-party auditors into account, reviewed and summarized the performance of the subsidiaries on the management of connected transactions for the year, on the basis of which, the Company made a list of excellent subsidiaries and update the list of supervised subsidiaries with an aim to establish a closed-loop management mechanism. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 75 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS 

In respect of the continuing connected transactions of the Group, the Company has made proposals on the annual caps after taking into account the prevailing market price, the historical transaction amount, the Group’s development needs and current capacity, and all the relevant proposals have been considered and approved by the Board or the Shareholders’ meeting (if applicable) in accordance with the Hong Kong Listing Rules and the Rules Governing the Listing of Stocks on Shanghai Stock Exchange. The Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Board of the Company monitored and confirmed the progress of the continuing connected transactions, made proposal on the revision of the annual caps once needed based on the actual situation and transaction amount and submitted the proposal for consideration and approval. The actual transaction amount under the continuing connected transactions of the Company in 2023 were within reasonable and controllable range and were in line with the expectations of the Company. The Company has effective and sufficient control mechanism in place to control the annual caps of continuing connected transactions and ensure such caps will not be exceeded. The control measures adopted by the Company are as follows: (i) leveraging historical experience and operation plans, the Company enters into continuing connected transaction framework agreements for a term of three years and set annual caps on the basis of the assessment on necessity and fairness of potential connected transactions. These agreements and proposed annual caps are subject to necessary decision-making and approval procedures, including but not limited to review and consideration by independent directors, the Audit and Internal Control Committee under the Board, the Board, the Supervisory Committee and the Shareholders’ general meeting of the Company pursuant to their respective authorisation. Implementation will be organized upon approval after review and consideration; (ii) the Company carries out daily supervision on the overall implementation and actual transaction amounts of continuing connected transactions. For financial services agreement and finance lease and commercial factoring agreement, CCCC Finance and CCCC Leasing (subsidiaries of the Company), as non-bank financial institutions, report actual maximum daily balance of credit services and actual amount of finance lease services and commercial factoring services provided on a monthly basis, and predict the transaction amount of the outstanding period of the relevant year on a quarterly basis. For other continuing connected transaction agreements, the subsidiaries of the Company report actual transaction amount (including the actual transaction amount of the relevant quarter and accumulated actual transaction amount) and predict the transaction amount of the outstanding period of the relevant year on a quarterly basis. Meanwhile, the Company will allocate the caps of continuing connected transactions for the next year to the implementers of relevant transactions at the end of every year; (iii) the implementers shall bring forward the need for increasing the caps of continuing connected transactions in time when it occurs during implementation based on changes in business development. The Company will start decision-making procedures for revising caps in due course after assessing necessity and fairness of the continuing connected transactions; (iv) whenever the actual transaction amount of relevant continuing connected transaction reaches 80% of the existing annual caps, the transaction implementers shall make a new prediction on whether the transaction amount of the outstanding period of the relevant year will satisfy operation needs and shall provide the Company with relevant transaction information so that the Company can realize better supervision and start decision-making procedures for revising caps in time after assessing necessity and fairness; and (v) by the end of every year, the Company will make a new prediction about the proposed caps of continuing connected transaction for the next year based on the latest actual situation of the relevant transaction of the current year, and re-assess the plan for the continuing connected transaction for next year after evaluating the necessity and fairness. If the reassessment is consistent with the existing annual caps, the transactions shall be implemented following above procedures, and if it is expected to exceed the caps, the decision-making procedure for revising caps shall be started. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 76 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

1. Mutual Project Contracting Framework Agreement Entered into between the Company and CCCG 

On 15 October 2021, in order to renew the transactions under the original mutual project contracting framework agreement, the Company and CCCG entered into the mutual project contracting framework agreement for a term of three years from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2024, pursuant to which the Group agreed to provide project contracting services to CCCG Group, which may include (i) provision of construction, design, consultation and management services for the construction projects that may be undertaken by CCCG Group; and (ii) design, construction, operation, management and dismantlement of temporary supporting facilities; and CCCG Group agreed to provide the labour and subcontracting services to the Group, which may include (i) provision of professional services for construction projects that may be undertaken by the Group; (ii) design, construction, operation, management and dismantlement of temporary supporting facilities; and (iii) provision of consultation, management and technical services. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement dated 15 October 2021 and the circular dated 25 October 2021 of the Company. The annual caps for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual transaction amounts receivable and payable by the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Project contracting services provided by the Group to CCCG Group 34,554 14,009 

Labour and subcontracting services provided by CCCG Group to the Group 8,232 3,095 

2. Financial Services Agreement Entered into between CCCC Finance and CCCG 

On 15 October 2021, in order to renew the transactions under the original financial services agreement, CCCC Finance and CCCG entered into the financial services agreement for a term of three years from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2024, pursuant to which CCCC Finance agreed to provide deposit services, loan services, guarantee letter services, and other credit services to CCCG Group. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement dated 15 October 2021 and the circular dated 25 October 2021 of the Company. The annual cap for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual maximum daily balance (including the interests accrued thereon) of credit services provided by CCCC Finance to CCCG Group and fees to be charged by CCCC Finance to CCCG Group for provision of other financial services for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Maximum daily balance (including the interests accrued thereon) of credit services provided by CCCC Finance to CCCG Group Loan services under the Financial Services – Deposit Services and Loan Services Framework Agreement 29,078 4,859 

Guarantee letter services under the Financial Services – Guarantee Letter Services Framework Agreement 5,010 1,923 

Bills issuance services and bonds subscription under the Financial Services – Other Credit Services Framework Agreement 1,372 847 REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 77 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

3. Finance Lease and Commercial Factoring Agreement Entered into between CCCC Capital and CCCG 

On 15 October 2021, in order to renew the transactions under the original finance lease framework agreement and to further regulate the commercial factoring services provided by CCCC Leasing to CCCG Group, CCCC Leasing and CCCG entered into the finance lease and commercial factoring agreement for a term of three years from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2024, pursuant to which CCCC Leasing shall provide finance lease services to CCCG Group in respect of the leased assets through direct leasing or sale and leaseback arrangements and commercial factoring services in respect of receivables through factoring or reverse factoring arrangement. On 28 October 2022, pursuant to the actual needs of production and operation, CCCC Leasing, CCCG and CCCC Capital entered into a supplemental agreement to the finance lease and commercial factoring agreement, to change the party to the Finance Lease and Commercial Factoring Agreement from CCCC Leasing to CCCC Capital. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcements dated 15 October 2021 and 28 October 2022 and the circular dated 25 October 2021 of the Company. The annual caps for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual aggregate amount for finance lease services and the commercial factoring services provided by CCCC Capital to CCCG Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Finance lease services provided by CCCC Capital to CCCG Group 6,300 768 

Commercial factoring services provided by CCCC Capital to CCCG Group 7,500 460 

4. Mutual Product Sales and Purchase Agreement entered into between the Company and CCCG 

On 9 September 2021, in order to renew the transactions under the original mutual product sales and purchase agreement, the Company and CCCG entered into the mutual product sales and purchase agreement for a term of three years from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2024, the Group agreed to sell and CCCG Group agreed to purchase material products, including material and equipment, components, etc., and CCCG Group agreed to sell and the Group agreed to purchase engineering products, including engineering ships (e.g. leveling ship, crane ship, etc.), engineering machines (e.g. shield machines), steel structure products, etc. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement dated 9 September 2021 and the circular dated 25 October 2021 of the Company. The annual caps for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual aggregate amount for the fees receivable by the Group from CCCG Group and payable by the Group to CCCG Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Sales of material products to CCCG Group by the Group 3,877 831 

Purchase of engineering products from CCCG Group by the Group 4,532 2,889 REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 78 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

5. Leasing and Asset Management Services Framework Agreement Entered into between the Company and CCCG 

On 9 September 2021, in order to renew the transactions under the original leasing framework agreement, the Company and CCCG entered into the leasing framework agreement for a term of three years from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2024, pursuant to which, CCCG Group agreed to lease the leased assets to the Group for the Group’s production and operation use. The leased assets mainly include certain buildings, plants and auxiliary equipment and facilities for production and operation owned by CCCG. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement dated 9 September 2021 and the circular dated 25 October 2021 of the Company. The annual cap for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual aggregate amount for the leasing by CCCG Group to the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Leasing of certain buildings, plants and auxiliary equipment, facilities, etc. for production and operation by CCCG Group to the Group 795 332 

6. Product Leasing Framework Agreement Entered into by the Company and CCCC Haifeng 

On 30 August 2022, the Company and CCCC Haifeng entered into a product leasing framework agreement, pursuant to which CCCC Haifeng Group agreed to lease engineering products to the Group for a period commencing from 30 August 2022 to 31 December 2024. On 30 October 2023, the Company and CCCC Haifeng entered into a supplemental agreement to revise the existing annual cap of rents to be received by CCCC Haifeng Group for leasing of engineering products to the Group under the existing Product Leasing Framework Agreement for the year ending 31 December 2023 from RMB138.00 million to RMB277.80 million according to the business development. CCCC Haifeng is a subsidiary of the Company. On 30 October 2023, CCCG (being the controlling shareholder of the Company holding approximately 59.47% interests in the issued ordinary shares of the Company) holds 20% interests in CCCC Haifeng through its subsidiary, CCCC Industrial Investment. Therefore, CCCC Haifeng is a connected subsidiary of the Company pursuant to Rule 14A.16 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As such, the supplemental agreement and the transactions contemplated thereunder constitute continuing connected transactions of the Company under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As the highest applicable percentage ratio of the revised annual cap under the supplemental agreement exceeded 0.1% but was less than 5%, the supplemental agreement and the transactions contemplated thereunder were subject to the announcement requirement, but exempt from the independent Shareholders’ approval requirement under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 30 August 2022 and 30 October 2023. The annual cap for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual aggregate amount for the leasing by CCCC Haifeng to the Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Leasing of engineering products by CCCC Haifeng Group to the Group 277.80 188 REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 79 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

7. Labor Subcontracting and Professional Subcontracting Framework Agreement Entered into by the Company and CCCC Haifeng 

On 30 October 2023, the Company and CCCC Haifeng entered into a labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting framework agreement, pursuant to which the Group agreed to provide the labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting services to CCCC Haifeng Group from the date of the agreement (i.e., 30 October 2023) to 31 December 2023. CCCC Haifeng is a subsidiary of the Company. On 30 October 2023, CCCG (being the controlling Shareholder of the Company holding approximately 59.47% interests in the issued ordinary shares of the Company) held 20% interests in CCCC Haifeng through its subsidiary, CCCC Industrial Investment. Therefore, CCCC Haifeng was a connected subsidiary of the Company pursuant to Rule 14A.16 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As such, labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting framework agreement and the transactions contemplated thereunder constituted continuing connected transactions of the Company under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. As the highest applicable percentage ratio of the proposed annual cap under the labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting framework agreement exceeded 0.1% but was less than 5%, the labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting framework agreement and the transactions contemplated thereunder were subject to the announcement requirement, but are exempt from the independent Shareholders’ approval requirement under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For details of the aforesaid continuing connected transactions, please refer to the announcement of the Company dated 30 October 2023. The annual cap for the continuing connected transactions described above as compared with the actual aggregate amount for the labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting services provided by the Group to CCCC Haifeng Group for the year ended 31 December 2023 are set out as follows: 

Annual cap for 2023 Actual amount for 2023 (RMB million) (RMB million) 

Labor subcontracting and professional subcontracting services provided by the Group to CCCC Haifeng Group 122.75 102 

Explanation on the Continuing Connected Transactions of CCCC Finance 

CCCC Finance is a non-bank financial institution established in July 2013 with the approval of the China Banking Regulatory Commission. CCCC Finance is jointly funded by CCCG and the Company (5% of CCCG, 95% of CCCC) with a registered capital of RMB3.5 billion. As a specialized financial services company, CCCC Finance provides various professional financial services such as fund settlement, deposits, credit, entrusted loans, financial leasing, financial and financing consultants. The deposit and loan connected transactions between CCCC Finance and its connected persons are one of its main businesses. By absorbing the deposits of the members of CCCG and granting loans with reference to market pricing to improve the efficiency of capital use, which will have positive significance for the development of the Company and benefit the interests of the Company and all Shareholders. 

1. Pricing Principle 

The financial services provided by CCCC Finance to connected persons adopted a market-based fair pricing principle. When providing deposit service, the interest rate of deposit interest received by connected persons is not higher than the interest rate range set by the People’s Bank of China for similar deposits during the same period, nor higher than the interest rate of similar deposit provided by CCCC Finance to other member of the Group during the same period. When providing loan services, the daily average amount of loan to connected persons is no more than 75% of the daily average deposit balance in CCCC Finance. The loan interest rate is implemented with reference to the quoted interest rate in the loan market, and is not lower than the interest rate applicable to the same period and similar loan services provided by major domestic commercial banks. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 80 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

Explanation on the Continuing Connected Transactions of CCCC Finance (continued) 

2. Risk Management and Review Process 

CCCC Finance has established certain internal rules and policies related to the management and control of operational risks and credit risks in accordance with relevant PRC laws and regulations regarding financial services, with a relatively complete internal control system. CCCC Finance has established a standardized corporate governance structure to ensure effective internal control, including the implementation of the general manager responsibility system under the leadership of the board of directors, established an organizational structure based on decision-making, implementation and regulatory regime, and formulated different work procedures and risk control systems based on different duties. CCCC Finance monitored transactions in a timely manner through centralized management, safe and effective business system. The decision-making process of CCCC Finance is a three-tier structure of the shareholders’ meeting, the board of directors and the general manager’s office. CCCC Finance has four professional committees, namely the Audit Committee, the Risk Management Committee, the Credit Review Committee and the Investment Decision Committee, which manage and control the business, risks, internal control and major investments of CCCC Finance. As a banking financial institution, CCCC Finance manages its accounts in strict compliance with the Measures for Payment and Settlement and Measures for the Administration of RMB Bank Settlement Accounts issued by the People’s Bank of China, and ensures the safety of the funds of the account holders in accordance with the laws. The accounts opened by the Group and connected persons with CCCC Finance are independent of each other, and there is no interchange of funds in the accounts. CCCC Finance conducts credit review before conducting business, and perform credit rating and credit asset rating based on internal rating standards, and regularly arrange post-loan inspections (every six months). During the course of business, CCCC Finance also assigns dedicated personnel to follow up the utilization of loan. If the use of the loan is changed, CCCC Finance will recover the entire principal and interest, and impose an additional penalty of 100% interest. The borrowing contract entered into between CCCC Finance and connected persons expressly provides that, if connected persons does not repay the principal and interest within the repayment period as stipulated in the contract, CCCC Finance is entitled to require connected persons to repay the principal and interest within a certain period of time, and charge a penalty interest on the overdue borrowings in accordance with the contract, generally at 50% of the benchmarking rate for the same period of borrowings. CCCG unconditionally and irrevocably warrants to the Group that during the term of the Financial Services Agreement, CCCG will (i) guarantee the full performance of obligations and liabilities of connected persons under the Financial Services Agreement; and (ii) indemnify the Group against any loss suffered by the Group as a result of connected persons’ failure to meet its obligations and liabilities under the Financial Services Agreement or the terms thereof. In the future, CCCC Finance will adopt similar measures to safeguard the interests of the Group from losses when providing connected persons with other financial services within the scope of its operations. When a guarantee is issued to connected persons, relevant protection terms will be specified in the signed agreement. If CCCC Finance receives a statement of claim from the beneficiary, CCCC Finance is entitled to directly deduct the deposits agreed in the agreement and all the amounts in the account opened by connected persons with CCCC Finance for external payment (where the amounts is a time deposit, CCCC Finance is entitled to directly deduct the money regardless of whether the deposit has matured or not, and any loss arising from such deduction shall be borne by connected persons themselves). If the currency of the deducted deposits is different from the currency of the debt to be repaid, it should be converted into the same currency of the debt to be repaid at the exchange rate announced by CCCC Finance at the time of the deduction. In the event that the amounts of the deducted deposits is not sufficient for external payments claim, connected persons shall remit the corresponding amounts to the account opened by connected persons with CCCC Finance within three banking days from the date of receipt of the notice of payment from CCCC Finance at the latest for CCCC Finance to make external payments claim. If connected persons do not make repayment within the repayment period, CCCC Finance is entitled to require connected persons to make such repayment within a certain period of time, and charge a penalty interest on the overdue borrowings in accordance with the contract, generally at 50% of the benchmarking rate for the same period of borrowings. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 81 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

Explanation on the Continuing Connected Transactions of CCCC Finance (continued) 

3. Risk Control Measures of CCCC over CCCC Finance 

(i) The Company will arrange senior management to be responsible for monitoring the implementation and transactions of the Financial Services Agreement; (ii) The senior management is required to report to the chairman, finance supervisor or chief financial officer and other senior management in a timely manner when any issue is identified. In the event that no issues are identified, such senior management are also required to report on a monthly basis to the chairman, finance supervisor or chief financial officer and other senior management regarding the implementation of the Financial Services Agreement; and (iii) The Company will engage a third-party auditor to conduct quarterly audits or reviews of the implementation of the Financial Services Agreement and the adequacy of the internal control system of CCCC Finance, and report the results of the audits or reviews to the independent non-executive Directors and Supervisors of the Company. 

4. 2023 Deposit and Loan Business of CCCC Finance 

In 2023, the balance of deposits from connected persons to CCCC Finance amounted to approximately RMB9,291 million, accounting for 18.97% of the total deposit of CCCC Finance, and paid interest of RMB88 million to connected persons. The maximum daily average balance in respect of provision of credit services to connected persons and corresponding interests amounted to RMB7,630 million. 

Explanation on the Continuing Connected Transactions of CCCC Leasing 

CCCC Leasing was established in Shanghai Free-Trade Zone in May 2014 with registered capital of RMB5 billion. The shareholding structure of CCCC Leasing as at 31 December 2023 is as follows: 90.2% in total held by CCCC and its subsidiaries (62.42% by CCCC Capital, 11.45% by Chuwa Bussan Company Limited, 7.64% by CCCC International Holding Limited and 8.69% by RB Industrial Park Investment & Development (Hong Kong) Limited), and 9.8% held by subsidiaries of CCCG (5.82% by ZPMC and 3.98% by China Airport Construction Group Company Limited). In 2017, CCCC’s corporate credit rating was AAA. CCCC Leasing devotes itself to developing industry and finance, and provides comprehensive investment and financing services including finance leases, operating leases, and commercial factoring, expanding the financing channels for the principal business for CCCC. To expand business, CCCC Leasing offers finance leases to CCCG and its subsidiaries at the same time and gains the profit. The above businesses are in the interests of the Company and the Shareholders as a whole. 

1. Pricing Principle 

CCCC Leasing provides CCCG with finance leases and commercial factoring services. Finance leases include, without limitation, direct leases, after-sale leaseback and other forms. Fixed assets under the finance leases service mainly includes construction equipment, hotel equipment and device, and commercial properties and its equipment. Commercial factoring includes, without limitation, recourse factoring agreements and non-recourse factoring agreements and other forms. The finance leases between CCCC Leasing and connected persons (CCCG and its subsidiaries) adopted a market-based fair pricing principle. CCCC Leasing entered into the finance lease transactions with connected persons at the interest rate which increased certain percentage according to the loan rates of the bank in the corresponding period (specific percentage depends on the credit information of the lessee) and is negotiated by CCCC Leasing and the lease. CCCC Leasing provided CCCG with the pricing principle of commercial factoring service, the quoted price of which is offered by CCCC Leasing and determined by CCCG after negotiation with CCCC Leasing with reference to the quoted price for the factoring service of same type offered by the independent third parties and with consideration for relevant factors. Designated departments and personnel of CCCG are responsible for reviewing the quoted price of the factoring of same type by the independent third parties and market trading price. 

2. Risk Control and Audit Procedures 

CCCC Leasing formulated certain internal rules and policies for managing and controlling the operating risks with a comprehensive internal control system. CCCC Leasing has established standardized corporate governance structure to ensure the effectiveness of its internal control, including the implementation of the general manager responsibility system under the leadership of the board of directors, established an organizational structure based on decision-making, implementation and regulatory regime, and formulated different work procedures and risk control systems based on different duties. CCCC Leasing monitored transactions in a timely manner through centralized management, safe and effective business system. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 82 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONTINUING CONNECTED TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

Explanation on the Continuing Connected Transactions of CCCC Leasing (continued) 

3. Finance Leases of CCCC Leasing in 2023 

For the year 2023, CCCC Leasing entered into finance lease transactions with the connected persons with the total amount of RMB768 million, accounting for 2.07% of the total amount of the finance leases of CCCC Leasing for that year. For the year 2023, CCCC Leasing entered into commercial factoring transactions with the connected persons with the total amount of RMB460 million, accounting for 7.94% of the total amount of the commercial factoring of CCCC Leasing for that year. The independent non-executive Directors have reviewed the relevant agreements for the above non-exempt continuing connected transactions of the Group and the transactions contemplated thereunder and are of the opinion that such transactions are: (i) entered into in the ordinary and usual course of business of the Group; (ii) conducted either on normal commercial terms or on terms no less favourable to the Group than terms available to or from independent third parties; and (iii) conducted on the term of the relevant transaction agreements, which are fair and reasonable and in the interests of the Company and its Shareholders as a whole. The auditors of the Company have performed certain procedures and issued a letter to the Board in accordance with Rule 14A.56 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, stating that nothing has come to its attention that may cause it to believe that such transactions: (i) have not been approved by the Board; (ii) were not entered into, in all material respects, in accordance with the pricing policy of the Company if the transactions involved the provision of goods or services by the Group; (iii) were not entered into, in all material respects, in accordance with the relevant agreements governing these transactions; and (iv) the actual annual amounts have exceeded the relevant caps as previously disclosed in the announcements of the Company. 

Others 

Except the aforesaid connected transactions, the Group did not enter into any other connected transactions or continuing connected transactions which should comply with the reporting, announcement and independent Shareholders’ approval requirements under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For related party transactions discussed in Note 46 of the audited consolidated financial statements which are also connected transactions under Chapter 14A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, the Company had made disclosure when required under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 83 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# EMPLOYEES 

As at 31 December 2023, the Group had 144,813 employees that had signed labor contracts with the Group. The breakdown of employees as at 31 December 2023 was as follows: 

1. Categorized by Major 

Major Number of Employees Percentage 

Production staff 18,634 12.87% Sales staff 10,837 7.48% Technician 90,312 62.36% Financial staff 9,677 6.68% Administrative staff 15,353 10.60% Total 144,813 100.0% 

2. Categorized by Degree Held 

Number of Employees Percentage 

Doctor 613 0.42% Master 16,548 11.43% Bachelor 100,390 69.32% Junior college degree 13,006 8.98% High school degree (associate degree) and other 14,256 9.84% Total 144,813 100.0% Note: The percentage figures mentioned above have been rounded to the nearest one decimal places. In accordance with applicable regulations, the Group makes contributions to the employees’ pension plan, medical insurance plan, unemployment insurance plan, maternity insurance plan and personal injury insurance plan. The amount of contributions is based on the specified percentages of employees’ aggregate salaries as provided for by relevant PRC authorities. The Group also makes contributions to an employee housing fund according to applicable PRC regulations. In addition to statutory contributions, the Group also provides voluntary benefits to current employees and retired employees. Current employees of the Group are also entitled to performance-based annual bonus. Please refer to Note 29 of the audited consolidated financial statement for details of the payroll and social security payable by the Company during the year ended 31 December 2023. Please refer to Note 9 of the audited consolidated financial statement for information about the emoluments of the Directors and chief executives. Please refer to Note 33 of the audited consolidated financial statements for details of the supplementary pension subsidies and medical benefits provided by the Company to its employees. REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 84 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# BUSINESS REVIEW 

Please refer to the section of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” in this report for the principal risks and uncertainties of the Group. Please refer to the section of “Business Overview” in this report for business review and business outlook of the Group. 

# MATERIAL LAWSUITS AND ARBITRATIONS 

As at 31 December 2023, as far as the Directors are aware, except as disclosed in Note 41 of the audited consolidated financial statements, the Group was not involved in any material litigation or arbitration and no material litigation or claim was pending or threatened or made against the Group. 

# AUDITORS 

The 2022 annual general meeting of the Company held on 16 June 2023 considered and approved the re-appointments of Ernst & Young as the Company’s international auditor and Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP as the Company’s domestic auditor for a term starting from the date of passing the resolution at the 2022 annual general meeting and ending at the 2023 annual general meeting of the Company. Ernst & Young has audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with IFRS. The Company has retained the appointment of Ernst & Young and Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP since the 2015 annual general meeting of the Company held on 16 June 2016. The main construction content of the Beigang Pool Maintenance Dredging Project in the Nanshui Operation Area of the Gaolan Port District in Zhuhai, Guangdong, is the maintenance dredging of the harbor pools for three berths and communal areas within the port, with a project volume of approximately 3 million cubic meters. The project has completely opened up the deep-water channel of the Gaolan Port District in Zhuhai, achieving a leapfrog development of the Gaolan Port District. REPORT OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 86 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

During the Reporting Period, the Supervisory Committee of the Company fulfilled its duties faithfully authorized by the Company Law, the Articles of Association and the Rules of Procedures for Meetings of the Supervisory Committee, focused on the Company’s deployment on “Year for High-quality Development Enhancement”, earnestly reviewed various resolutions, regularly attended the general meetings and Board meetings and actively carried out the research and inspections, supervised on the lawful and compliant operation of the Company, the duty performance of the Directors and the senior management, the decision making of significant events, effectively safeguarding the interest of the Company and shareholders, and promoting the high-quality development of the Company. 

# I. WORK OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE (i) Convening and Attendance of the Meetings 

During the Reporting Period, the Supervisory Committee held 10 meetings and considered 51 resolutions. It considered 40 resolutions on routine supervision matters, including regular reports, financial reports and annual operation objectives of the Company; considered 10 resolutions on related-party (connected) transactions, which ensured that the plans and relevant annual caps for related-party (connected) transactions were determined in a scientific and reasonable manner and the pricing of related-party (connected) transactions was fair under transparent procedures; considered 1 resolutions on guarantees with an amount of approximately RMB4 billion, which ensured that such guarantees satisfied the Company’s development requirements and would not undermine the interest of the Company and shareholders. The number of Supervisors attending the meetings and the procedures for convening such meetings were all in compliance with the provisions of the Company Law and the Articles of Association. The resolutions adopted at such meetings have gone through the disclosure procedures in accordance with relevant requirements set by Shanghai Stock Exchange and Hong Kong Stock Exchange. During the reporting period, the Supervisory Committee attended 3 general meetings and 16 board meetings to ensure the review process and content of the resolutions are compliant with laws and regulations, and supervise on the duty performance of the directors, and attended 24 meetings of the President’s Office to fully understand the operation and management information of the Company and lay a solid foundation for the Supervisory Committee to enhance its value of supervision. 

(ii) Focus of Supervision 

During the reporting period, the Supervisory Committee adhered to the goal of building a word-class enterprise in “technology, management and quality”, and accelerated the high-quality development of the Company. Focusing on the Company’s implementation of major national strategies and the completion of various indicators such as “profit and five rates ( 一利五率 )”, a special inspection for “high-quality development of the sub-subsidiaries” was carried out. To ensure the practical results of supervisory inspections, the Supervisory Committee selected units that are of high concern to the Company, have a large number of units at the grassroots level, or encounter certain difficulties in the promotion process, aiming to not only review but also assist in their enhancement. During the supervisory inspections, the Supervisory Committee carefully reviewed the implementation of relevant systems such as the “Guiding Opinions for Comprehensive Deepening Reform and High-quality Development of CCCG’s Sub-subsidiaries” and work lists based on audit results, carried out inspections on CCCC Second Harbour and the Fifth Branch Company ( 第五分公司 ) and Construction Engineering Company ( 建築工程公司 ) thereunder, as well as CCCC Construction Group ( 中交建築集團 ) and the Second Engineering Company ( 第二工程公司 ) and the Fourth Engineering Company ( 第四工程公司 ) thereunder through listening to special reports, visiting project sites, conducting panel discussions and other methods, and through directly visiting the front line of project, conducted research and inspection on the site of Shuangliu Yangtze River Bridge Project of CCCC Second Harbour and held research discussions with frontline employees. To ensure the high-quality of this research, the Supervisory Committee innovated its working methods, conducted preliminary inspections on the target units, and applied on-site questioning to ensure that the research reached the grassroots units, identified problems, resolved difficulties, and proposed suggestions, contributing high-quality supervisory value. In the supervision and inspection, the Supervisory Committee identified the following issues existed in the promotion of high-quality development of enterprises: firstly, the market development of some sub-subsidiaries regarding their own qualifications is hard to meet the needs of business development until further enhancement; secondly, the overall development level needs to be enhanced, as the development of sub-subsidiaries is uneven; thirdly, the gearing ratio of some sub-subsidiaries needs to be optimized; fourthly, the development quality of some sub-subsidiaries needs to be improved rapidly, with some indicators requiring urgent improvement; fifthly, the core technology of some sub-subsidiaries needs to be enhanced, as the research and development level of certain key technologies is still in a catching-up phase; sixthly, the local development of some sub-subsidiaries needs to be enhanced, and those units faced significant competitive challenges; seventhly, the reform and management of some projects need to be enhanced, with the management level in terms of standardization and leanness requiring improvement. REPORT OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 87 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# I. WORK OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE (CONTINUED) 

(ii) Focus of Supervision (continued) 

In response to the said issues and risks, the Supervisory Committee has made targeted advice: firstly, enhance the coordination, integrity and proactivity of high-quality development of sub-subsidiaries, consolidating the advantageous resources for centralized deployment to cultivate a batch of “leading” enterprises; secondly, improve the core competitiveness and core functions of high-quality development of sub-subsidiaries through comprehensive enhancement of reform. Strengthening the reform of market-oriented mechanism, continuing to promote the “four capabilities ( 四能 )” reform, and building a new operating responsibility system covering all staff; thirdly, promote the comprehensive implementation of high-quality development measures of sub-subsidiaries. Transforming the “ six modernisations ( 六化 )” into various measures for high-quality development of enterprises, ensuring thorough and proper implementation; fourthly, improve the level of refined development of enterprises, especially in terms of project control. Optimizing project management mechanisms, seeking benefits from refined management and digital empowerment, and comprehensively enhancing profitability. The Supervisory Committee focused on the issues identified as well as the opinions and advice thereon, and formulated the “Special Inspection Report on High-quality Development of Sub-subsidiaries ( 《三級公司高品質發展專項檢查報告》 )”. The management of the Company attached great importance to such report and issued instructions in the first place, in which they emphasized the importance of taking solid steps to address the main responsibilities towards the contracting project market, establishing special companies to refine the main business and enhance the expertise segment. They requested a dedicated conference to explore the development strategies of sub-subsidiaries in terms of professionalization, regionalization, qualification, and materialization. The Company’s party committee had conducted a special research into the high-quality growth of these sub-subsidiaries, reviewed the achievements and clarified the priorities for progress. They had also updated the assessment criteria for high-quality development of the sub-subsidiaries to facilitate the effective transformation of the recommendations from the Supervisory Committee as specific measures for enhancing the quality of growth of these sub-subsidiaries. Relevant enterprises highly valued the issues identified by the Supervisory Committee, took prompt action and formulated a working list to specify the working nodes, which strongly promoted the high-quality development of the enterprises and showed the value of supervision of the Supervisory Committee. 

# II. INDEPENDENT OPINIONS OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE (i) Overall Assessment of the Management and the Performance 

During the reporting period, the profound changes unseen in a century accelerates their evolution, and external environment has become more complex, severe, and uncertain. The economic recovery and growth still face some problems, such as a lack of effective demand, overcapacity in some industries, weak public expectations, and many lingering risks and hidden dangers. Furthermore, there are blockages in domestic economic flows. Given the severe internal and external situation, the Company earnestly fulfilled the powers and obligations conferred by the Company Law and the Articles of Association, adhered to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, closely followed the main line of “Year of Deepening High-quality Development”, and promoted the Company to steadily progress and improve, with the concept, path, mechanism, and achievements of high-quality development continuously deepening. The Company has been rated as a Level A enterprise in the business performance appraisal organized by the SASAC for the 18 consecutive year, has achieved “6 consecutive A” in the state-owned enterprise party-building responsibility system assessment, and has ranked the first among Chinese enterprises in ENR’s Top International Contractors for 17 consecutive year, marking a new stage in high-quality development. In the meantime, the Supervisory Committee held the view that the Company should focus on the main line of “Year of Deepening High-quality Development”, continuously strengthen the effectiveness of reforms, enhance management capabilities, and intensify risk prevention and control, in order to accelerate the move towards high-quality development. The Supervisory Committee suggested that: firstly, significantly improve the quality and efficiency of development by effectively improving operational efficiency, profitability, asset quality, and other indicators; secondly, significantly enhance the capability for independent scientific and technological innovation, and further highlight the key, foundational, and leading roles of technology and talent in high-quality development; thirdly, significantly improve the modernization level of the industrial system, seize the opportunities of the new round of industrial revolution, drive industrial innovation with technological innovation, optimize the Company’s industrial layout, and promote the upgrading of the industrial structure; fourthly, significantly enhance the effectiveness of reform empowerment, accurately identify the main directions for deepening reform, and make precise moves and breakthroughs; fifthly, significantly enhance the effectiveness of major risk preventing and defusing by taking the initiative, adopting multiple measures, and sparing no efforts in risk preventing and defusing with a combination of measures; sixthly, significantly enhance the leading and safeguarding role of party building, resolutely maintain the “two upholds”, and ensure that the central government’s deployments and the SASAC’s requirements are fully and faithfully implemented. REPORT OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 88 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# II. INDEPENDENT OPINIONS OF THE SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 

# (CONTINUED) 

(ii) Independent Opinions on Specific Matters 

Firstly, keep the corporate operation in compliance with laws and regulations. During the reporting period, the Company operated strictly in accordance with the Company Law, the Securities Law, the Articles of Association and other relevant policies and regulations, and each of the decision-making procedures complied with laws and regulations. The Directors and the senior management of the Company worked diligently, and they had no violation of laws, regulations and the Articles of Association or act that was detrimental to the interests of the Company and the shareholders. Secondly, ensure the financial position to be objective and true. During the reporting period, the Company prepared the financial statements in accordance with the Enterprise Accounting System, the Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises and other relevant requirements. The financial report of the Company for 2022 was objective and true, and the accounting firm issued the audit report with the standard unqualified opinion, which was objective and fair. Thirdly, use the proceeds raised in compliance with regulations. During the reporting period, the Company used the proceeds in strict compliance with the relevant requirements, and the actual utilization of the proceeds was in line with the committed purposes without prejudice to the interests of the Company and the Shareholders. Fourthly, ensure the fairness and justness of related-party (connected) transactions. During the reporting period, all related-party (connected) transactions conducted by the Company complied with the requirements of laws, regulations, and the Company’s systems. These transactions were conducted at fair market prices after thorough discussion and cautious decision-making by the Board and the management as well as the legitimate supervision of the Supervisory Committee under the principle of making compensation for equal value, and followed the statutory approval procedures while strictly managed and monitored the implementation. The related-party (connected) transactions remained within the scope of approval, and there was no act that was detrimental to the interests of the Company and the shareholders. Fifthly, ensure the authenticity and accuracy of the internal assessment. During the reporting period, there was no act that violated the Guidelines for the Internal Control of Listed Companies and the Basic Standard for Enterprise Internal Control. The Internal Control Assessment Report of the Company for 2022 gave a comprehensive, objective and true view of the actual conditions of the Company’s internal control. Sixthly, manage and regulate the disclosure of the inside information. During the reporting period, the Company recorded matters related to the inside information in a timely manner. There were no instances found of the Company’s Directors, Supervisors, and senior management, as well as relevant insiders buying or selling shares based on inside information prior to the disclosure of material and sensitive information that may affect the share price of the Company. The phase II project of ecological wetland restoration for the farmland reclamation and wetland restoration in Zaozha Dian Lake, Xiong’an New Area, Hebei, accounts for approximately one-seventh of the area of the Baiyangdian Lake basin. The main construction contents include water system dredging projects, healthy wetland projects, and ancillary facilities projects, and other projects. The project is of great significance in restoring the ecological function of wetland in Baiyangdian Lake and improving the regional ecological environment. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 90 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# OVERVIEW 

As a both H share and A share company, the Company operates in strict compliance with the requirements of the applicable laws, administrative regulations and regulatory documents, including the Company Law, the Securities Law and relevant rules of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in relation to corporate information disclosure, the management and services of investor relations. In addition, the Company amended the Articles of Association and the related internal governance rules in 2011, 2012, 2015, 2017, 2020 and 2021 according to the requirements of the laws and regulations of the Code of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies, Rules for Shareholders’ General Meetings of Listed Companies, the Guidelines for the Articles of Association of Listed Companies and the Rules Governing the Listing of Stocks on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. As a result, the Company has set up a corporate governance system that complies with the regulatory requirements for listed companies and has further enhanced its corporate governance standard. During the reporting period, the Company had effectively implemented the corporate governance rules, including the Articles of Association, the Rules of Procedures for General Meetings, the Rules of Procedures for Board Meetings, the Working Manual of Independent Directors, the Rules of Procedures for the Supervisory Committee Meetings and the Working Rules of the President. The general meetings, Board meetings and Supervisory Committee meetings are convened independently and efficiently with their respective duties and obligations fully fulfilled. 

# CORPORATE CULTURE 

CCCC is a leading global comprehensive service provider of ultra-large infrastructure. Bearing in mind the country’s most fundamental interests, CCCC has been forging ahead under the strategic guidance of quality development with the sentiment and strength of a national master. In recent years, CCCC has formed a scientific and comprehensive value system based on five dimensions: corporate mission, corporate vision, corporate spirit, corporate goals and value orientation. CCCC Mission Consolidate the foundation, cultivate the way, and carry out the CCCC’s mission CCCC Vision Make the world more smooth, make the city more livable, make the life more colorful CCCC Spirit Blend with the world and build without borders Development Goal Build a word-class enterprise with global competitiveness in technology, management and quality Value Orientation Respect these talented people who can create value, regardless of their backgrounds The Company actively constructs the core value system of its corporate culture and continuously improves the top-level design of the corporate culture. It has issued a series of documents such as the corporate culture construction plan, and published a comprehensive system identification handbook and cartoon images for employee behavior norms. It has conducted special training on the historical and cultural development of the enterprise, promoted the integration of culture into the entire management process, advanced the approach of cultivating people through culture and educating people with culture, and focused on creating a favorable cultural atmosphere for the high-quality development of the Company, thereby leading all management and staff to perceive, practice and inherit the corporate culture and gathering tremendous strength for the accelerated construction of a world-class enterprise with “Three Orientations ( 三型 )”. The Company firmly believes that a sound corporate culture is an important driving force for corporate development and an important way to increase the cohesiveness and synergy of all parties concerned. CCCC will continuously improve the construction of its corporate culture system so as to bring in cultural momentum for quality corporate development. 

# COMPLIANCE WITH THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE 

The Company is committed to high standards of corporate governance. The Board believes that the Company complied with all code provisions as set out in Part 2 of Appendix C1 (Corporate Governance Code) to the Hong Kong Listing Rules for the year ended 31 December 2023. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 91 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1. Composition of the Board of Directors 

As at 31 December 2023, the Board consisted of eight Directors, including three executive Directors, one non-executive Director and four independent non-executive Directors. Members of the Board were as follows: Chairman of the Board: Wang Tongzhou Executive Directors: Wang Tongzhou, Wang Haihuai and Liu Xiang Non-executive Director: Mi Shuhua 1Independent non-executive Directors: Liu Hui, Chan Wing Tak Kevin, Wu Guangqi and Zhou Xiaowen The Company has appointed a sufficient number of independent non-executive Directors in compliance with the Rule 3.10A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules which requires that independent non-executive directors shall represent at least one-third of the board of a listed company. The Board has established four specialized committees, namely the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee 2 , the Nomination Committee, the Remuneration and the Appraisal Committee as well as the Audit and Internal Control Committee, of which the Audit and Internal Control Committee and the Remuneration and the Appraisal Committee are all comprised of external Directors, while the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee and the Nomination Committee comprise a majority of external Directors. The Board complies with the requirements of the modern enterprise system with Chinese characteristics and the Listing Rules, and has a mature and sound organization, which operates in a scientific and standardized manner and fully demonstrates its role. The Company has established a comprehensive and scientific mechanism to ensure that the Directors are fully informed of the relevant information of the Company and can express their views and opinions independently. The Company has compiled the “Work Plan for Guaranteeing the Performance of External Directors” and has established six working mechanisms, including the mechanism for obtaining information on the production and operation by the Directors, the mechanism for “Enquiries on Corporate Situation”, the mechanism for investigation and research, and the mechanism for the convener of Directors. The Company has established a Directors’ reporting meeting mechanism whereby the management of the Company makes special reports to the Directors at special reporting meetings on major and complex Board resolutions to assist the Directors in fully and comprehensively studying the feasibility and reasonableness of the relevant resolutions. In 2023, the Company convened 11 Directors’ reporting meetings, at which 76 proposals were discussed. The Company has received the confirmation on independence from each of the independent non-executive Directors for the year 2023 and the Company considers each independent non-executive Director to be independent. Pursuant to the Articles of Association, the term of office for Directors (including independent non-executive Directors) is three years, which is renewable upon re-election and re-appointment and each independent non-executive Director shall not serve that position for more than six consecutive years in order to ensure the independence. 1 Mr. Mi Shuhua retired as the non-executive Director of the Company on 15 January 2024. 2 The Strategy and Investment Committee was renamed as the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee with effect from 28 March 2024, as considered and approved at the 31st meeting of the fifth session of the Board. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 92 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

2. Shareholders’ General Meetings 

In 2023, the Company held four shareholders’ general meetings. The table below sets out the details of shareholders’ general meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings Attended 

Wang Tongzhou 1Wang Haihuai 2Liu Xiang 2Sun Ziyu (Note 1) 0Mi Shuhua (Note 2) 4Liu Hui 4Chan Wing Tak Kevin 3Wu Guangqi 4Zhou Xiaowen 4Note 1: Mr. Sun Ziyu retired as the executive Director on 26 April 2023. Note 2: Mr. Mi Shuhua retired as the non-executive Director of the Company on 15 January 2024. 

3. Board Meetings 

In 2023, the Company held 16 Board meetings to discuss the fundamental system, the internal control system, the establishment of subsidiaries, fund raising and investment opportunities, the appointment of the senior management of the Company. The table below sets out the details of Board meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Wang Tongzhou 16 15 1 100% Wang Haihuai 16 16 0 100% Liu Xiang 16 15 1 100% Sun Ziyu (Note 1) 5 5 0 100% Mi Shuhua (Note 2) 16 16 0 100% Liu Hui 16 16 0 100% Chan Wing Tak Kevin 16 15 1 100% Wu Guangqi 16 16 0 100% Zhou Xiaowen 16 16 0 100% Note 1: Mr. Sun Ziyu retired as the executive Director on 26 April 2023. Note 2: Mr. Mi Shuhua retired as the non-executive Director of the Company on 15 January 2024. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 93 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

4. Responsibilities and Operations of the Board 

The principal responsibilities of the Board are, among other things, making decisions on business strategies, business plans, material investment plans, formulating annual financial budget, proposing profit distribution plan, appointing and dismissing the president of the Company and implementing Shareholders’ resolutions. There are currently four committees established under the Board, being the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee, the Audit and Internal Control Committee, the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee and the Nomination Committee. Each committee has its respective operation rules and reports to the Board regularly. The division of power between the Board and senior management complies with the Articles of Association and relevant regulations. The chairman of the Board is responsible for ensuring that the Directors perform their duties properly and ensuring discussions on material matters are on a timely basis. Pursuant to the Articles of Association, the president is responsible to the Board and is delegated the authority to, among other things, oversee the operation and management of the Company, implement the decisions of the Board, carry out investment plans and establish an internal management system. While at all times the Board retains full responsibility for guiding and monitoring the Company in discharging its duties, the Board has also delegated the responsibility of implementing its strategies and the day- to-day operation to the management of the Company under the leadership of the executive Directors of the Company. Clear guidance has been made as to the matters that should be reserved to the Board for its decision which include matters on, inter alia, capital, financing and financial reporting, internal controls, communication with Shareholders and corporate governance. For the year ended 31 December 2023, Mr. Wang Tongzhou served as the Chairman of the Board and Mr. Wang Haihuai served as the President of the Company. The corporate governance functions (including preparation of accounts) of the Company are performed by the Board. In 2023, the Board reviewed the Company’s policies and practices on corporate governance, reviewed and monitored the training and continuous professional development of Directors and senior management, the Company’s policies and practices on compliance with legal and regulatory requirements as well as the Company’s compliance with the Corporate Governance Code and disclosure in the Corporate Governance Report. 

5. Code for Securities Transactions by Directors 

The Company has adopted the Model Code. The Company has made specific inquiries with all of its Directors and Supervisors. Each of the Directors and Supervisors has confirmed his compliance with the requirements set out in the Model Code for the year ended 31 December 2023. 

6. Directors’ Training 

The Directors are encouraged to participate in continuous professional development to develop and refresh their knowledge and skills. The Company has provided a comprehensive induction package covering the summary of the responsibilities and liabilities of a director of a Hong Kong listed company, the Company’s constitutional documents and A Guide on Directors’ Duties issued by the Companies Registry of Hong Kong to each newly appointed Director to ensure that he/she is fully aware of his/her responsibilities and obligations under the Hong Kong Listing Rules and other regulatory requirements. For the year ended 31 December 2023, each of Mr. Mi Shuhua, Mr. Zhou Xiaowen participated in 1 special training on the management methods of independent directors organized by the listed company organization of the Shanghai Stock Exchange, and each of Mr. Mi Shuhua, Mr. Liu Hui, Mr. Wu Guangqi and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen participated in 1 training on low-carbon development organized by the Organization Department of the CPC Central Committee. Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin attended 1 CPD training of CPA Australia. Mr. Wang Tongzhou, Mr. Wang Haihuai, Mr. Liu Xiang, Mr. Sun Ziyu and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen attended briefings and seminars in relation to the listing rules of the listed places organized by the Company and read newspapers, periodicals and updates on the duties and responsibilities of directors. The company secretary of the Company reports from time to time the latest changes and development of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, Corporate Governance Code and other regulatory regime to the Directors with written materials, as well as organizes seminars on the professional knowledge and latest development of regulatory requirements related to director’s duties and responsibilities. During 2023, the company secretary of the Company undertook over 15 hours of professional training to update his skills and knowledge. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 94 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

7. Committees under the Board 

(a) Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee 

The main duties of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee include, among other things, to review proposals and to make recommendations to the Board regarding the Company’s strategic development plans, annual budgets, capital allocation plans, significant mergers and acquisitions, significant financing plans and matters in relation to environmental, social and governance. As at 31 December 2023, the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee consisted of six members, namely Mr. Wang Tongzhou, Mr. Wang Haihuai, Mr. Mi Shuhua Mr. Liu Hui, Mr. Wu Guangqi and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen, and is chaired by Mr. Wang Tongzhou. The Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee held five meetings in 2023 to review and discuss, among other things, the business plan, the investment plan, the budget for projects investment and foundation plan of the Company for 2023. The table below sets out the details of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Wang Tongzhou 5 5 0 100% Wang Haihuai 5 5 0 100% Sun Ziyu (Note 1) 1 1 0 100% Mi Shuhua (Note 2) 5 5 0 100% Liu Hui 5 5 0 100% Wu Guangqi 5 5 0 100% Zhou Xiaowen 5 5 0 100% Note 1: Mr. Sun Ziyu, ceased to be a member of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee with effect from 26 April 2023. Note 2: Mr. Mi Shuhua, ceased to be a member of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee with effect from 15 January 2024. The Strategy and Investment Committee was renamed as the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee with effect from 28 March 2024, as considered and approved at the 31st meeting of the fifth session of the Board. Pursuant to which, the Company has further clarified the corresponding responsibilities of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee to support the Board in better formulating the Company’s ESG strategy, incorporated safety, science and technology, quality management and environmental management into the performance assessment indicators of the Company’s senior management, and continued to establish a sound and effective implementation of internal controls, risk management and effectiveness evaluation, thereby building up a more comprehensive ESG management system. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 95 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

7. Committees under the Board (continued) 

(b) Audit and Internal Control Committee 

The Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Company has reviewed the annual results of the Company. The main duties of the Audit and Internal Control Committee include, among other things, • to be primarily responsible for making recommendations to the Board on the appointment, reappointment and removal of the external auditor and the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor; • to review and monitor the external auditor’s independence and objectivity and the effectiveness of the audit process in accordance with applicable standards; • to monitor the integrity of financial statements of the Company and the Company’s annual reports and accounts, half-year reports and, if prepared for publication, quarterly reports, and to review significant financial reporting judgments contained in them; and • to oversee the Company’s financial reporting system and internal control procedures, including but not limited to, review of financial controls, internal control and risk management systems, consideration of action on any findings of major investigations of internal control matters as delegated by the Board or at its own initiative and management’s response thereto, and review of the Company’s financial and accounting policies and practices. As at 31 December 2023, the Audit and Internal Control Committee consisted of five members, namely Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin, Mr. Mi Shuhua, Mr. Liu Hui, Mr. Wu Gaungqi and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen, and is chaired by Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin. Four out of the five members of the Audit and Internal Control Committee were independent non-executive Directors. The Audit and Internal Control Committee held 9 meetings in 2023 to discuss, among other things, the audited annual financial statements of 2022, the internal control report of the Company of 2022, the internal audit summary of 2022 and the plan of 2023, the report of duty performance of the Audit and Internal Control Committee in 2022, the quarterly financial reports of 2023 and the interim financial report of 2023, the re-appointment of the international and domestic auditors for 2023 and their remuneration, the Proposed Assets Reorganization and Proposed Spin-off and matters concerning connected transactions. The table below sets out the details of Audit and Internal Control Committee meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Mi Shuhua (Note) 9 9 0 100% Liu Hui 9 9 0 100% Chan Wing Tak Kevin 9 9 0 100% Wu Guangqi 9 8 1 100% Zhou Xiaowen 9 9 0 100% Note: Mr. Mi Shuhua, ceased to be a member of the Audit and Internal Control Committee with effect from 15 January 2024. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 96 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

7. Committees under the Board (continued) 

(c) Remuneration and Appraisal Committee 

The main duties of the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee include, among other things: • to make recommendations to the Board on the Company’s policy and structure for remuneration of Directors and senior management and on the establishment of a formal and transparent process for developing policy on such remuneration; • to have the delegated responsibility to determine the specific remuneration packages of all executive Directors and senior management, including benefits in kind, pension rights and compensation payments (including any compensation payable for loss or termination of their office or appointment) and make recommendations relating to the remuneration of independent non-executive Directors to the Board; and • to review and approve performance-based remuneration by reference to corporate goals and objectives resolved by the Board from time to time. As at 31 December 2023, the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee consisted of five members, namely Mr. Liu Hui, Mr. Mi Shuhua, Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin, Mr. Wu Guangqi and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen and is chaired by Mr. Liu Hui. Four out of the five members of the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee were independent non- executive Directors. The Remuneration and Appraisal Committee held three meetings in 2023 to review and discuss the proposals in relation to the first grant under the 2022 Restricted Share Incentive Scheme of the Company and the remuneration plans for the senior management of the Company for 2021 and 2022, respectively. The table below sets out the details of Remuneration and Appraisal Committee meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Mi Shuhua (Note) 3 3 0 100% Liu Hui 3 3 0 100% Chan Wing Tak Kevin 3 3 0 100% Wu Guangqi 3 3 0 100% Zhou Xiaowen 3 3 0 100% Note: Mr. Mi Shuhua, ceased to be a member of the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee with effect from 15 January 2024. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 97 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

7. Committees under the Board (continued) 

(d) Nomination Committee 

The main duties of the Nomination Committee include, among other things, to study the recruiting standard and procedure in respect of nomination of Directors and president of the Company and to review the credentials of Director or president candidates and make recommendations to the Board. The Directors were nominated by criteria such as personal integrity, work experience relating to the Company’s core business, performance track record, professional background, familiarity with corporate governance requirements for listed companies, etc. As at 31 December 2023, the Nomination Committee consisted of five members, namely Mr. Wang Tongzhou, Mr. Liu Xiang, Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin, Mr. Wu Guangqi and Mr. Zhou Xiaowen, and is chaired by Mr. Wang Tongzhou. Three out of the five members of the Nomination Committee were independent non-executive Directors. The Nomination Committee held one meeting in 2023 to discuss the appointment of the vice president of the Company. The table below sets out the details of Nomination Committee meeting attendance of each Director in 2023: 

Director Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Wang Tongzhou 1 1 0 100% Liu Xiang 1 1 0 100% Chan Wing Tak Kevin 1 1 0 100% Wu Guangqi 1 1 0 100% Zhou Xiaowen 1 1 0 100% For the year ended 31 December 2023, the Nomination Committee adopted a basic policy concerning diversity of Board members and is committed to enhancing the diversity of the Board and the Company’s staff structure. The Nomination Committee may consider diversity of Board members from a number of aspects, including but not limited to gender, age, ethnicity, education, specialty, experience, skills, knowledge and length of service and so forth. When reviewing the size and composition of the Board and searching for and recommending candidates for Directors, the Nomination Committee should take into account relevant factors mentioned above to try to achieve the diversity of the Board members in accordance with the Company’s development strategy, business needs and specific functions of job vacancy. Upon selection, the Nomination Committee shall make a final recommendation to the Board based on merit of the selected candidates and fits with the development of the Company. During the reporting period, except for gender diversity, the Board has achieved the following measurable objectives: at least one independent non-executive Director shall usually reside in Hong Kong; at least one independent non-executive Director shall have work experience as the financial controller in large enterprises or shall be an expert in corporate finance and accounting; the number of independent non-executive Directors shall be not less than one-third of the Board members and the number of independent non-executive Directors shall exceed half of the Board members. The Board is committed to achieving gender diversity of Board members. Considering the importance of gender diversity, the Nomination Committee has made discussions from the perspective of gender diversity of the Board and fully studied the relevant requirements of the diversity policy under the Listing Rules. Given that the fifth session of the Board is comprised of all male members, the Company will fully communicate with the relevant regulatory authorities and Shareholders to seize the opportunity to increase the proportion of female members of the Board and enhance the level of gender diversity in line with Shareholders’ expectations and practice. As at 31 December 2023, the Company has a total of approximately 0.145 million employees in service, of which approximately 0.027 million employees are women, accounting for 18.6% of the total number of employees in service. The Company has always adhered to the principle of gender equality in employment, eliminated gender discrimination, and protected the employment rights of women. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 98 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 

The Supervisory Committee is responsible for supervising the Board, its individual members and senior management to safeguard against any potential abuse of authority by the Board, its individual members and senior management so as to protect the interests of the Company and its Shareholders as a whole. As at 31 December 2023, the Supervisory Committee of the Company consisted of three members, Mr. Lu Yaojun, Mr. Wang Yongbin and Mr. Yao Yanmin (as the representative of employees). The term of office for supervisors is three years which is renewable upon re-election. The Supervisory Committee held 10 meetings in 2023 to consider and approve 49 resolutions. The table below sets out the details of Supervisory Committee meeting attendance of each Supervisor in 2023: 

Supervisor Number of Meetings to be Attended Number of Meetings Attended in Person Number of Meetings Attended by Proxy Attendance Rate 

Wang Yongbin (chairman) 10 10 0 100% Lu Yaojun 10 10 0 100% Yao Yanmin (Note) 10 10 0 100% Note : Mr. Yao Yanmin retired as the staff representative supervisor of the Company on 11 January 2024. On the same date, Mr. Yang Xiangyang was elected as the staff representative supervisor of the Company. 

# AUDITORS’ REMUNERATION 

Ernst & Young and Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP are appointed as the international and domestic auditors of the Company, respectively. Breakdown of the remuneration to Ernst & Young and Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP for audit services and other non-audit services provided for the year ended 31 December 2023 are as follows: RMB’000 

Audit services 27,850 Other non-audit services 8,469 The resolution on appointment of auditors will be submitted at the 33rd meeting of the fifth session of the Board, which will then be submitted to the AGM for consideration and approval. 

# INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT 

The Board is responsible for the Company’s internal control and risk management system and reviews its efficiency through the Audit and Internal Control Committee. The Board and the Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Company will receive from the management the information about the internal control and risk management on a regular basis (at least once a year). The Company’s internal control and risk management system is designed to manage risks and is unable to ensure the elimination of all risks. Such system can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 99 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT (CONTINUED) 

The Company builds a comprehensive risk management-oriented internal control system. It determines the key points of internal control by identifying and assessing risks; improves the efficiency of internal control by optimizing processes and perfecting systems; enhances the executive ability of internal control by strengthening supervision and check. The risk management system of the Company mainly assesses the risk identification, risk analysis, risk response, etc.; includes the risk evaluation in the approval process on major investment projects by optimizing the risk evaluation mechanism; continuously advances the annual risk management report system; identifies major important risks (e.g., safety production risk, financial risk, investment risk, operational risk, overseas risk, compliance risk, litigation risk) and formulates the response strategy and measures in terms of these risks by combining with internal control department; regularly tracks the implementation of response measures for major important risks so as to further improve the risk management level of the Company. The Company has established a risk management structure with distinct hierarchy and reasonable authorization. The Company’s functional departments and their organizations shall perform identification and response for major risks on the basis of respective duties, and shall report to the Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Company annually. The management and the Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Company carry out the annual assessment and review of risk control of all functional departments. Matters to be assessed include changes in nature and severity of material risks subsequent to review in the previous year, the Company’s abilities to respond to material risks and the assessment on material risk management and internal control errors or material risk management and internal defects identified during the period. Based on the assessment, the Audit and Internal Control Committee arranges the annual work plan, which covers the Company’s strategies, market, operation, financial capital, law and major procedures of its affiliated entities, and urges relevant entities to rectify the problems identified in the audit process and reports the progress of rectification to the management and the Audit and Internal Control Committee of the Company on a regularly basis. The Company establishes a supervision mechanism for internal control, and stipulates its duty and powder, job requirements and methods. The Supervisory Committee supervises the establishment and the implement of internal control by the Board; the Board and the Audit and Internal Control Committee supervise the internal control system of the Company; the supervisory departments carry out supervision on performance, discipline inspection and matters related tendering and bidding and bulk purchase of the Company; the audit departments audit and supervise the operation management, financial revenue and expenditure and economic results of the entities. The Company’s assessment process of internal control strictly implement basic specifications, assessment guideline and procedures stipulated in internal system. The internal control assessment group is set up, which made up of members from, among other things, strategy & development department, finance & fund department, audit department and other business departments, to carry out work by three steps including self-evaluation, defect rectification and sampling inspection by the Company. The affiliated entities implement the process of self-evaluation under unified deployment by the Company. The assessment collects the data and information related to the planning and operation of internal control of the Company by interview, sampling, walk through test and field inspection, on a business occurrence frequency basis, and fills out the working paper of the assessment honestly, which give a true process of internal control of the Company. By strictly implementing the requirements of the Criminal Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Anti-Unfair Competition Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Anti-Money Laundering Law of the People’s Republic of China, and other laws and regulations, CCCC improves the institutional mechanism to prevent the emergence and spread of corruption, promotes the “three non-corruptions”, focuses on the construction of work style, and establishes a “four-in-one” corruption management system with a view to strengthening discipline and promoting a culture of integrity, thus jointly creating a clean atmosphere for corporate development. Through the establishment of whistleblowing channels (including anonymous reporting by phone, email or in writing), daily risk monitoring, internal audits and self-inspections, the Company is able to grasp clues of problems, investigate and deal with them in a timely manner. The Board is the highest governance organization of the Company, and the Company has been actively strengthening anti-corruption trainings for Directors and rigorously enforcing the relevant regulations on the integrity and self-discipline of responsible persons and Directors of state-owned enterprises. In 2023, all employees of the Company have attended the anti-corruption trainings, with each employee receiving at least three hours of anti-corruption trainings. During the reporting period, the Board reviewed and evaluated the internal control and risk management system and listened to the reporting from the Audit and Internal Control Committee. The Board considered that the Company’s internal control and risk management system was effective. The 2023 Internal Control Self-assessment Report of China Communications Construction Company Limited has been published on the Company’s website. 

# INSIDE INFORMATION 

The Company formulated the Inside Information Management System, which set out the detailed rules for the handing, disclosure and internal control of inside information. In 2023, the Company strictly implemented the abovementioned policies, further strengthened the identification and evaluation work for inside information and narrowed down the scope of insiders as far as possible. Besides, before the disclosure of an inside information in accordance with law, the Company conducted strict registration for and management over the insiders. In case of major events which require deferral or exemption of disclosure, the main department or person in charge of the specific work shall, in addition to filling in the insider registration form, prepare the memorandum on progress of material matters, including but not limited to the time of various key nodes in the course of planning and decision-making, list of personnel participating in planning and decision-making, and the means of planning and decision-making. The relevant personnel involved in planning and decision-making shall sign and confirm on the memorandum, so as to ensure the relevant insiders to fulfill their confidentiality obligation, and effectively prevent the leakage of the information. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 100 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# INSIDE INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

The Company attaches great importance to internal control and its corporate social responsibility. The 2023 Environmental, Social and Governance Report of China Communications Construction has been published on the Company’s website. 

# ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE DIRECTORS IN RELATION TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

The Directors are responsible for overseeing the preparation of the financial statements for each fiscal period. In preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2023, the Directors have selected appropriate accounting policies and applied them consistently and made prudent and reasonable judgment and estimates so as to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the results and cash flow for that fiscal year. 

# SHAREHOLDERS’ RIGHTS 

The Company is committed to pursue active communications with Shareholders as well as to provide disclosure of information concerning the Group’s material developments to Shareholders, investors and other stakeholders. The annual general meeting of the Company serves as an effective forum for communication between Shareholders and the Board. Notice of the annual general meeting together with the meeting materials will be dispatched to all Shareholders not less than 20 clear business days (the date on which the Hong Kong Stock Exchange opens for securities trading) prior to the annual general meeting. The chairman of the Board and of the Strategy and Investment and ESG Committee, Audit and Internal Control Committee, Remuneration and Appraisal Committee and Nomination Committee, or in their absence, other members of the respective committees, will be invited to the annual general meeting to answer questions from Shareholders. External auditors will also be invited to attend the annual general meeting to answer questions about the conduct of the audit, the preparation and content of the auditors’ report, the accounting policies and the independence of auditors. Shareholders individually or jointly holding in aggregate more than 10% of the shares of the Company are entitled to request the convention of a shareholders’ general meeting. Shareholders individually or jointly holding more than 3% of the shares of the Company shall have the right to submit proposals to the Company at a shareholders’ general meeting. Shareholders individually or jointly holding more than 3% of the shares of the Company may bring forward provisional proposals and submit the same in writing to the convener ten days prior to a shareholders’ general meeting. Voting by Shareholders at a shareholders’ general meeting will be conducted by poll in accordance with the Hong Kong Listing Rules, unless otherwise required and permitted. Detailed procedures for conducting a poll will be explained to the Shareholders at the inception of a shareholders’ general meeting to ensure that Shareholders are familiar with such voting procedures. Separate resolution will be proposed by the chairman of a shareholders’ general meeting for each material issue. Poll results will be posted on the websites of the Company and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on the same business day of the shareholders’ general meeting. Pursuant to the Articles of Association, a special general meeting can be convened upon the written requisition by any two or more Shareholders holding in aggregate not less than 10% in the paid up capital of the Company, provided that at the date of the lodging of such requisition such capital carries the right of voting at shareholders’ general meetings of the Company. Such requisition must state the objects of the meeting and must be signed by the requisitionists and lodged at the office of the Company. Enquiries directed to the Board or the Company are facilitated by email to ir@ccccltd.cn or through the online messaging system on the Company’s website. All announcements, press releases and conducive corporate information of the Company are available on the Company’s website to enhance the transparency of the Company. 

# INVESTOR RELATIONS 

Please refer to the chapter headed “Investor Relations” for detailed information. The Company has reviewed the implementation and effectiveness of its shareholder’s communication policy during the reporting period. The Board is of the view that the Company has established a smooth and effective communication channel with its Shareholders and considers that the Company’s shareholder communication policy and its implementation are effective. The total length of the Serbia E763 Expressway project is approximately 265 kilometers, with CCCC undertaking the construction of about 131 kilometers. The Serbia E763 Expressway is the first infrastructure project to be realized under the framework of cooperation among Eastern European countries, and represents the first expressway undertaken by Chinese enterprises in Europe. PROFILE OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 102 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

The Board consisted of eight Directors, including three executive Directors, one non-executive Director and four independent non-executive Directors. Profiles of the Directors are as follows: Mr. Wang Tongzhou, born in 1965, Chinese nationality, is the secretary of the Party Committee, the executive Director and the chairman of the Board of the Company. He also serves as the secretary of the Party Committee and the chairman of CCCG. Mr. Wang has extensive operational and management experience. Mr. Wang served as the general manager of China State Construction Development Co., Ltd., the director of sixth engineering division of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; a member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the deputy general manager of Sinohydro Construction Group Corporation, a member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the deputy general manager of Power Construction Corporation of China; the director, the general manager and the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group; the secretary of the Party Committee, the chairman of the board and the general manager of China Nonferrous Metal Mining (Group) Co., Ltd., the secretary of the Party Committee and the chairman of the board of China Nonferrous Metal Mining (Group) Co., Ltd., the executive director and the chairman of the board of China Nonferrous Mining Corporation Limited; the general manager of CCCG and the president of the Company. Mr. Wang possesses a doctoral degree in economics. Mr. Wang is a professorate senior engineer, a chartered builder of The Chartered Institute of Building, U.K., and a professional who enjoys special government allowance of the State Council. Mr. Wang has been serving as the executive Director and the chairman of the Board of the Company since October 2020. Mr. Wang Haihuai, born in 1968, Chinese nationality, is the deputy secretary of the Party Committee, the executive Director and president of the Company and also serves as a deputy secretary of the Party Committee, a director and the general manager of CCCG. Mr. Wang joined the Company in 1991 and has extensive operational and management experience. He held positions as a member of the Party Committee and the deputy director, the deputy secretary of the Party Committee and the director of The Second Harbour Engineering Bureau of Ministry of Transport ( 交通部第二航務工程局 ), the chairman, the general manager, the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd., the general manager of the port and waterway dredging division of the Company, the vice president of the Company, the deputy general manager of CCCG. Mr. Wang graduated from Chongqing Jiaotong University with a major in harbour and channel engineering, and obtained a master’s degree in business administration for executives from Wuhan University and is a professorate senior engineer and senior economist who enjoys special government allowance of the State Council. Mr. Wang has been serving as the president of the Company since April 2021, and as the executive Director of the Company since June 2021. Mr. Liu Xiang, born in 1968, Chinese nationality, is the deputy secretary of the Party Committee, the executive Director of the Company and also serves as the deputy secretary of the Party Committee and an employee director of CCCG. Mr. Liu has extensive experience in corporate administration. He held positions as the inspector at the deputy director level of the Party mass work department, the deputy director of the Party mass work department and the secretary of the Youth League Committee of China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation Limited ( 中國航天科工集團有限公司 ), the chairman of the supervisory committee of Guizhou Aerospace Industry Co., Ltd. ( 貴州航天工業有限責任公司 ) and the director of the discipline inspection and supervision department, the deputy head of the Party disciplinary inspection group and the director of the human resource department of China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation Limited ( 中國航天科工集團有限公司 ). Mr. Liu successively graduated from Anhui Institute of Education majoring in Chinese, and obtained a master’s degree in literature and arts from Renmin University of China and a master’s degree in business administration from Beihang University. Mr. Liu is a senior political engineer at the research institute level. Mr. Liu has been serving as the executive Director of the Company since June 2021. Mr. Sun Ziyu, born in 1962, Chinese nationality, has served as the executive Director of the Company for a period commencing from February 2022 to April 2023. Mr. Sun joined the Company in 1983 and has extensive operational and management experience. He has been serving as the vice president of First Harbour Consultants Co., Ltd. of Ministry of Transport, the chief engineer of China Harbour Engineering Company (Group), the chief engineer of CCCG, the general manager and chairman of the board of China Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd., and the general manager of the overseas department and the vice president of the Company. Mr. Sun graduated from Zhejiang University (formerly known as Hangzhou University) with a major in marine geology and geomorphology and subsequently obtained a master’s degree from Delft University of Technology NL and a master’s degree in business administration for executives from Peking University. He is a professorate senior engineer, a British royal chartered civil engineer and a British royal chartered constructor and enjoys special government allowance of the State Council. Mr. Mi Shuhua, born in 1962, Chinese nationality, has served as the non-executive Director of the Company for a period commencing from February 2022 to January 2024. Mr. Mi has extensive experience in corporate production and operation administration. He held positions as a member of the Party Committee and the deputy general manager of National Electric Power Corporation (Northeast Branch) ( 國家電力公司東北公司 ), a member of the Party Committee and the deputy general manager of State Grid Corporation (Northeast Branch) ( 國家電網公司東北公司 ), the secretary of the Party Committee and the general manager of China Guodian Corporation (Northeast Branch) ( 中國國電集團公司東北公司 ), the deputy secretary of the Party Committee and the general manager of National Electric Power Co., Ltd. ( 國電電力股份有限公司 ), the deputy general manager and a member of the Party Committee of China Guodian Corporation ( 中國國電集團公司 ), the deputy general manager and a member of the Party Committee of China Energy Investment Corporation ( 國家能源投資集團有限責任公司 ). Mr. Mi graduated from Northeast Electric Power University ( 東北電力學院 ) with a bachelor’s degree in engineering, and he is a professorate senior engineer. PROFILE OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 103 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# BOARD OF DIRECTORS (CONTINUED) 

Mr. Liu Hui, born in 1960, Chinese nationality, is an external director of China Academy of Building Research. Mr. Liu has extensive experience in construction, project construction and scientific research management. He held positions as the assistant to general manager, the director and the chief engineer of China Railway No. 2 Engineering Group Co., Ltd. ( 中鐵二局集團有限公司 ), the deputy general manager, a member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the chief engineer of China Railway Engineering Corporation, a member of the standing committee of the Party Committee of China Railway Engineering Group Company Limited and the vice president, a member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the chief engineer of China Railway Group Limited. Mr. Liu graduated from Southwest Jiaotong University in railway engineering, and obtained a master’s degree in architecture and civil engineering, and he is a professorate senior engineer and a professional who enjoys special government allowance of the State Council. Mr. Liu has been serving as an independent non-executive Director of the Company since February 2022. Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin, born in 1966, Chinese nationality and a resident of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, is the chief executive officer of Concentric Education Foundation (Hong Kong), the vice president of Chinese Banking Association of Hong Kong and a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference Guangdong Committee ( 中國人民政治協商會議廣東省委員會 ) and he also serves as an independent non-executive director of TravelSky Technology Limited and Royale Home Holdings Limited, respectively. Mr. Chan has extensive experience in finance, securities and financing. He held positions as the head of research division of Nomura International (Hong Kong) Limited in China and Hong Kong and the director of banking department thereof in Asia region, the head of China and Hong Kong Financial Department of CLSA, a senior advisor of KPMG China and a member of the Listing Committee of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, a member of Election Committee (Finance) of The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Mr. Chan graduated from London School of Economics and Political Science with a master’s degree in economics and has qualification of Fellow Certified Practising Accountant in Australia. Mr. Chan has been serving as an independent non-executive Director of the Company since February 2022. Mr. Wu Guangqi, born in 1957, Chinese nationality, is an external director of China National Salt Industry Group Co., Ltd. Mr. Wu has extensive experience in corporate administration. He held positions as the director of general office of China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC), the secretary of the Party Committee, the secretary of the Committee for Discipline Inspection and chairman of the Labor Union of CNOOC Research Center, the secretary of the Party Committee and the director of the ideology affairs department of the direct department of CNOOC, the assistant of general manager, a member of the Party group, the head of Party disciplinary inspection group, the deputy general manager, a member of the Party group, the deputy secretary of the Party group and the deputy general manager of CNOOC, and also served as the executive director and the compliance officer of CNOOC Limited for a long time. Mr. Wu also served as an independent director of China Yangtze Power Co., Ltd. Mr. Wu graduated from Ocean University of China with a major in marine geology, and obtained a master’s degree in management from China University of Petroleum and a doctoral degree in public administration from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and he is a professor-level senior economist, Certified Senior Enterprise Risk Manager (CSERM) and Certified Internal Auditor (CIA). Mr. Wu has been serving as an independent non-executive Director of the Company since February 2022. Mr. Zhou Xiaowen, born in 1961, Chinese nationality, is an external director of China Logistics Group Co., Ltd. ( 中國物流集團有限公司 ). Mr. Zhou has extensive experience in transportation, construction, project construction and planning. He held positions as the deputy director of the Development and Planning Department ( 

發展計劃司 ), the executive deputy dean of the Economy Planning Institute ( 經濟規劃研究院 ), and the executive deputy director of the Engineering Design Appraisal Center ( 工程設計鑒定中心 ) of Ministry of Railways, the dean of the Economy Planning Institute and the director of the Engineering Design Appraisal Center of Ministry of Railways; the head and the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of China Railway Economic and Planning Research Institute ( 中國鐵路經濟規劃研究院 ), the director of the Engineering Design Appraisal Center of China Railway Corporation ( 中國鐵路總公司工程設計鑒定中心 ), the vice chairman, the general manager and the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of China Railway Economic and Planning Research Institute, the director of the Engineering Design Appraisal Center of China State Railway Group Co., Ltd. (“CSRG”), the chief expert in survey and design of CSRG, an office specialist and the commissioner (special external director) of the Office of Sichuan-Tibet Railway Engineering Construction Headquarters (Leading Group). Mr. Zhou graduated from Lanzhou Railway Institute ( 蘭州鐵道學院 ) with a major in railway engineering. He has also obtained a master’s degree in engineering, and is a professorate senior engineer and a national master in engineering survey and design ( 全國工程勘察設計大師 ). Mr. Zhou has been serving as an independent non-executive Director of the Company since February 2022. PROFILE OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 104 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE 

Mr. Wang Yongbin, born in 1965, Chinese nationality, is the chairman of the Supervisory Committee, the general manager of the auditing department and the director of the Office of Dispatched Supervisors of the Company. He also serves as the chief auditor, the general manager of the auditing department and the director of the Office of Dispatched Supervisors of CCCG. Mr. Wang joined the Company in 2001 and has extensive management experience. He held positions as the chairman of the Supervisory Committee of Zhenhua Logistics Group Co., Ltd., a Supervisor of China Northeast Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. ( 中國市 政工程東北設計研究總院有限公司 ) and CCCC Shanghai Equipment Engineering Co., Ltd. Mr. Wang graduated from Changsha Communications University with a bachelor’s degree in project finance and accounting. Mr. Wang is a professorate senior accountant and a professorate senior auditor. Mr. Wang has been serving as a Supervisor of the Company since September 2006, and as the chairman of the Supervisory Committee of the Company since November 2021. Mr. Lu Yaojun, born in 1970, Chinese nationality, is a Supervisor and the general manager of the investment management department of the Company. He also serves as the general manager of the investment management department of CCCG, the director of CCCC Capital Holdings Limited ( 中交資本控股有限公司 ) and the vice chairman of Capital Expressway Development Co., Ltd. ( 首都高速公路發展有限公司 ). Mr. Lu joined the Company in 1993 and has extensive management experience. He has served as the deputy chief engineer and director of the investment management department of CCCC Second Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. ( 中交第二公路勘 察設計研究院有限公司 ), and the deputy general manager of the investment division of the Company. Mr. Lu graduated from Tongji University with a major in traffic engineering and is a professorate senior engineer. Mr. Lu has been serving as a Supervisor of the Company since November 2021. Mr. Yao Yanmin, born in 1963, Chinese nationality with no overseas permanent residence, has served as a staff representative Supervisor of the Company for a period commencing from April 2014 to January 2024. Mr. Yao also serves as a specialized external Supervisor of CCCG, an external supervisor of CCCC Tianhe Machinery and Equipment Manufacturing Co., Ltd., China Urban and Rural Holding Group Co., Ltd.* ( 中國城鄉控股集團有限公司 ), CCCC Asset Management Co., Ltd. and China Communications Information Technology Group Co., Ltd., respectively. Mr. Yao joined the Company in 1992 and has extensive management experience. He held positions as the head of president office, the assistant to general manager and the deputy general manager of China Road and Bridge Construction Corporation, the deputy head of general office of CCCG, the deputy head of general office of the Company, the head of the work department of the Company’s Party Committee, the general manager of corporate culture department of the Company, vice chairman of union federation and the chairman of labor union for organs, and the director of the office of union federation of the Company. Mr. Yao graduated from Guangdong University of Foreign Studies and Renmin University of China with a bachelor’s degree in English and a bachelor’s degree in law, respectively. Mr. Yang Xiangyang, born in 1971, Chinese nationality, is currently a staff representative Supervisor, the vice chairman of union federation, the director of the office of union federation and the chairman of labor union for organs of the Company. Mr. Yang joined the Company in 1995 and has extensive management experience. He held positions as the head of the marketing planning department, the head of the comprehensive affairs office, the assistant to the general manager, a director, a deputy general manager, a general manager (legal representative), the vice chairman, the secretary of the Party Committee and the chairman of CCCC Xi’an Road Construction Machinery Co., Ltd.* ( 中交西安築路機械有限公司 ). Mr. Yang graduated from Chang’an University (formerly known as Xi’an University of Highway Traffics ( 西安公路 交通大學 )) with a bachelor’s degree in engineering majoring in manufacturing of machinery and equipment* ( 機械製造工藝與設備專業 ), and subsequently obtained a master’s degree in mechanical engineering from Chang’an University, and he is a professorate senior engineer. Mr. Yang has been serving as a staff representative Supervisor of the Company since January 2024. PROFILE OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 105 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# SENIOR MANAGEMENT 

The Company’s senior management consisted of four members with the profiles as follow (for the profile of Mr. Wang Haihuai, a senior management member who concurrently serves as a Director, please refer to the above): Mr. Wang Jian, born in 1964, with Chinese nationality, is a member of the Party Committee and a vice president of the Company. He also serves as a member of the Party Committee and the deputy general manager of CCCG. Mr. Wang joined the Company in 2004 and has rich operational and management experience. He successively held positions as the secretary of the Party Committee of CCCC Tunnel Engineering Co., Ltd., the general manager of east China regional headquarters, the general manager of road, bridge and rail transportation department and the assistant to president of the Company. Mr. Wang graduated from Xi’an Highway Transportation University with a postgraduate diploma, majoring in bridge and structure engineering. He also holds a doctoral degree in geotechnical engineering of Central South University. Mr. Wang is a professorate senior engineer. Mr. Wang has been serving as the vice president of the Company since December 2016. Mr. Zhou Jingbo, born in 1963, with Chinese nationality, has served as the vice president and a member of the Party Committee of the Company for a period commencing from October 2019 to November 2023. Mr. Zhou joined the Company in 1980 and has extensive operational and management experience. He served as the assistant to general manager, the deputy general manager and the general manager of CFHCC, the deputy general manager of CFHCC, the chairman, the general manager and the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of CCCC Tianjin Dredging Co., Ltd., and the chairman, the general manager and the acting secretary of the Party Committee of CCCG Real Estate Company Limited. He also served as the assistant to the president and the general manager of the port and waterway dredging division of the Company, and the acting secretary of the Party Committee and the chairman of CCCC Dredging. Mr. Zhou graduated from China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) with a master’s degree in economics. He is a professorate senior engineer and senior economist. Mr. Li Maohui, born in 1962, with Chinese nationality, has served as the vice president and a member of the Party Committee of the Company for a period commencing from October 2019 to April 2023. Mr. Li joined the Company in 2005 and has extensive financial, operational and management experience. He served as the deputy chief and the chief of the planning and finance division and the deputy head and the member of the Party group of the Department of Transport of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, the deputy head (in temporary capacity) of the first assessment bureau of China Development Bank, the deputy chief economist of CRBC, the general manager of investment department of CCCG, the general manager of capital operation department of the Company, the director, the general manager and the deputy secretary of the Party Committee of CCCC Investment, the chairman and the secretary of the Party Committee of CCCC Investment, the assistant to the president of the Company. Mr. Li graduated from Chang’an University (formerly known as Xi’an Highway Transportation University) with a bachelor’s degree in finance and accounting and later obtained an executive master of business administration (EMBA) from Tsinghua University. He is a professorate senior economist. Mr. Zhu Hongbiao, born in 1970, with Chinese nationality, has served as the chief financial officer and a member of the Party Committee of the Company for a period commencing from October 2019 to August 2023. He also serves as the chairman of CCCC Finance Company Limited. Mr. Zhu joined the Company in 1994 and has extensive capital and financial management experience. Mr. Zhu served as the assistant to general manager and the deputy general manager of capital management department, the deputy general manager of finance and accounting department of CRBC. Mr. Zhu also served as the deputy general manager and general manager of fund department of CCCG and the general manager of finance fund department of the Company. Mr. Zhu graduated from Chang’an University (formerly known as Xi’an Highway Institute* ( 西安公路學院 )) with a bachelor’s degree in accounting and later obtained a master’s degree in accounting from Peking University. He is a professorate senior accountant. Mr. Sun Liqiang ( 孫立強 ), born in 1969, Chinese nationality, is currently the vice president and the chief safety officer of the Company. He also serves as the general manager of the international direct operation business division, the deputy secretary of the Party Committee and the general manager of the international engineering branch of the Company, as well as the assistant to general manager of CCCG. Mr. Sun joined the Company in 1991 and has extensive operational and management experience. He has successively served as the director of the construction technology division under the overseas project management department of China Road and Bridge Corporation* ( 中國路橋工程有限責任公司 ) (“CRBC”), the deputy general manager of Sana’a Office, the general manager of Equatorial Guinea Office, the general manager of engineering management department, the deputy general manager of CRBC; the deputy commander and the executive commander of the headquarter of the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway Project of the Company, the executive general manager of the overseas business department, the executive general manager of the international engineering branch, the general manager of road, bridge and rail transportation department, the general manager of project management department and the general manager of the production and operation management department, the general manager of the international direct operation business division, the secretary of the Party Committee and the general manager of the international engineering branch of the Company; the assistant to general manager of CCCG, the general manager of the international direct operation business division as well as the deputy secretary of the Party Committee and the general manager of the international engineering branch of the Company. Mr. Sun obtained a bachelor’s degree in engineering with a major in bridge from Xi’an Highway Institute, and subsequently obtained a master’s degree of engineering in project management from Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is a professorate senior engineer. Mr. Sun has been serving as the vice president of the Company since September 2023. PROFILE OF DIRECTORS, SUPERVISORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT 106 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# SENIOR MANAGEMENT (CONTINUED) 

Mr. Liu Zhengchang ( 劉正昶 ), born in 1968, is currently the chief financial officer of the Company. He also serves as the member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the chief accountant of CCCG, and a supervisor of China Railway Construction Corporation Limited (“CRCC”). Mr. Liu has extensive experience in enterprise economic management, financial management and internal audit, and he once served as the director of the audit department and the head of the finance department of China Railway 19th Bureau Group Co., Ltd., a member of the Party Committee, the deputy general manager and the chief accountant of China Railway 15th Bureau Group Co., Ltd., as well as a member of the Party Committee, the deputy general manager and the chief accountant of China Railway 16th Bureau Group Co., Ltd. He has successively served as the chief of the audit and supervision bureau; a supervisor of the supervisory committee; a supervisor, the chief auditor, chief of the audit and supervision bureau; a supervisor, the chief auditor and general manager of the audit and supervision department of CRCC since May 2016. He has served as the member of the standing committee of the Party Committee and the chief accountant of CCCG since December 2023. Mr. Liu graduated from Dongbei University of Finance and Economics majoring in business administration, and obtained his master’s degree in business administration. He is a senior accountant and was elected as a member of the national training programme for leaders in the accounting profession. Mr. Liu has been serving as the chief financial officer of the Company since January 2024. Mr. Yang Zhichao, born in 1981, with Chinese nationality, is currently a member of the Party Committee and the vice president of the Company. Mr. Yang joined the Company in 2003 and has extensive operational and management experience. He has successively served as the secretary of the Party Committee and a deputy general manager of the Third Engineering Co., Ltd. of CCCC Third Highway Engineering Co., Ltd.* ( 中交三公局第三工程有限公司 ); the secretary of the Party Committee and the chairman of the board of directors of the First Engineering Co., Ltd. of CCCC Third Highway Engineering Co., Ltd.* ( 中交三公局第一工程有限公司 ); the deputy general manager (deputy director) of the human resource department II (the Party Committee organisation department), a deputy director (deputy general manager) of the Party Committee work department (the enterprise culture department), a deputy director of the Party Committee work department (the Party Committee united front work department) and the secretary of the Youth League Committee of the Company; the deputy secretary of the Party Committee, a director and the general manager of China Urban and Rural Holding Group Co., Ltd.* ( 中國城鄉控股集團有限公司 ); and the chairman of the board of directors of Southwest Municipal Engineering Design and Research Institute of China* ( 中國市政工程西南設計研究總院有限公司 ). Mr. Yang obtained a bachelor’s degree in engineering with a major in civil engineering from Changsha University of Science & Technology and subsequently obtained a master’s degree in engineering with a major in transportation engineering from Changsha University of Science & Technology. He is a senior engineer and a senior political engineer. Mr. Yang has been serving as the vice president of the Company since August 2021. Mr. Zhou Changjiang, born in 1965, with Chinese nationality, has served as the Board secretary and the company secretary of the Company, and the chairman of CCCC Capital Holdings Limited ( 中交資本控股有限公司 ) for a period commencing from November 2017 to March 2024. Mr. Zhou joined the Company in 2000, and he is familiar with enterprise management, corporate governance, capital operation, information disclosure and investor relations management and has extensive operational and management experience and profound professional knowledge. He served as the officer of the former State Administration for Commodity Price and the State Planning Commission, the deputy director of the general office of China National Machine Tool Corporation, the deputy general manager of the enterprise planning department of China Harbour Engineering Company (Group), the deputy general manager of the enterprise development department and the director of the board office of CCCG. Mr. Zhou graduated from Renmin University of China with a bachelor’s degree in economics. He is a professorate senior economist. The project of Hubei Danjiangkou Reservoir Grand Bridge of Shiyan to Xichuan Expressway (Hubei Section) has a total length of approximately 41 kilometers. The section undertaken by the CCCC Second Harbour has a total length of approximately 15.8 kilometers, and the Danjiangkou Reservoir Grand Bridge in the section is a key controlled project of the whole line. The Hubei Danjiangkou Reservoir Grand Bridge of Shiyan to Xichuan Expressway is the world’s largest span partially anchored mixed-beam cable-stayed bridge, serving as a rapid north-south interprovincial passage in Hubei and Henan provinces. INVESTOR RELATIONS 108 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

The Company strengthens its investor relations management, and implements the new development concept in a complete, accurate and comprehensive manner. It attaches importance to the performance in the capital market, endeavors to promote the Company’s market value in accordance with its intrinsic value, aiming to enhance its appraised value and achieve high-quality development. 

# (I) CAPITAL MARKET REVIEW 

In 2023, the Company’s share price generally outperformed the market due to the international political environment and low industry valuations. On a full-year basis, the average daily closing price of the Company’s A shares outperformed the SSE Index by 13 percentage points, and the average daily closing price of the Company’s H shares outperformed the Hang Seng Index by 11 percentage points. As of the year-end, the closing price of the Company’s A shares decreased by 3.7% from the previous year-end, while the SSE Index decreased by 3.7% from the previous year-end during the same period; the closing price of the Company’s H shares decreased by 2.2% from the previous year-end, while the Hang Seng Index decreased by 13.8% from the previous year-end during the same period. 

H Shares -2.2% A Shares -3.7% SSE Composite Index -3.7% Hang Seng Index -13.8% 

# (II) IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF REGULAR INVESTOR RELATIONS 

# SERVICES ON ALL FRONTS, AND CARRYING OUT POSITIVE INTERACTION WITH CAPITAL MARKET IN A PROACTIVE MANNER 

In 2023, adhering to an active, open and transparent attitude, the Company explored new approaches and forms of communication with investors, focused on value creation, and built a comprehensive investor relations service system in a multi-channel, multi-approach and multi-platform manner. 

1. Increasing the Frequency and Coverage of Regular Results Presentations 

In 2023, the Company held 4 results presentations on a quarterly basis to deeply analyse the Company’s operating results and reform achievements, and to objectively look forward to the market opportunities in 2023. The representatives of the China Association for Public Companies attended the 2023 interim results presentation and provided guidance. In the preliminary stage of preparation for the presentation, the Company studied and analysed the changes in the shareholder structure based on the shareholder register, extensively collected the main issues of concern to domestic and overseas analysts and various types of investors, and requested the management to provide answers at the presentation. INVESTOR RELATIONS 109 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF REGULAR INVESTOR RELATIONS 

# SERVICES ON ALL FRONTS, AND CARRYING OUT POSITIVE INTERACTION WITH CAPITAL MARKET IN A PROACTIVE MANNER 

# (CONTINUED) 

1. Increasing the Frequency and Coverage of Regular Results Presentations (continued) 

At the same time, as an A+H listed company, the Company held one overseas results communication meeting with high quality, which was held by the core management of the Company in Hong Kong, to communicate with overseas investors face-to-face. The meeting fully demonstrated the Company’s achievements in terms of the reform of state-owned enterprises, the “Belt and Road” initiative, the “valuation system with Chinese characteristics” and other aspects, and highlighted our achievements in high-quality development as a listed company held by the central SOEs. 

2. Diversifying Communication Media for Results Presentations 

In order to facilitate the participation of investors to the greatest extent possible, the Company made use of modern means of communication to hold collective results presentations through the four-dimensional interactive mode of “on-site + video broadcast + telephone + network interaction”, and the meetings were broadcast live on the “SSE Roadshow Center”. After the meetings, the Company collated the meeting minutes in English and Chinese and displayed them on the Company’s official website for the reference of investors after the meetings. During the results release periods, the Company made use of various channels, such as paper media, online media and public accounts to deepen the interpretation of investment value and expand the Company’s market influence by means of article posts, a graphic description of the results and visualized annual report. 

3. Actively Planning Reverse Roadshow Activities 

Based on the main focus of the capital market and investors, the Company organised three themed reverse roadshow activities throughout the year. The first theme is CCCC design segment. In-depth exchanges among the management of CCCG and the Company and more than 30 domestic and overseas institutions including CICC, Zhongtai Securities and TF Securities on the business development direction, strategic deployment, progress of professional reorganization of the design segment, as well as the Company’s initiatives to continuously promote deployment optimization and functional operation of listed companies in conjunction with capital optimization were organized, to guide investors in discovering the investment value of the Company, and to enhance the Company’s vitality in the capital market. The second theme is the “Belt and Road” initiative. In order to demonstrate the Company’s overseas business results across 139 countries and regions, it held a reverse roadshow in Singapore for the Southeast Asian regional market. Over 30 institutional investors and analysts visited the Company’s projects, delved into the frontline operations, and experienced firsthand the Company’s “overseas-first” strategic development. This event highlighted the Company’s leading role in the “Belt and Road” initiative for overseas infrastructure construction, setting a benchmark. The third theme is the “three major projects” regarding villages in the cities. The activity regarding urban renewal projects in Fengxi community, Shanghai attracted over 100 participants from research institutions, including Guosheng Securities, Changjiang Securities, and UBS Securities, fund companies, and shareholders. In line with the spirit of the SASAC and CCCG’s overall development concept of “123456”, the activity was conducted in an interactive method of “on-site visits + panel discussions + Q&A sessions”. Analysts and investors were invited to gain a deeper understanding of the Company’s exploration and achievements in the comprehensive planning of “big city” business, business model innovation, and the integration of industry and urban development, which enhanced the investors’ confidence in the Company’s future prospects. 

4. Timely Interpretation of Significant Matters 

The Company made reasonable use of capital market tools, firmly grasped the initiative of investor communication, convened investor communication meetings within 10 working days after the first announcement of spinning off the design segment, implementation of share incentive scheme and other major matters to interpret the plan programme in detail and answer investor questions frankly, which helped capital operation and created a good atmosphere. INVESTOR RELATIONS 110 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (II) IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF REGULAR INVESTOR RELATIONS 

# SERVICES ON ALL FRONTS, AND CARRYING OUT POSITIVE INTERACTION WITH CAPITAL MARKET IN A PROACTIVE MANNER 

# (CONTINUED) 

5. Optimising Investor Communication Channels 

The Company has created the WeChat public account of “CCCC Investor Relations” to build a “one-stop” service platform for investor services. Investors can use the public account to book research meetings, study recent company-related research reports and watch representations, etc. 

6. Improving the Protection Mechanism for Small and Medium Investors Through Multiple Channels 

The Company has always insisted on treating all types of investors equally. Facing more than 130,000 minority shareholders, the Company has arranged specialised personnel to answer the IR hotline, handle IR emails, and respond to the major issues of concern to investors in the SSE e-Interaction as much as possible, so as to enable the investors to have a clear understanding of the Company’s development results. During the communication with investors, the Company tried its best to satisfy the demands for investigation and research of investors, research institutions and financial media by answering each question seriously. During the course, other than fully fulfilling the information disclosure responsibility by communicating the business strategies and operation performance to investors, the Company also actively listened to the questions and suggestions raised by investors. The Company prepared the Summary of Non-deal Roadshows to present the questions raised by investors to the management in a timely and comprehensive manner. Through careful, detailed and diverse work and services, an effective and interactive bridge of communication was built between the capital market and the Company. Investors’ issues throughout the year mainly focused on: the achievement of the goals of the Company in 2023, the improvement of important financial indicators, the “14th Five-Year” plan and strategic layout, how to balance the benefits and risks of investment business, the overseas business, follow-up plans of REITs, the room for further improvement of the dividend ratio, the progress and impact of the reform of state-owned enterprises, the strategy and layout of new industries, the growth in appraised value, the spin-off and listing of CCCC Design, the progress of the increase in shareholdings of major shareholders, share incentives, etc. 

List of the Company’s major investor relations activities in 2023 

Month Activity Organiser 

January 2022 Annual Conference UBS Securities 2023 Capital Market Summit Guosheng Securities Preference Shares Conference Guotai Jun’an Preference Shares and Professional Reorganization Conference Zhongtai Securities •CCCC Design Reverse Roadshow CCCC February 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Guotai Jun’an 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Caitong Securities 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Changjiang Securities 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Sealand Securities 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Changjiang Securities 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Northeast Securities 2023 Spring Online Strategy Conference Shenwan Hongyuan Securities INVESTOR RELATIONS 111 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

Month Activity Organiser 

April •2022 Annual Results Presentation CCCC •Annual Results Non-deal Roadshow CCCC 2023 Online Strategy Conference CSC Special Online Strategy Conference Changjiang Securities 2023 Roadshow RoadShowChina •2023 First Quarterly Results Presentations CCCC May 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Cinda Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Northeast Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference GF Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference CSC 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference TF Securities June 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Huachuang Securities 2023 Interim Capital Market Summit Huatai Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Citic Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Essence Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Soochow Securities 2023 Capital Markets Forum TF Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference China Fortune Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Guosheng Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Industrial Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Guotai Jun’an 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Haitong Securities July 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Huatai Securities 2023 Interim Online Strategy Conference Huachuang Securities August •2023 Interim Results Presentation CCCC •Interim Results Non-deal Roadshow CCCC •The “Belt and Road” Initiative Reserve Roadshow for Southeast Asian Market CCCC 

# (II) IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF REGULAR INVESTOR RELATIONS 

# SERVICES ON ALL FRONTS, AND CARRYING OUT POSITIVE INTERACTION WITH CAPITAL MARKET IN A PROACTIVE MANNER 

# (CONTINUED) 

6. Improving the Protection Mechanism for Small and Medium Investors Through Multiple Channels (continued) 

List of the Company’s major investor relations activities in 2023 (continued) INVESTOR RELATIONS 112 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

Month Activity Organiser 

September 2023 Autumn Capital Market Summit Northeast Securities 2023 Capital Market Summit Huachuang Securities 2023 Third Quarterly Strategy Conference Huatai Securities 2023 Third Quarterly Strategy Conference TF Securities November •2023 Third Quarterly Results Presentation CCCG 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference Cinda Securities 2023 Investment Summit Huatai Securities 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference CICC 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference Guotai Jun’an 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference Caitong Securities December 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference Citic Securities 2023 Annual Online Strategy Conference CSC 2023 Investment Summit Essence Securities 2023 Annual Capital Market Conference TF Securities 2023 Investment Summit Galaxy Securities •“Three Projects” of Urban Renewal Reverse Roadshow CCCC 

# (II) IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF REGULAR INVESTOR RELATIONS 

# SERVICES ON ALL FRONTS, AND CARRYING OUT POSITIVE INTERACTION WITH CAPITAL MARKET IN A PROACTIVE MANNER 

# (CONTINUED) 

6. Improving the Protection Mechanism for Small and Medium Investors Through Multiple Channels (continued) 

List of the Company’s major investor relations activities in 2023 (continued) INVESTOR RELATIONS 113 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (III) CONTINUE TO CONSOLIDATE THE BOTTOM LINE OF SECURITIES 

# COMPLIANCE WITH SOLID INFORMATION DISCLOSURE 1. Strengthening Construction of Mechanisms for Information Disclosure System 

In accordance with the latest regulatory requirements issued by domestic and overseas securities regulators, the Company revised four systems, namely, the Management Measures for Information Disclosure and Internal Reporting of Important Information ( 《信息披露及重大信息內部報告管理辦 法》 ), the Management System of Inside Information ( 《內幕信息管理制度》 ), the Administrative Policies on Shareholding Changes of Shareholders, Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management Members ( 《股東及董事、監事和高級管理人員持股變動管理制度》 ), and the Measures for Management of Investor Relations ( 《投資者關係管理辦法》 ), aiming to enhance the Company’s performance in management of investor relations and regulate the information disclosure. On the basis of the establishment series of systems, the Company issued the Implementation Rules for Disclosure of Provisional Reports ( 《臨時報告披露實施細則》 ) to further rationalise the internal review mechanism for information disclosure. At the same time, the Company has taken the disclosure of periodic reports as a handhold, appointed part-time information disclosure officers in relevant departments, and organised joint research on disclosure content, investor questions and answers, etc., before the disclosure of periodic reports and major events, so as to improve the accuracy of information release and reduce the risk of compliance. 

2. Strengthening of the Talent Pool 

The Company focuses on cultivating compound talents, and all practitioners have overseas study experience and master’s degrees, specialising in accounting, law, finance, economics, engineering and language. For three consecutive years, the Company held the “Securities Compliance Training”, in which seven training courses were set up for the high-quality development of listed companies and the bottom line of securities compliance by means of “on-site + live broadcasting + video broadcasting”. Renowned lawyers and auditors from home and abroad provided training on management of insider information, connected transactions, scientific capital market values, etc., and the compliance training had more than 10,000 attendances in total. 

# (IV) CONSOLIDATE THE SYSTEM FOUNDATION AND OPTIMIZE THE 

# CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 1. Highlighting Scientific, Democratic and Legal Decision-Making 

The Board of the Company always adheres to scientific, democratic and legal decision-making, not only to ensure the efficiency and quality of decision-making, but also to prevent violation of the regulatory requirements for listed companies and to avoid the occurrence of compliance risks. It strictly complies with laws and regulations, the Articles of Association and various regulatory requirements, adheres to legal decision-making, and does not touch the red line of compliance. The Company pays attention to the research and argumentation before decision-making, adheres to the communication and reporting system of external directors, and reports to external directors on major issues before formally submitting them to the Board, so as to study and judge the risks in advance, revise and optimize schemes and improve the efficiency of the Board’s deliberation and decision-making level. 

2. Making Efforts to Optimize Corporate Governance Systems 

The Board of the Company properly manages the relationships between the Board and other governance bodies in accordance with the Articles of Association and a series of consideration and decision-making procedures. For significant operational and management matters that require preliminary study by the Party committee and deliberation by the President Office meeting, it is essential to conduct the procedures of the Party committee and the President Office meeting and arrive at deliberative opinions before submitting them to the Board for decision-making. For matters within the scope of authorization delegated by the Board, the form and requirements of the delegation are standardized to promote the management to exercise their powers and fulfill their duties in accordance with the law, thereby improving the efficiency of operational decision-making. For matters submitted for the Board’s deliberation and decision, on one hand, the pre-meeting communication and reporting mechanisms are perfected to ensure that external directors have ample time to understand the proposals and to control the risks associated with them, thereby enhancing the efficiency and quality of decisions made in formal meetings; on the other hand, relevant departments are urged to implement the Board’s resolutions, incorporating them into the supervision system to ensure that the resolutions are executed promptly and effectively. INVESTOR RELATIONS 114 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# (IV) CONSOLIDATE THE SYSTEM FOUNDATION AND OPTIMIZE THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE (CONTINUED) 

3. Implementing the Resolutions of the General Meeting Strictly 

In accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Association, the Board diligently fulfilled its responsibilities as the convener of the general meetings, and convened and held four general meetings in 2023 with 37 resolutions considered and passed. The general meetings considered and approved the report of the Board, the report of the supervisory committee, the profit distribution and dividend payment plan, the external guarantee plan, the corporate bond issuance plan, the asset-backed securitization business plan, and the election of directors and supervisors, among other resolutions. Based on the resolutions and authorizations of the general meetings, during the reporting period, the Board effectively advanced and completed the work of profit distribution and dividend payment for 2022, and strictly implemented the external guarantee plan, bond issuance plan, etc., within the limits approved by the general meetings, thereby successfully carrying out the resolutions of the general meetings, and safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of all shareholders. 

# (V) CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT OF INVESTOR RELATIONS 

Over the long term, CCCC has made unremitting efforts to optimize corporate governance, information disclosure, and investor relations services, earning the recognition of a broad base of investors. In terms of information disclosure, CCCC has been awarded the “A-Class Evaluation for Listed Company Information Disclosure ( 上市公司信息披露 A類評價 )” by the SSE for ten consecutive years. In terms of management cases, it has received accolade of the “Outstanding Practice in Investor Relations Management among Beijing Listed Companies ( 北京上市公司投資者關係管理優秀實踐 )” case from the Listed Companies Association of Beijing. In terms of investor relations, CCCC has been honored with multiple awards from the capital market, including the “Golden Bauhinia Award for Listed Company of the Best Investor Relations Management ( 金紫荊獎最佳投資者關係管理上市公司 )”, the “Tianma Award ( 天馬獎 )” for investor relations of listed companies in China from the Securities Times, the “Best Practice Award for the Board Office of Listed Companies ( 上市公司董事會辦公室最佳實踐獎 )” from the China Association for Public Companies, and the “5th New Fortune Best IR of HK-Listed Company ( 第五屆新財富最佳 IR 港股公司 )”, among others. The Company will continue to enhance the management of capital market, highly value its investor relations work, attach great importance to the value creation for small and medium investors and further improve its information disclosure to continually increase the transparency of the Company in 2024. Investor relation management will be taken as a sustainable development strategy. The Company is committed to maximising shareholders’ return through effective multi-channel and multi-level communication with investors that features equality, sincerity and mutual respect. The Fuzhou-Xiamen High-speed Railway is located in the coastal area of Fujian Province, with a total length of 277.4 kilometers and a designed speed of 350 kilometers per hour. The Fuzhou-Xiamen High-speed Railway is the first cross-sea high-speed railway in China. INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 116 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

Ernst & Young 27/F, One Taikoo Place 979 King’s Road Quarry Bay, Hong Kong 

安永會計師事務所 香港鰂魚涌英皇道979號 太古坊一座27樓 Tel 電話: +852 2846 9888 Fax 傳真: +852 2868 4432 ey.com 

To the shareholders of China Communications Construction Company Limited 

(Incorporated in the People’s Republic of China with limited liability) 

# OPINION 

We have audited the consolidated financial statements of China Communications Construction Company Limited (the “Company”) and its subsidiaries (the “Group”) set out on pages 120 to 252, which comprise the consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2023, and the consolidated statement of profit or loss, the consolidated statement of comprehensive income, the consolidated statement of changes in equity and the consolidated statement of cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the consolidated financial statements, including material accounting policy information. In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements give a true and fair view of the consolidated financial position of the Group as at 31 December 2023, and of its consolidated financial performance and its consolidated cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRSs”) issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) and have been properly prepared in compliance with the disclosure requirements of the Hong Kong Companies Ordinance. 

# BASIS FOR OPINION 

We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (“ISAs”) issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board. Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements section of our report. We are independent of the Group in accordance with the HKICPA’s Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (the “Code”) issued by the Hong Kong Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the Code. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 

# KEY AUDIT MATTERS 

Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the consolidated financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. For each matter below, our description of how our audit addressed the matter is provided in that context. We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements section of our report, including in relation to these matters. Accordingly, our audit included the performance of procedures designed to respond to our assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements. The results of our audit procedures, including the procedures performed to address the matters below, provide the basis for our audit opinion on the accompanying consolidated financial statements. 117 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# KEY AUDIT MATTERS (CONTINUED) 

Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter 

Recognition of revenue from construction services 

The Group derives most of its revenue from construction services and accounted for such revenue by measuring progress towards completion of the performance obligations (measuring progress). The measuring progress method involves the use of significant judgements and estimates, including estimates of total contract revenue and total contract cost. The management of the Group will continue to reappraise items such as total contract revenue, total cost according to the scope of deliveries and services required, and remaining cost to completion. In addition, revenue and cost realised on such contracts can vary (sometimes significantly) from the Group’s original estimates because of changes in conditions. The accounting policies and disclosures for the recognition of revenue from construction services are included in notes 2.5, 3, and 5 to the financial statements. We evaluated and tested the Group’s internal controls over the process to recognise revenue, including the records of expected contract costs and contract revenue, and revenue recognised based on the measurement of the progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligations. We selected material construction contracts to review key contract terms and checked the expected total contract revenue and contract costs. We examined the contract costs incurred on a sample basis by tracing to related documents. We performed cut-off testing procedures to check if the costs had been recognised in the appropriate accounting period. We re-calculated the proportion of the actual cost incurred relative to the estimated total cost and the revenue recognised under the measuring progress method. In addition, we performed analytical procedures on the gross margins of material construction contracts of the Group. 

Impairment of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables 

The impairment of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables was recognised based on the allowance for expected credit loss (“ECL”). The management of the Group determines the ECLs of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables based on historical information of settlement of contract assets and collection of trade receivables and long-term receivables, customers’ creditworthiness, and forward-looking economic conditions, involving the use of significant judgements and estimates. The accounting policies and disclosures for the impairment of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables are included in notes 2.5, 3, 25 and 26 to the financial statements. We evaluated and tested the Group’s internal controls over the process to recognise the allowance for ECLs of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables. We reviewed the management’s analysis of historical information of settlement of contract assets and collection of trade receivables and long-term receivables. We tested the accuracy of the ageing of trade receivables and long-term receivables balances by tracing details of related documents on a sample basis. We evaluated the management’s credit risk assessment of contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables. 

Impairment assessment of concession assets 

For those concession assets with indications of impairment, the management of the Group performed impairment tests to revalue the recoverable amounts of such concession assets. The recoverable amounts of such assets are determined using the discounted cash flow method which requires the Group to make assumptions, including future expectations for the traffic volume, necessary maintenance and operating costs incurred for the concession assets, and discount rates. The assessment of recoverable amounts by the management of the Group with the assistance of management specialists involves significant judgements and estimation. The accounting policies and disclosures for the impairment assessment of concession assets are included in notes 2.5, 3 and 18 to the financial statements. We evaluated and tested the Group’s internal controls over the process of impairment assessment on concession assets. We evaluated the competence, capabilities and objectivity of management’s specialists employed by the Group. We obtained an understanding of the work of management’s specialists and evaluated the appropriateness of the models and assumptions used by the management specialists. We involved internal valuation specialists to assist us in evaluating the models and the inputs used e.g. the discount rates. We reviewed the basis and assumptions used in the cash flow forecasts, including the forecasted traffic volume, the operation performance of these concession assets and the development plan of relevant areas in which these concession assets operated. We also compared the prior year’s forecast with the Group’s actual performance in 2023. We also evaluated the reasonableness of the discount rates. 118 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# OTHER INFORMATION INCLUDED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT 

The directors of the Company are responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report, other than the consolidated financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon. Our opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. In connection with our audit of the consolidated financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the consolidated financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 

# RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DIRECTORS FOR THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

The directors of the Company are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that give a true and fair view in accordance with IFRSs issued by the IASB and the disclosure requirements of the Hong Kong Companies Ordinance, and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, the directors of the Company are responsible for assessing the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors of the Company either intend to liquidate the Group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so. The directors of the Company are assisted by the Audit Committee in discharging their responsibilities for overseeing the Group’s financial reporting process. 

# AUDITOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Our report is made solely to you, as a body, and for no other purpose. We do not assume responsibility towards or accept liability to any other person for the contents of this report. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial statements. 119 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE CONSOLIDATED 

# FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) 

As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also: • Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. • Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s internal control. • Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the directors. • Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group to cease to continue as a going concern. • Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. • Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. We communicate with the Audit Committee regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. We also provide the Audit Committee with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to eliminate threats or safeguards applied. From the matters communicated with the Audit Committee, we determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Wong Man Kit. Ernst & Young Certified Public Accountants Hong Kong 28 March 2024 120 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) Revenue 4, 5 755,646 719,084 Cost of sales (661,118) (635,392) 

Gross profit 94,528 83,692 Other income 5 5,568 5,363 Other (losses)/gains, net 5 (325) 3,404 Selling and marketing expenses (2,543) (2,019) Administrative expenses (47,588) (44,139) Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets, net (7,901) (9,735) Other expenses (2,784) (2,564) 

Operating profit 38,955 34,002 Finance income 7 23,896 21,320 Finance costs, net 8 (24,310) (21,911) Share of profits and losses of: – Joint ventures (1,409) (666) – Associates 406 343 

Profit before tax 

6 37,538 33,088 Income tax expense 11 (6,397) (7,117) 

Profit for the year 31,141 25,971 

Attributable to: 

– Owners of the parent 24,734 20,226 – Non-controlling interests 6,407 5,745 

31,141 25,971 

Earnings per share attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent 

14 Basic RMB1.45 RMB1.15 

Diluted RMB1.45 RMB1.15 121 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) 

Profit for the year 31,141 25,971 

Other comprehensive income/(losses) Other comprehensive income/(losses) that will not be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods, net of tax: Actuarial losses on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax (2) –Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates – 1Changes in fair value of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive losses, net of tax (2,734) (4,825) 

Net other comprehensive loss that will not be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods (2,736) (4,824) 

Other comprehensive income/(losses) that may be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods, net of tax: Cash flow hedges, net of tax (4) (10) Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates 24 338 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 617 3,091 

Net other comprehensive income that may be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods 637 3,419 

Other comprehensive losses for the year, net of tax (2,099) (1,405) 

Total comprehensive income for the year 29,042 24,566 

Attributable to: 

– Owners of the parent 22,618 18,643 – Non-controlling interests 6,424 5,923 

29,042 24,566 122 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 

31 December 2023 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) 

Non-current assets 

Property, plant and equipment 15 75,102 60,705 Investment properties 16 9,583 10,633 Right-of-use assets 17(a) 20,353 18,274 Intangible assets 18 200,548 219,538 Investments in joint ventures 19 59,671 51,731 Investments in associates 20 53,820 47,588 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 21 27,316 21,489 Derivative financial instruments 27 413 681 Debt investments at amortised cost 1,240 1,629 Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 22 21,425 24,127 Contract assets 25 282,355 242,716 Trade and other receivables 26 236,179 190,188 Deferred tax assets 32 10,117 7,849 

Total non-current assets 998,122 897,148 

Current assets 

Inventories 24 88,021 78,263 Contract assets 25 170,257 150,555 Trade and other receivables 26 302,189 275,982 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 21 838 1,300 Debt investments at amortised cost – 135 Derivative financial instruments 27 – 7Restricted bank deposits and time deposits with an initial term of over three months 28 10,729 9,660 Cash and cash equivalents 28 110,204 103,663 

682,238 619,565 Assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale 12 3,902 –

Total current assets 686,140 619,565 

Current liabilities 

Trade and other payables 29 564,336 485,138 Contract liabilities 30 73,476 77,420 Derivative financial instruments 27 5 7Tax payable 9,662 8,010 Interest-bearing bank and other borrowings 31 111,912 93,704 Retirement benefit obligations 33 102 101 

759,493 664,380 Liabilities directly associated with the assets classified as held for sale 12 2,688 –

Total current liabilities 762,181 664,380 

Net current liabilities (76,041) (44,815) 

Total assets less current liabilities 922,081 852,333 

Continued/ ⋯123 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 

31 December 2023 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) 

Total assets less current liabilities 922,081 852,333 

Non-current liabilities 

Trade and other payables 29 53,121 41,989 Interest-bearing bank and other borrowings 31 399,714 372,646 Deferred income 1,633 1,718 Deferred tax liabilities 32 4,379 4,476 Retirement benefit obligations 33 907 847 Provision 34 3,203 3,165 

Total non-current liabilities 462,957 424,841 

Net assets 459,124 427,492 

Equity Equity attributable to owners of the parent 

Share capital 35 16,264 16,166 Share premium 35 20,049 19,625 Treasury shares (522) –Financial instruments classified as equity 37 35,000 37,988 Reserves 38 230,943 208,721 

301,734 282,500 

Non-controlling interests 157,390 144,992 

Total equity 459,124 427,492 

Wang Tongzhou Wang Haihuai Director Director 124 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

Attributable to owners of the parent Share capital Treasury shares Share premium Financial instruments classified as equity (1) Other reserves Retained earnings Total Non-controlling interests (2) Total equity 

Notes RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2022 16,166 – 19,625 37,988 44,339 163,860 281,978 144,198 426,176 

Business combination under common control – – – – (199) 720 521 794 1,315 

Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS 12 (note 2.2(c)) – – – – – 1 1 – 1

At 1 January 2023 (Restated) 16,166 – 19,625 37,988 44,140* 164,581* 282,500 144,992 427,492 

Profit for the year – – – – – 24,734 24,734 6,407 31,141 

Other comprehensive income/(losses) for the year: Changes in fair value of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – – (2,729) – (2,729) (5) (2,734) 

Cash flow hedges, net of tax – – – – (4) – (4) – (4) 

Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates – – – – 24 – 24 – 24 

Actuarial losses on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax – – – – (1) – (1) (1) (2) 

Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – – 594 – 594 23 617 

Total comprehensive income for the year – – – – (2,116) 24,734 22,618 6,424 29,042 

Final 2022 dividend declared – – – – – (3,509) (3,509) – (3,509) 

Interest distribution on perpetual securities (1)(2) – – – – – (1,393) (1,393) (3,842) (5,235) 

Share-based payment 36 – – – – 146 – 146 – 146 

Grant of restricted shares 98 – 424 – – – 522 – 522 

Restricted shares repurchase obligation – (522) – – – – (522) – (522) 

Dividends to non-controlling shareholders – – – – – – – (2,713) (2,713) 

Share of other reserves of joint ventures and associates – – – – 4 – 4 – 4

Shares repurchased – – – – – – – (916) (916) 

Withdrawal of capital by non- controlling shareholders – – – – – – – (2,011) (2,011) 

Capital contribution from non- controlling shareholders – – – – – – – 4,636 4,636 

Spin-off and separate listing of three subsidiaries – – – – 4,929 – 4,929 7,373 12,302 

Business combination under common control 42(b) – – – – (88) – (88) – (88) 

Acquisition of subsidiaries 42(a) – – – – – – – 106 106 

Disposal of subsidiaries 43 – – – – – – – (2,027) (2,027) 

Issue of perpetual securities – – – 3,000 (15) – 2,985 30,963 33,948 

Redemption of perpetual securities – – – (5,988) – – (5,988) (25,824) (31,812) 

Transaction with non-controlling interests – – – – (463) (7) (470) 229 (241) 

Transfer to statutory surplus reserve 38(a) – – – – 2,260 (2,260) – – –

Transfer from general reserve 38(b) – – – – 95 (95) – – –

Transfer to safety production reserve 38(c) – – – – 922 (922) – – –

Transfer of fair value reserve upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – – – – (93) 93 – – –

At 31 December 2023 16,264 (522) 20,049 35,000 49,721* 181,222* 301,734 157,390 459,124 

* As at 31 December 2023, these reserve accounts comprise the consolidated reserves of RMB230,943 million (2022: RMB208,721 million (restated)) in the consolidated statement of financial position. (1) As of 31 December 2023, perpetual securities of RMB35,000 million (2022: RMB37,988 million(restated)) issued by the Company were classified as equity in the consolidated financial statements. During the year, interest distribution on these perpetual securities by the Company totaled RMB1,393 million. (2) As of 31 December 2023, perpetual securities of RMB85,436 million (2022: RMB81,052 million (restated)) issued by subsidiaries of the Company were classified as non-controlling interests in the consolidated financial statements. During the year, interest distribution on these perpetual securities by the subsidiaries of the Company totalled RMB3,842 million. Continued/ ⋯125 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

Attributable to owners of the parent Share capital Share premium Financial instruments classified as equity Other reserves Retained earnings Total Non-controlling interests Total equity Notes RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2021 16,166 19,625 33,959 40,115 150,485 260,350 131,004 391,354 Business combination under common control – – – 413 543 956 713 1,669 Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS 12 (note 2.2(c)) – – – – 1 1 – 1

At 1 January 2022 (Restated) 16,166 19,625 33,959 40,528 151,029 261,307 131,717 393,024 Profit for the year (Restated) – – – – 20,226 20,226 5,745 25,971 Other comprehensive income/(losses) for the year: Changes in fair value of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – (4,836) – (4,836) 11 (4,825) Cash flow hedges, net of tax – – – (10) – (10) – (10) Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates – – – 339 – 339 – 339 Actuarial losses on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax – – – (1) – (1) 1 –Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – 2,925 – 2,925 166 3,091 

Total comprehensive income for the year (Restated) – – – (1,583) 20,226 18,643 5,923 24,566 Final 2021 dividend declared – – – – (3,293) (3,293) – (3,293) Interest distribution on perpetual securities – – – – (1,622) (1,622) (3,530) (5,152) Dividends to non-controlling shareholders – – – – – – (1,952) (1,952) Share of other reserves of joint ventures and associates – – – (36) – (36) (35) (71) Withdrawal of capital by non-controlling shareholders – – – – – – (112) (112) Capital contribution from non-controlling shareholders – – – 4,335 – 4,335 12,319 16,654 Business combination under common control – – – (243) – (243) – (243) Spin-off and separate listing of three subsidiaries – – – (510) – (510) – (510) Acquisition of subsidiaries – – – – – – 89 89 Disposal of subsidiaries 43 – – – – – – (741) (741) Issue of perpetual securities – – 18,000 (30) – 17,970 25,332 43,302 Redemption of perpetual securities – – (13,971) – – (13,971) (24,018) (37,989) Transaction with non-controlling interests – – – (79) – (79) – (79) Transfer to statutory surplus reserve 38(a) – – – 743 (743) – – –Transfer from general reserve 38(b) – – – 141 (141) – – –Transfer to safety production reserve 38(c) – – – 961 (961) – – –Transfer of fair value reserve upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – – – (86) 86 – – –Others – – – (1) – (1) – (1) 

At 31 December 2022 (Restated) 16,166 19,625 37,988 44,140* 164,581* 282,500 144,992 427,492 126 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) 

Cash flows from operating activities 

Profit before tax 37,538 33,088 Adjustments for: – Depreciation of property, plant and equipment, investment properties 6 8,334 9,269 – Depreciation of right-of-use assets 6 1,434 1,268 – Amortisation of intangible assets 6 3,285 2,918 – Gains on disposal of items of property, plant and equipment, intangible assets and other long-term assets 5 (511) (1,385) – Gains on disposal of joint ventures and associates 5 (7) (79) – Fair value losses on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 5 770 169 – Fair value losses/(gains) on derivative financial instruments 5 278 (34) – Gains on disposal of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 5 (10) (118) – Gains on disposal of subsidiaries 5 (518) (2,710) – Dividend income from financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 5 (284) (241) – Dividend income from equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 5 (873) (880) – Other income from investing activities (288) (167) – Share of losses of joint ventures and associates, net 19, 20 1,003 323 – Write-down of inventories to net realisable value 6 254 201 – Provision for impairment of financial assets and contract assets, net 6 7,901 9,735 – Provision for impairment of property, plant and equipment 15 5 79 – Provision for impairment of associates and joint ventures 19, 20 248 1– Provision for impairment of goodwill 18 196 50 – Interest income 7 (23,896) (21,320) – Interest expenses 8 21,809 20,345 – Equity-settled share-based payment 146 –– Net foreign exchange losses on borrowings 8 437 30 

57,251 50,542 Increase in inventories (8,164) (5,390) Increase in trade and other receivables (110,508) (95,280) Increase in contract assets (13,177) (17,168) Increase in restricted bank deposits (1,540) (205) Increase in trade and other payables 75,562 58,417 Decrease in contract liabilities (3,851) (3,147) Increase/(decrease) in retirement benefit obligations 60 (114) Increase/(decrease) in provision 38 (521) (Decrease)/increase in deferred income (85) 126 

Cash used in operations (4,414) (12,740) Interest income from operating activities 22,669 20,804 Income tax paid (6,181) (6,925) 

Net cash flows from operating activities 12,074 1,139 

Continued/ ⋯127 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 

Year ended 31 December 2023 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) Net cash flows from operating activities 12,074 1,139 

Cash flows from investing activities 

Purchases of items of property, plant and equipment (14,517) (13,059) Purchases of investment properties (29) (5) Additions to right-of-use assets (906) (598) Purchases of intangible assets (23,505) (20,506) Proceeds from disposal of items of property, plant and equipment 1,102 1,987 Proceeds from disposal of right-of-use assets 436 58 Proceeds from disposal of investment properties 3 134 Proceeds from disposal of intangible assets 28 14 Business combination 42 553 115 Asset acquisition – (2,721) Investments in associates (5,454) (4,421) Investments in joint ventures (6,821) (6,822) Disposal of subsidiaries 43 5,088 9,054 Disposal of joint ventures and associates 750 841 Purchases of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income (1,284) (960) Purchases of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (20,869) (28,825) Proceeds from disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 420 587 Proceeds from disposal of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 15,187 20,958 Purchases of debt instruments – (1,094) Loans to joint ventures, associates and third parties (17,894) (12,110) Repayment of loans from joint ventures, associates and third parties 6,540 7,986 Interest received 308 451 Changes in time deposits with an initial term of over three months 471 (639) Cash consideration from operation of concession assets 1,420 289 Dividends received 2,605 1,561 Proceeds from other investment activity 483 798 

Net cash flows used in investing activities (55,885) (46,927) 

Cash flows from financing activities 

Capital contribution from non-controlling shareholders 3,923 16,642 Withdrawal of capital contribution by non-controlling interests (2,927) (112) Dividends paid to non-controlling shareholders (2,344) (1,844) Dividends paid to equity holders of the parent (3,509) (3,293) Proceeds from issue of perpetual securities 33,963 43,303 Interest paid for perpetual securities (4,922) (4,734) Redemption of perpetual securities (31,937) (37,990) Proceeds from bank and other borrowings 378,956 293,280 Repayments of bank and other borrowings (296,300) (228,905) Interest paid for bank and other borrowings (23,054) (22,258) Transaction with non-controlling interests (155) (74) Cash paid for business combination under common control (88) (220) Increase in an amount due to the ultimate holding company 522 –Principal portion of lease payments (1,796) (1,163) 

Net cash flows from financing activities 50,332 52,632 

Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 6,521 6,844 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 28 103,663 96,121 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes, net 174 698 

Subtotal 110,358 103,663 

Less: held for sale-cash and cash equivalents 154 –

Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 

28 110,204 103,663 128 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 1. CORPORATE AND GROUP INFORMATION 

China Communications Construction Company Limited (the “Company”) was established in the People’s Republic of China (the “PRC”) on 8 October 2006 as a joint stock company with limited liability under the Company Law of the PRC as part of the group reorganisation of China Communications Construction Group (Limited) (“CCCG”), the parent company and a state-owned enterprise established in the PRC. The H shares of the Company were listed on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited on 15 December 2006 and the A shares of the Company were listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange on 9 March 2012. The address of the Company’s registered office is 85 De Sheng Men Wai Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, the PRC. The Company and its subsidiaries (together, the “Group”) are principally engaged in infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging businesses. In the opinion of the directors, the immediate and ultimate holding company of the Company is CCCG, which was established in the PRC. 

Information about subsidiaries 

Particulars of the Company’s principal subsidiaries are as follows: 

Name Place of incorporation/ registration and business Type of legal entity Issued ordinary/ registered share capital 

(in million) 

Percentage of equity attributable to the Company Principal activities Direct Indirect 

Unlisted 

China Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. (“CHEC”) PRC and other regions Limited liability company RMB6,000 50.10% 49.90% Infrastructure construction China Road and Bridge Corporation (“CRBC”) PRC and other regions Limited liability company RMB6,000 99.64% 0.36% Infrastructure construction CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB7,295 82.39% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB5,329 71.50% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB6,021 89.31% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Fourth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB4,966 86.23% – Infrastructure construction CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB6,976 74.81% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB3,942 65.16% – Infrastructure construction Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB3,974 71.08% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Third Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB2,156 70.00% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB2,177 71.20% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Water Transportation Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB818 100.00% – Infrastructure design CCCC Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB750 100.00% – Infrastructure design Continued/ ⋯129 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

Name Place of incorporation/ registration and business Type of legal entity Issued ordinary/ registered share capital 

(in million) 

Percentage of equity attributable to the Company Principal activities Direct Indirect 

CCCC First Harbour Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB723 100.00% – Infrastructure design CCCC Second Harbour Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB428 100.00% – Infrastructure design CCCC Third Harbour Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB731 100.00% – Infrastructure design CCCC Fourth Harbour Consultants Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB630 100.00% – Infrastructure design China Infrastructure Maintenance Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB1,314 54.32% 45.68% Infrastructure design CCCC Dredging (Group) Co., Ltd. (“CCCC Dredging”) PRC Limited liability company RMB11,775 99.90% 0.10% Dredging CCCC Investment Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB12,500 100.00% – Investment holding CCCC Xi’an Road Construction Machinery Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB433 54.31% 45.69% Manufacture of road construction machinery China Highway Vehicle & Machinery Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB168 100.00% – Trading of motor vehicle spare parts Chuwa Bussan Co., Ltd. (“Chuwa Bussan”) Japan Limited liability company JPY100 99.94% – Trading of machinery CCCC Shanghai Equipment Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB10 55.00% – Maintenance and design of port machinery CCCC Mechanical & Electrical Engineering Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB833 60.00% 40.00% Infrastructure construction China Communications Materials & Equipment Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB1,734 100.00% – Trading of construction materials and equipment Continued/ ⋯

# 1. CORPORATE AND GROUP INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

Information about subsidiaries (continued) 130 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

Name Place of incorporation/ registration and business Type of legal entity Issued ordinary/ registered share capital 

(in million) 

Percentage of equity attributable to the Company Principal activities Direct Indirect 

CCCC Finance PRC Limited liability company RMB7,000 95.00% – Financial services CCCC International Holding Limited (“CCCI”) Hong Kong Limited liability company HK$2,372 50.98% 49.02% Investment holding CCCC Capital Holdings Limited (“CCCC Capital”) PRC Limited liability company RMB10,000 100.00% – Fund management and financial leasing CCCC Asset Management Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB20,733 35.37% 64.63% Investment holding CCCC Urban Investment Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB10,000 91.94% – Investment holding CCCC Tianhe Machinery and Equipment Manufacturing Co., Ltd PRC Limited liability company RMB1,277 81.52% 11.74% Machinery and equipment manufacturing CCCC Changjiang Construction and Development Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB2,667 41.24% 33.74% Infrastructure design CCCC South China Construction and Development Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB623 100.00% – Infrastructure construction CCCC Design Consulting Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB2,062 53.88% – Infrastructure design Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. PRC Limited liability company RMB1,200 85.00% – Cement sales CCCC (Tianjin) Rail Transit Investment and Construction Co., Ltd PRC Limited liability company RMB4,267 44.51% 7.04% Infrastructure construction Forsea Holdings PTE. Ltd. Singapore Limited liability company USD1 100% – Infrastructure construction The above table lists the subsidiaries of the Company which, in the opinion of the directors, principally affected the results for the year or formed a substantial portion of the net assets of the Group. To give details of other subsidiaries would, in the opinion of the directors, result in particulars of excessive length. 

# 1. CORPORATE AND GROUP INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

Information about subsidiaries (continued) 131 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES 2.1 Basis of preparation 

These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRSs”) issued by International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) and the disclosure requirements of the Hong Kong Companies Ordinance. They have been prepared under the historical cost convention, except for certain financial assets and liabilities (including derivative financial instruments) which have been measured at fair value. Disposal groups held for sale are stated at the lower of their carrying amounts and fair values less costs to sell as further explained in note 2.5. These financial statements are presented in Renminbi (“RMB”) and all values are rounded to the nearest million except when otherwise indicated. 

Basis of consolidation 

The consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively referred to as the “Group”) for the year ended 31 December 2023. A subsidiary is an entity (including a structured entity), directly or indirectly, controlled by the Company. Control is achieved when the Group is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee (i.e., existing rights that give the Group the current ability to direct the relevant activities of the investee). Generally, there is a presumption that a majority of voting rights results in control. When the Company has less than a majority of the voting or similar rights of an investee, the Group considers all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing whether it has power over an investee, including: (a) the contractual arrangement with the other vote holders of the investee; (b) rights arising from other contractual arrangements; and (c) the Group’s voting rights and potential voting rights. The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the Company, using consistent accounting policies. The results of subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains control, and continue to be consolidated until the date that such control ceases. Profit or loss and each component of other comprehensive income are attributed to the owners of the parent of the Group and to the non-controlling interests, even if this results in the non-controlling interests having a deficit balance. All intra-group assets and liabilities, equity, income, expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between members of the Group are eliminated in full on consolidation. The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control described above. A change in the ownership interest of a subsidiary, without a loss of control, is accounted for as an equity transaction. If the Group loses control over a subsidiary, it derecognises the related assets (including goodwill) liabilities, any non-controlling interest and the exchange reserve; and recognises the fair value of any investment retained and any resulting surplus or deficit in profit or loss. The Group’s share of components previously recognised in other comprehensive income is reclassified to profit or loss or retained profits, as appropriate, on the same basis as would be required if the Group had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities. 

Going concern 

The Group had net current liabilities of RMB76,041 million as at 31 December 2023. Having considered the Group’s cash flow projections for the year ending 31 December 2024, including the Group’s cash position, cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, and the unutilised bank facilities as at the date of this report, the directors of the Company are satisfied that the Group is able to meet its financial obligations in full as they fall due for the coming 12 months. Accordingly, these financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis. 132 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.2 Changes in accounting policies and disclosures 

The Group has adopted the following new and revised IFRSs for the first time for the current year’s financial statements. IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts Amendments to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2 Disclosure of Accounting Policies Amendments to IAS 8 Definition of Accounting Estimates Amendments to IAS 12 Deferred Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a Single Transaction Amendments to IAS 12 International Tax Reform – Pillar Two Model Rules The nature and the impact of the new and revised IFRSs that are applicable to the Group are described below: (a) Amendments to IAS 1 require entities to disclose their material accounting policy information rather than their significant accounting policies. Accounting policy information is material if, when considered together with other information included in an entity’s financial statements, it can reasonably be expected to influence decisions that the primary users of general-purpose financial statements make on the basis of those financial statements. Amendments to IFRS Practice Statement 2 Making Materiality Judgements provide non-mandatory guidance on how to apply the concept of materiality to accounting policy disclosures. The Group has disclosed the material accounting policy information in note 2.5 to the financial statements. The amendments did not have any impact on the measurement, recognition or presentation of any items in the Group’s financial statements. (b) Amendments to IAS 8 clarify the distinction between changes in accounting estimates and changes in accounting policies. Accounting estimates are defined as monetary amounts in financial statements that are subject to measurement uncertainty. The amendments also clarify how entities use measurement techniques and inputs to develop accounting estimates. Since the Group’s approach and policy align with the amendments, the amendments had no impact on the Group’s financial statements. (c) Amendments to IAS 12 Deferred Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a Single Transaction narrow the scope of the initial recognition exception in IAS 12 so that it no longer applies to transactions that give rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences, such as leases and decommissioning obligations. Therefore, entities are required to recognise a deferred tax asset (provided that sufficient taxable profit is available) and a deferred tax liability for temporary differences arising from these transactions. Prior the initial application of these amendments, the Group applied the initial recognition exception and did not recognise a deferred tax assets and a deferred tax liability for temporary differences for transactions related to leases. The Group has applied the amendments on temporary differences related to leases as at 1 January 2022. Upon initial application of these amendments, the Group recognised (i) a deferred tax asset for all deductible temporary differences associated with lease liabilities (provided that sufficient taxable profit is available), and (ii) a deferred tax liability for all taxable temporary differences associated with right-of-use assets as at 1 January 2022. With cumulative effect recognised as an adjustment to the balances of retained profits and non-controlling interest at that date. The quantitative impact on the financial statements is summarised below. 133 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.2 Changes in accounting policies and disclosures (continued) 

(c) (continued) Impact on the consolidated statement of financial position: 

Increase/(decrease) As at 31 December 2023 

As at 31 December 2022 As at 1 January 2022 Note 

RMB million 

RMB million RMB million Assets Deferred tax assets (i) 8 1 1Total non-current assets 8 1 1Total assets 8 1 1Net assets 8 1 1Equity Retained profits (included in reserves) 8 1 1Equity attributable to owners of the parent 8 1 1Total equity 8 1 1Note (i): The deferred tax asset and the deferred tax liability arising from lease contracts of the same subsidiary have been offset in the statement of financial position for presentation purposes. Impact on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income: 

Increase/(decrease) For the year ended 31 December 2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Income tax expense (7) (1) Profit for the year 7 1Attributable to: Owners of the parent 7 1Total comprehensive income for the year 7 1Attributable to: Owners of the parent 7 1

The adoption of amendments to IAS 12 did not have any material impact on the basic and diluted earnings per share attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent, other comprehensive income and the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022. 134 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.2 Changes in accounting policies and disclosures (continued) 

(d) Amendments to IAS 12 International Tax Reform – Pillar Two Model Rules introduce a mandatory temporary exception from the recognition and disclosure of deferred taxes arising from the implementation of the Pillar Two model rules published by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The amendments also introduce disclosure requirements for the affected entities to help users of the financial statements better understand the entities’ exposure to Pillar Two income taxes, including the disclosure of current tax related to Pillar Two income taxes separately in the periods when Pillar Two legislation is effective and the disclosure of known or reasonably estimable information of their exposure to Pillar Two income taxes in periods in which the legislation is enacted or substantively enacted but not yet in effect. The Group has not yet applied the temporary exception during the current year because most of the entities comprising the Group are operating in jurisdictions in which the Pillar Two tax law has not yet been enacted or substantively enacted. The Group is in the process of assessing the potential exposure arising from Pillar Two legislation based on the information available for the financial year ended 31 December 2023. Based on the assessment carried out so far, the Group has identified certain countries where the Pillar Two effective tax rates are likely to be lower than 15%. Quantitative information to indicate potential exposure to Pillar Two income taxes is currently not known or reasonably estimable. 

2.3 Prior period restatement 

In addition to the adoption of amendments to IAS 12, the Group acquired a subsidiary from China Communications Real Estate Group Co., LTD., China Real Estate Development Group Limited, and China Real Estate Co., LTD. Since these subsidiaries and the Group are both under common control of CCCG before and after the acquisition, the acquisition constitutes a business combination under common control, which is mentioned in note 42(b) to the financial statements. Based on the Group’s shareholding in subsidiaries (i.e., CCCC Highway Consultants Co., Ltd., CCCC First Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. and CCCC Second Highway Consultants Co., Ltd.) (collectively called the “Three Highway Institutes”), the Group realized the spin-off and listing of the design segment through the asset swap and the issuance of shares to purchase assets for reorganization and integration (“Asset swap”). Before the Asset swap, China Urban & Rural Holding Group Limited (“CURH”) wholly-owned China Northeast Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd., China Southwest Municipal Engineering Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. and CCCC Urban Energy Research and Design Institute Co. Ltd (collectively called the “Three Municipal Institutes”). In the terms of Asset swap, the Group together with CURH exchange the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes for Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Ltd. (“Qilianshan Cement”). The parent of Qilianshan Cement (“Qilianshan”) issued share to the Group and CURH for fair value difference between swapping asset. Upon such reorganization, the Group directly holds 53.88% equity of the Qilianshan and 85% equity of Qilianshan Cement. The Qilianshan holds 100% equity of the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes. Therefore, the Group indirectly holds 53.88% equity of the Three Highway Institutes and the Three Municipal Institutes. Since the Three Municipal Institutes and the Group are both under common control of CCCG before and after the completion of the Asset swap, the acquisition constitutes a business combination under common control, which is mentioned in note 42(c) to the financial statements. Business combinations arising from transfers of interests in entities that are under the control of the ultimate shareholder that controls the Group are accounted for as if the acquisitions had occurred at the beginning of the earliest date presented or, if later, at the date that common control was established. The assets and liabilities acquired are recognised at the carrying amounts recognised previously in the acquired entities’ financial statements. Upon transfer of interest in an entity to another entity that is under the control of the ultimate shareholder that controls the Group, any difference between the Group’s interest in the carrying value of the assets and liabilities and the cost of transfer of interest in the entity is recognised directly in equity. The consolidated statement of comprehensive income includes the results of each of the combining entities from the earliest date presented or since the date when the combining entities first came under the common control, where this is a shorter period. All intra-group balances, transactions, unrealized gains and losses resulting from intra-group transactions and dividends are eliminated in full on consolidation. Due to adoption of amendments to IAS 12 and the acquisition of subsidiaries under common control, the opening balances as at 1 January 2022 and the comparative information for the year ended 31 December 2022 and as of 31 December 2022 have been restated in the consolidated financial statements. 135 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.3 Prior period restatement (continued) 

Restated consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years ended 31 December 2022: 

Before restatement Effect of business combinations under common control Effect of application of amendments to IAS 12 After restatement 

RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Profit for the year 25,706 264 1 25,971 Net other comprehensive income to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods 3,419 – – 3,419 Net other comprehensive loss that will not be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods (4,850) 26 – (4,824) Total comprehensive income for the year 24,275 290 1 24,566 Attributable to: Owners of the parent 18,469 173 1 18,643 Non-controlling interests 5,806 117 – 5,923 Restated consolidated statements of financial position as at 31 December 2022: 

Before restatement Effect of business combinations under common control Effect of application of amendments to IAS 12 After restatement 

RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Total non-current assets 895,087 2,060 1 897,148 Total current assets 616,263 3,302 – 619,565 Total current liabilities 661,353 3,027 – 664,380 Total non-current liabilities 423,821 1,020 – 424,841 Equity attributable to owners of the parent 281,978 521 1 282,500 Non-controlling interests 144,198 794 – 144,992 Total equity 426,176 1,315 1 427,492 136 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.4 Issued but not yet effective International Financial Reporting Standards 

The Group has not applied the following revised IFRSs, which have been issued but are not yet effective, in these financial statements. The Group intends to apply these revised IFRSs, if applicable, when they become effective. Amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture 3Amendments to IFRS 16 Lease Liability in a Sale and Leaseback 1Amendments to IAS 1 Classification of Liabilities as Current or Non-current (the “2020 Amendments”) 1Amendments to IAS 1 Non-current Liabilities with Covenants (the “2022 Amendments”) 1Amendments to IAS 7 and IFRS 7 Supplier Finance Arrangements 1Amendments to IAS 21 Lack of Exchangeability 21 Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2024 2 Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2025 3 No mandatory effective date yet determined but available for adoption Further information about those IFRSs that are expected to be applicable to the Group is described below: Amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 address an inconsistency between the requirements in IFRS 10 and in IAS 28 in dealing with the sale or contribution of assets between an investor and its associate or joint venture. The amendments require a full recognition of a gain or loss resulting from a downstream transaction when the sale or contribution of assets constitutes a business. For a transaction involving assets that do not constitute a business, a gain or loss resulting from the transaction is recognised in the investor’s profit or loss only to the extent of the unrelated investor’s interest in that associate or joint venture. The amendments are to be applied prospectively. The previous mandatory effective date of amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 was removed by the IASB. However, the amendments are available for adoption now. Amendments to IFRS 16 specify the requirements that a seller-lessee uses in measuring the lease liability arising in a sale and leaseback transaction to ensure the seller-lessee does not recognise any amount of the gain or loss that relates to the right of use it retains. The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2024 and shall be applied retrospectively to sale and leaseback transactions entered into after the date of initial application of IFRS 16 (i.e., 1 January 2019). Earlier application is permitted. The amendments are not expected to have any significant impact on the Group’s financial statements. The 2020 Amendments clarify the requirements for classifying liabilities as current or non-current, including what is meant by a right to defer must exist at the end of the reporting period. Classification of a liability is unaffected by the likelihood that the entity will exercise its right to defer settlement. The amendments also clarify that a liability can be settled in its own equity instruments, and that only if a conversion option in a convertible liability is itself accounted for as an equity instrument would the terms of a liability not impact its classification. The 2022 Amendments further clarify that, among covenants of a liability arising from a loan arrangement, only those with which an entity must comply on or before the reporting date affect the classification of that liability as current or non-current. Additional disclosures are required for non-current liabilities that are subject to the entity complying with future covenants within 12 months after the reporting period. The amendments shall be applied retrospectively with early application permitted. An entity that applies the 2020 Amendments early is required to apply simultaneously the 2022 Amendments, and vice versa. The Group is currently assessing the impact of the amendments and whether existing loan agreements may require revision. Based on a preliminary assessment, the amendments are not expected to have any significant impact on the Group’s financial statements. Amendments to IAS 7 and IFRS 7 clarify the characteristics of supplier finance arrangements and require additional disclosure of such arrangements. The disclosure requirements in the amendments are intended to assist users of financial statements in understanding the effects of supplier finance arrangements on an entity’s liabilities, cash flows and exposure to liquidity risk. Earlier application of the amendments is permitted. The amendments provide certain transition reliefs regarding comparative information, quantitative information as at the beginning of the annual reporting period and interim disclosures. The amendments are not expected to have any significant impact on the Group’s financial statements. Amendments to IAS 21 specify how an entity shall assess whether a currency is exchangeable into another currency and how it shall estimate a spot exchange rate at a measurement date when exchangeability is lacking. The amendments require disclosures of information that enable users of financial statements to understand the impact of a currency not being exchangeable. Earlier application is permitted. When applying the amendments, an entity cannot restate comparative information. Any cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments shall be recognised as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained profits or to the cumulative amount of translation differences accumulated in a separate component of equity, where appropriate, at the date of initial application. The amendments are not expected to have any significant impact on the Group’s financial statements. 137 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies 

Investments in associates and joint ventures 

An associate is an entity in which the Group has a long term interest of generally not less than 20% of the equity voting rights and over which it has significant influence. Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee, but is not control or joint control over those policies. A joint venture is a type of joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the joint venture. Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement, which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control. The Group’s investments in associates and joint ventures are stated in the consolidated statement of financial position at the Group’s share of net assets under the equity method of accounting, less any impairment losses. Adjustments are made to bring into line any dissimilar accounting policies that may exist. The Group’s share of the post-acquisition results and other comprehensive income of associates and joint ventures is included in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and consolidated other comprehensive income, respectively. In addition, when there has been a change recognised directly in the equity of the associate or joint venture, the Group recognises its share of any changes, when applicable, in the consolidated statement of changes in equity. Unrealised gains and losses resulting from transactions between the Group and its associates or joint ventures are eliminated to the extent of the Group’s investments in the associates or joint ventures, except where unrealised losses provide evidence of an impairment of the assets transferred. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of associates or joint ventures is included as part of the Group’s investments in associates or joint ventures. If an investment in an associate becomes an investment in a joint venture or vice versa, the retained interest is not remeasured. Instead, the investment continues to be accounted for under the equity method. In all other cases, upon loss of significant influence over the associate or joint control over the joint venture, the Group measures and recognises any retained investment at its fair value. Any difference between the carrying amount of the associate or joint venture upon loss of significant influence or joint control and the fair value of the retained investment and proceeds from disposal is recognised in profit or loss. When an investment in an associate or a joint venture is classified as held for sale, it is accounted for in accordance with IFRS 5 Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations. 

Interests in joint operations 

A joint operation is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the assets, and obligations for the liabilities, relating to the arrangement. Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement, which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control. The Group recognises in relation to its interest in a joint operation: • its assets, including its share of any assets held jointly; • its liabilities, including its share of any liabilities incurred jointly; • its revenue from the sale of its share of the output arising from the joint operation; • its share of the revenue from the sale of the output by the joint operation; and • its expenses, including its share of any expenses incurred jointly. The assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses relating to the Group’s interest in a joint operation are accounted for in accordance with the IFRSs applicable to the particular assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. 138 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Business combinations and goodwill 

Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method, except for those acquisitions which are considered as a business combination under common control in a manner similar to pooling-of-interest. 

Merger accounting for common control combinations 

The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the combining entities or businesses in which the common control combination occurs as if they had been combined from the date when the combining entities or businesses first came under the control of the ultimate controlling party. The net assets of the combining entities or businesses are combined using the existing book values from the ultimate controlling parties’ perspective. No amount is recognised in consideration for goodwill or excess of the acquirer’s interest in the net fair value of the acquiree identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities over cost at the time of common control combination, to the extent of the continuation of the ultimate controlling party’s interest. The consolidated statement of profit or loss includes the results of each of the combining entities or businesses from the earliest date presented or since the date when the combining entities or businesses first came under the common control, where there is a shorter period, regardless of the date of the common control combination. The comparative amounts in the consolidated financial statements are presented as if the entities or businesses had been combined at the end of the prior reporting period or when they first came under common control, whichever is shorter. Transaction costs, including professional fees, registration fees, costs of furnishing information to shareholders and costs incurred in combining operations of the previously separate businesses and incurred in relation to the common control combination that is to be accounted for by using merger accounting, are recognised as expenses in the year in which they are incurred. 

Acquisition method of accounting for non-common control combinations 

The Group applies the acquisition method to account for non-common control business combinations. The consideration transferred is measured at the acquisition date fair value which is the sum of the acquisition date fair values of assets transferred by the Group, liabilities assumed by the Group to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interests issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree. For each business combination, the Group elects whether to measure the non-controlling interests in the acquiree at fair value or at the proportionate share of the acquiree’s identifiable net assets. All other components of non-controlling interests are measured at fair value. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred. The Group determines that it has acquired a business when the acquired set of activities and assets includes an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs. When the Group acquires a business, it assesses the financial assets and liabilities assumed for appropriate classification and designation in accordance with the contractual terms, economic circumstances and pertinent conditions as at the acquisition date. This includes the separation of embedded derivatives in host contracts of the acquiree. If the business combination is achieved in stages, the previously held equity interest is remeasured at its acquisition date fair value and any resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss. Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the acquirer is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date. Contingent consideration classified as an asset or liability is measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss. Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not remeasured and subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity. Goodwill is initially measured at cost, being the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred, the amount recognised for non-controlling interests and any fair value of the Group’s previously held equity interests in the acquiree over the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. If the sum of this consideration and other items is lower than the fair value of the net assets acquired, the difference is, after reassessment, recognised in profit or loss as a gain on bargain purchase. 139 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Business combinations and goodwill (continued) Acquisition method of accounting for non-common control combinations (continued) 

After initial recognition, goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired. The Group performs its annual impairment test of goodwill as at 31 December. For the purpose of impairment testing, goodwill acquired in a business combination is, from the acquisition date, allocated to each of the Group’s cash-generating units, or groups of cash-generating units, that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination, irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the Group are assigned to those units or groups of units. Impairment is determined by assessing the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit (group of cash-generating units) to which the goodwill relates. Where the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit (group of cash-generating units) is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognised. An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period. Where goodwill has been allocated to a cash-generating unit (or group of cash-generating units) and part of the operation within that unit is disposed of, the goodwill associated with the operation disposed of is included in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on the disposal. Goodwill disposed of in these circumstances is measured based on the relative value of the operation disposed of and the portion of the cash-generating unit retained. 

Fair value measurement 

The Group measures its derivative financial instruments, equity investments and certain other financial assets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value measurement is based on the presumption that the transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability takes place either in the principal market for the asset or liability, or in the absence of a principal market, in the most advantageous market for the asset or liability. The principal or the most advantageous market must be accessible by the Group. The fair value of an asset or a liability is measured using the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, assuming that market participants act in their economic best interest. A fair value measurement of a non-financial asset takes into account a market participant’s ability to generate economic benefits by using the asset in its highest and best use or by selling it to another market participant that would use the asset in its highest and best use. The Group uses valuation techniques that are appropriate in the circumstances and for which sufficient data are available to measure fair value, maximising the use of relevant observable inputs and minimising the use of unobservable inputs. All assets and liabilities for which fair value is measured or disclosed in the financial statements are categorised within the fair value hierarchy, described as follows, based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole: Level 1 – based on quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 – based on valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is observable, either directly or indirectly Level 3 – based on valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable For assets and liabilities that are recognised in the financial statements on a recurring basis, the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation (based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole) at the end of each reporting period. 140 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Impairment of non-financial assets 

Where an indication of impairment exists, or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required (other than inventories, contract assets, deferred tax assets, investment properties and non-current assets/a disposal group classified as held for sale), the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated. An asset’s recoverable amount is the higher of the asset’s or cash-generating unit’s value in use and its fair value less costs of disposal, and is determined for an individual asset, unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets, in which case the recoverable amount is determined for the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs. In testing a cash-generating unit for impairment, a portion of the carrying amount of a corporate asset (e.g., a headquarters building) is allocated to an individual cash-generating unit if it can be allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis or, otherwise, to the smallest group of cash-generating units. An impairment loss is recognised only if the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount. In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset. An impairment loss is charged to the statement of profit or loss in the period in which it arises in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset. An assessment is made at the end of each reporting period as to whether there is an indication that previously recognised impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased. If such an indication exists, the recoverable amount is estimated. A previously recognised impairment loss of an asset other than goodwill is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount of that asset, but not to an amount higher than the carrying amount that would have been determined (net of any depreciation/amortisation) had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years. A reversal of such an impairment loss is credited to the statement of profit or loss in the period in which it arises. 

Related parties 

A party is considered to be related to the Group if: (a) the party is a person or a close member of that person’s family and that person: (i) has control or joint control over the Group; (ii) has significant influence over the Group; or (iii) is a member of the key management personnel of the Group or of a parent of the Group; or (b) the party is an entity where any of the following conditions applies: (i) the entity and the Group are members of the same group; (ii) one entity is an associate or joint venture of the other entity (or of a parent, subsidiary or fellow subsidiary of the other entity); (iii) the entity and the Group are joint ventures of the same third party; (iv) one entity is a joint venture of a third entity and the other entity is an associate of the third entity; (v) the entity is a post-employment benefit plan for the benefit of employees of either the Group or an entity related to the Group; (vi) the entity is controlled or jointly controlled by a person identified in (a); (vii) a person identified in (a)(i) has significant influence over the entity or is a member of the key management personnel of the entity (or of a parent of the entity); and (viii) the entity, or any member of a group of which it is a part, provides key management personnel services to the Group or to the parent of the Group. 141 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Property, plant and equipment and depreciation 

Property, plant and equipment, other than construction in progress, are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment losses. When an item of property, plant and equipment is classified as held for sale or when it is part of a disposal group classified as held for sale, it is not depreciated and is accounted for in accordance with IFRS 5, as further explained in the accounting policy for “Non-current assets and disposal groups held for sale”. The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment comprises its purchase price and any directly attributable costs of bringing the asset to its working condition and location for its intended use. Cost may also include transfers from equity of any gains or losses on qualifying cash flow hedges of foreign currency purchases of property, plant and equipment. Expenditure incurred after items of property, plant and equipment have been put into operation, such as repairs and maintenance, is normally charged to the statement of profit or loss in the period in which it is incurred. In situations where the recognition criteria are satisfied, the expenditure for a major inspection is capitalised in the carrying amount of the asset as a replacement. Where significant parts of property, plant and equipment are required to be replaced at intervals, the Group recognises such parts as individual assets with specific useful lives and depreciates them accordingly. Depreciation is calculated on the straight-line basis to write off the cost of each item of property, plant and equipment to its residual value over its estimated useful life. The estimated useful lives used for this purpose are as follows: – Buildings 20 to 40 years – Machinery 5 to 20 years – Vessels 10 to 25 years – Vehicles 5 years – Other equipment 2 to 5 years Where parts of an item of property, plant and equipment have different useful lives, the cost of that item is allocated on a reasonable basis among the parts and each part is depreciated separately. Residual values, useful lives and the depreciation method are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at least at each financial year end. An item of property, plant and equipment including any significant part initially recognised is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected from its use or disposal. Any gain or loss on disposal or retirement recognised in the statement of profit or loss in the year the asset is derecognised is the difference between the net sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the relevant asset. Construction in progress is stated at cost less any impairment losses, and is not depreciated. It is reclassified to the appropriate category of property, plant and equipment, investment properties and intangible assets when completed and ready for use. 

Investment properties 

Investment properties are interests in land and buildings held to earn rental income and/or for capital appreciation. Such properties are measured initially at cost, including transaction costs. Subsequent to initial recognition, investment properties are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses, if any. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method to write off the cost less accumulated impairment loss of the asset over its estimated useful life. The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at the end of each reporting period. Any gains or losses on the retirement or disposal of an investment property are recognised in the statement of profit or loss in the year of the retirement or disposal. 142 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Non-current assets and disposal groups held for sale 

Non-current assets and disposal groups are classified as held for sale if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally through a sales transaction rather than through continuing use. For this to be the case, the asset or disposal group must be available for immediate sale in its present condition subject only to terms that are usual and customary for the sale of such assets or disposal groups and its sale must be highly probable. All assets and liabilities of a subsidiary classified as a disposal group are reclassified as held for sale regardless of whether the Group retains a non-controlling interest in its former subsidiary after the sale. Non-current assets and disposal groups (other than investment properties and financial assets) classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying amounts and fair values less costs to sell. Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets classified as held for sale are not depreciated or amortised. 

Intangible assets (other than goodwill) 

Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost. The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is the fair value at the date of acquisition. The useful lives of intangible assets are assessed to be either finite or indefinite. Intangible assets with finite lives are subsequently amortised over the useful economic life and assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired. The amortisation period and the amortisation method for an intangible asset with a finite useful life are reviewed at least at each financial year end. 

Concession assets 

The Group is engaged in certain service concession arrangements in which the Group carries out construction work (e.g., toll highways, bridges and ports) in exchange for a right for the Group to operate the asset concerned in accordance with pre-established conditions set by the granting authority. In accordance with IFRIC Interpretation 12 Service Concession Arrangements (IFRIC 12), the assets under the concession arrangements may be classified as intangible assets or financial assets. The assets are classified as intangibles if the operator receives a right (a licence) to charge users of the public service or as financial assets if the operator has an unconditional contractual right to receive cash or another financial asset from or at the direction of the grantor for the construction services. The Group classifies the non-current assets linked to the long-term investment in these concession arrangements as “concession assets” within intangible assets on the statement of financial position if the intangible asset model is adopted. Such concession assets represent the consideration received for its construction service rendered. Once the underlying infrastructure of the concession arrangements is completed, the concession assets are amortised over the term of the concession using the traffic flow method or straight-line method under the intangible asset model. 

Trademarks, patents, proprietary technologies and copyrights 

Separately acquired trademarks, patents, proprietary technologies and copyrights are shown at historical cost. Trademarks, patents, proprietary technologies and copyrights acquired in a business combination are recognised at fair value at the acquisition date. Trademarks, patents, proprietary technologies and copyrights have a finite useful life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation. Amortisation is calculated using the straight-line method to allocate the cost over their estimated useful lives. 

Computer software 

Computer software is measured on initial recognition cost and amortised over the estimated useful life of 1 to 10 years. 

Research and development costs 

Expenditure incurred on projects to develop new products is capitalised and deferred only when the Group can demonstrate the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale, its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset, how the asset will generate future economic benefits, the availability of resources to complete the project and the ability to measure reliably the expenditure during the development. Product development expenditure which does not meet these criteria is expensed when incurred. Deferred development costs are stated at cost less any impairment losses and are amortised using the straight-line basis over the commercial lives of the underlying products, commencing from the date when the products are put into commercial production. 143 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Leases 

The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. A contract is, or contains, a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. 

Group as a lessee 

The Group applies a single recognition and measurement approach for all leases, except for short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. The Group recognises lease liabilities to make lease payments and right-of-use assets representing the right to use the underlying assets. 

(a) Right-of-use assets 

Right-of-use assets are recognised at the commencement date of the lease (that is the date the underlying asset is available for use). Right-of-use assets are measured at cost, less accumulated depreciation and any impairment losses, and adjusted for any remeasurement of lease liabilities. The cost of right-of-use assets includes the amount of lease liabilities recognised, initial direct costs incurred, and lease payments made at or before the commencement date less any lease incentives received. Right-of-use assets are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the lease terms and the estimated useful lives of the assets as follows: Leasehold land 20 years to indefinite Buildings 1 to 10 years Vessels 1 to 25 years Vehicles 2 to 3 years Machinery 1 to 5 years Other equipment 1 to 3 years If ownership of the leased asset transfers to the Group by the end of the lease term or the cost reflects the exercise of a purchase option, depreciation is calculated using the estimated useful life of the asset. When the right-of-use assets relate to interests in leasehold land held as inventories, they are subsequently measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value in accordance with the Group’s policy for “inventories”. When a right-of-use asset meets the definition of investment property, it is included in investment properties. 

(b) Lease liabilities 

Lease liabilities are recognised at the commencement date of the lease at the present value of lease payments to be made over the lease term. The lease payments include fixed payments (including in substance fixed payments) less any lease incentives receivable, variable lease payments that depend on an index or a rate, and amounts expected to be paid under residual value guarantees. The lease payments also include the exercise price of a purchase option reasonably certain to be exercised by the Group and payments of penalties for termination of a lease, if the lease term reflects the Group exercising the option to terminate the lease. The variable lease payments that do not depend on an index or a rate are recognised as an expense in the period in which the event or condition that triggers the payment occurs. In calculating the present value of lease payments, the Group uses its incremental borrowing rate at the lease commencement date because the interest rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable. After the commencement date, the amount of lease liabilities is increased to reflect the accretion of interest and reduced for the lease payments made. In addition, the carrying amount of lease liabilities is remeasured if there is a modification, a change in the lease term, a change in lease payments (e.g., a change to future lease payments resulting from a change in an index or rate) or a change in assessment of an option to purchase the underlying asset. The Group’s lease liabilities are included in interest-bearing bank and other borrowings. 

(c) Short-term leases and leases of low-value assets 

The Group applies the short-term lease recognition exemption to its short-term leases that have a lease term of 12 months or less from the commencement date and do not contain a purchase option. It also applies the recognition exemption for leases of low-value assets to leases of value below RMB50,000. Lease payments on short-term leases and leases of low-value assets are recognised as expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 144 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Leases (continued) Group as a lessor 

When the Group acts as a lessor, it classifies at lease inception (or when there is a lease modification) each of its leases as either an operating lease or a finance lease. Leases in which the Group does not transfer substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of an asset are classified as operating leases. When a contract contains lease and non-lease components, the Group allocates the consideration in the contract to each component on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. Rental income is accounted for on a straight-line basis over the lease terms and is included in revenue in the statement of profit or loss due to its operating nature. Initial direct costs incurred in negotiating and arranging an operating lease are added to the carrying amount of the leased asset and recognised over the lease term on the same basis as rental income. Contingent rents are recognised as revenue in the period in which they are earned. Leases that transfer substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of an underlying asset to the lessee, are accounted for as finance leases. At the commencement date, the cost of the leased asset is capitalised at the present value of the lease payments and related payments (including the initial direct costs) and presented as a receivable at an amount equal to the net investment in the lease. The finance income of such leases is recognised in the statement of profit or loss so as to provide a constant periodic rate of charge over the lease terms. 

Investments and other financial assets Initial recognition and measurement 

Financial assets are classified, at initial recognition, as subsequently measured at amortised cost, fair value through other comprehensive income, and fair value through profit or loss. The classification of financial assets at initial recognition depends on the financial asset’s contractual cash flow characteristics and the Group’s business model for managing them. With the exception of trade receivables that do not contain a significant financing component or for which the Group has applied the practical expedient of not adjusting the effect of a significant financing component, the Group initially measures a financial asset at its fair value, plus in the case of a financial asset not at fair value through profit or loss, transaction costs. Trade receivables that do not contain a significant financing component or for which the Group has applied the practical expedient are measured at the transaction price determined under IFRS 15 in accordance with the policies set out for “Revenue recognition” below. In order for a financial asset to be classified and measured at amortised cost or fair value through other comprehensive income, it needs to give rise to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest (“SPPI”) on the principal amount outstanding. Financial assets with cash flows that are not SPPI are classified and measured at fair value through profit or loss, irrespective of the business model. The Group’s business model for managing financial assets refers to how it manages its financial assets in order to generate cash flows. The business model determines whether cash flows will result from collecting contractual cash flows, selling the financial assets, or both. Financial assets classified and measured at amortised cost are held within a business model with the objective to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows, while financial assets classified and measured at fair value through other comprehensive income are held within a business model with the objective of both holding to collect contractual cash flows and selling. Financial assets which are not held within the aforementioned business models are classified and measured at fair value through profit or loss. Purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery of assets within the period generally established by regulation or convention in the marketplace are recognised on the trade date, that is, the date that the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset. 145 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Investments and other financial assets (continued) Subsequent measurement 

The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification as follows: 

Financial assets at amortised cost (debt instruments) 

Financial assets at amortised cost are subsequently measured using the effective interest method and are subject to impairment. Gains and losses are recognised in the statement of profit or loss when the asset is derecognised, modified or impaired. 

Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income (debt instruments) 

For debt investments at fair value through other comprehensive income, interest income, foreign exchange revaluation and impairment losses or reversals are recognised in the statement of profit or loss and computed in the same manner as for financial assets measured at amortised cost. The remaining fair value changes are recognised in other comprehensive income. Upon derecognition, the cumulative fair value change recognised in other comprehensive income is recycled to the statement of profit or loss. 

Financial assets designated at fair value through other comprehensive income (equity investments) 

Upon initial recognition, the Group can elect to classify irrevocably its equity investments as equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income when they meet the definition of equity under IAS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation and are not held for trading. The classification is determined on an instrument-by-instrument basis. Gains and losses on these financial assets are never recycled to the statement of profit or loss. Dividends are recognised as other income in the statement of profit or loss when the right of payment has been established, except when the Group benefits from such proceeds as a recovery of part of the cost of the financial asset, in which case, such gains are recorded in other comprehensive income. Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income are not subject to impairment assessment. 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are carried in the statement of financial position at fair value with net changes in fair value recognised in the statement of profit or loss. This category includes derivative instruments and equity investments which the Group had not irrevocably elected to classify at fair value through other comprehensive income. Dividends on the equity investments are also recognised as other income in the statement of profit or loss when the right of payment has been established. A derivative embedded in a hybrid contract, with a financial liability or non-financial host, is separated from the host and accounted for as a separate derivative if the economic characteristics and risks are not closely related to the host; a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative would meet the definition of a derivative; and the hybrid contract is not measured at fair value through profit or loss. Embedded derivatives are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in the statement of profit or loss. Reassessment only occurs if there is either a change in the terms of the contract that significantly modifies the cash flows that would otherwise be required or a reclassification of a financial asset out of the fair value through profit or loss category. A derivative embedded within a hybrid contract containing a financial asset host is not accounted for separately. The financial asset host together with the embedded derivative is required to be classified in its entirety as a financial asset at fair value through profit or loss. 146 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Derecognition of financial assets 

A financial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets) is primarily derecognised (i.e., removed from the Group’s consolidated statement of financial position) when: • the rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired; or • the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the asset or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without material delay to a third party under a “pass-through” arrangement; and either (a) the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, or (b) the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has transferred control of the asset. When the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from an asset or has entered into a pass-through arrangement, it evaluates if, and to what extent, it has retained the risk and rewards of ownership of the asset. When it has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset nor transferred control of the asset, the Group continues to recognise the transferred asset to the extent of the Group’s continuing involvement. In that case, the Group also recognises an associated liability. The transferred asset and the associated liability are measured on a basis that reflects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained. Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower of the original carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration that the Group could be required to repay. 

Impairment of financial assets 

The Group recognises an allowance for expected credit losses (“ECLs”) for all debt instruments not held at fair value through profit or loss. ECLs are based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due in accordance with the contract and all the cash flows that the Group expects to receive, discounted at an approximation of the original effective interest rate. The expected cash flows will include cash flows from the sale of collateral held or other credit enhancements that are integral to the contractual terms. 

General approach 

ECLs are recognised in two stages. For credit exposures for which there has not been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition, ECLs are provided for credit losses that result from default events that are possible within the next 12 months (a 12-month ECL). For those credit exposures for which there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition, a loss allowance is required for credit losses expected over the remaining life of the exposure, irrespective of the timing of the default (a lifetime ECL). At each reporting date, the Group assesses whether the credit risk on a financial instrument has increased significantly since initial recognition. When making the assessment, the Group compares the risk of a default occurring on the financial instrument as at the reporting date with the risk of a default occurring on the financial instrument as at the date of initial recognition and considers reasonable and supportable information that is available without undue cost or effort, including historical and forward-looking information. The Group consider that there has been a significant increase in credit risk when contractual payments are more than 30 days past due. The Group considers a financial asset in default when contractual payments are 90 days past due. However, in certain cases, the Group may also consider a financial asset to be in default when internal or external information indicates that the Group is unlikely to receive the outstanding contractual amounts in full before taking into account any credit enhancements held by the Group. A financial asset is written off when there is no reasonable expectation of recovering the contractual cash flows. 147 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Impairment of financial assets (continued) General approach (continued) 

Debt investments at fair value through other comprehensive income and financial assets at amortised cost are subject to impairment under the general approach and they are classified within the following stages for measurement of ECLs except for trade receivables and contract assets which apply the simplified approach as detailed below. Stage 1 – Financial instruments for which credit risk has not increased significantly since initial recognition and for which the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to 12-month ECLs. Stage 2 – Financial instruments for which credit risk has increased significantly since initial recognition but that are not credit-impaired financial assets and for which the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to lifetime ECLs. Stage 3 – Financial assets that are credit-impaired at the reporting date (but that are not purchased or originated credit-impaired) and for which the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to lifetime ECLs. 

Simplified approach 

For trade receivables and contract assets that do not contain a significant financing component or when the Group applies the practical expedient of not adjusting the effect of a significant financing component, the Group applies the simplified approach in calculating ECLs. Under the simplified approach, the Group does not track changes in credit risk, but instead recognises a loss allowance based on lifetime ECLs at each reporting date. The Group has established a provision matrix that is based on its historical credit loss experience, adjusted for forward-looking factors specific to the debtors and the economic environment. For trade receivables and contract assets that contain a significant financing component and lease receivables, the Group chooses as its accounting policy to adopt the simplified approach in calculating ECLs with policies as described above. 

Financial liabilities Initial recognition and measurement 

Financial liabilities are classified, at initial recognition, as financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, loans and borrowings, payables, or as derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge, as appropriate. All financial liabilities are recognised initially at fair value and, in the case of loans and borrowings and payables, net of directly attributable transaction costs. The Group’s financial liabilities include trade and other payables, derivative financial instruments and interest-bearing bank and other borrowings. 

Subsequent measurement 

The subsequent measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification as follows: 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss include financial liabilities held for trading and financial liabilities designated upon initial recognition as at fair value through profit or loss. Financial liabilities are classified as held for trading if they are acquired for the purpose of repurchasing in the near term. This category includes derivative financial instruments entered into by the Group that are not designated as hedging instruments in hedge relationships as defined by IFRS 9. Separated embedded derivatives are also classified as held for trading unless they are designated as effective hedging instruments. Gains or losses on liabilities held for trading are recognised in the statement of profit or loss. The net fair value gain or loss recognised in the statement of profit or loss does not include any interest charged on these financial liabilities. Financial liabilities designated upon initial recognition as at fair value through profit or loss are designated at the initial date of recognition, and only if the criteria in IFRS 9 are satisfied. Gains or losses on liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss are recognised in the statement of profit or loss, except for the gains or losses arising from the Group’s own credit risk which are presented in other comprehensive income with no subsequent reclassification to the statement of profit or loss. The net fair value gain or loss recognised in the statement of profit or loss does not include any interest charged on these financial liabilities. 148 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Financial liabilities (continued) Subsequent measurement (continued) Financial liabilities at amortised cost (trade and other payables, and borrowings) 

After initial recognition, trade and other payables, and interest-bearing borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost, using the effective interest rate method unless the effect of discounting would be immaterial, in which case they are stated at cost. Gains and losses are recognised in the statement of profit or loss when the liabilities are derecognised as well as through the effective interest rate amortisation process. Amortised cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate. The effective interest rate amortisation is included in finance costs in the statement of profit or loss. 

Financial guarantee contracts 

Financial guarantee contracts issued by the Group are those contracts that require a payment to be made to reimburse the holder for a loss it incurs because the specified debtor fails to make a payment when due in accordance with the terms of a debt instrument. A financial guarantee contract is recognised initially as a liability at its fair value, adjusted for transaction costs that are directly attributable to the issuance of the guarantee. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group measures the financial guarantee contracts at the higher of: (i) the ECL allowance determined in accordance with the policy as set out in “Impairment of financial assets”; and (ii) the amount initially recognised less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognised. 

Derecognition of financial liabilities 

A financial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled, or expires. When an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and a recognition of a new liability, and the difference between the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the statement of profit or loss. 

Offsetting of financial instruments 

Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the statement of financial position if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis, or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. 

Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting Initial recognition and subsequent measurement 

The Group uses derivative financial instruments, such as forward currency contracts, total return swaps, forward equity contracts and foreign exchange option. Such derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at fair value. Derivatives are carried as assets when the fair value is positive and as liabilities when the fair value is negative. Any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value of derivatives are taken directly to the statement of profit or loss, except for the effective portion of cash flow hedges, which is recognised in other comprehensive income and later reclassified to profit or loss when the hedged item affects profit or loss. For the purpose of hedge accounting, hedges are classified as: • fair value hedges when hedging the exposure to changes in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability or an unrecognised firm commitment; or • cash flow hedges when hedging the exposure to variability in cash flows that is either attributable to a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction, or a foreign currency risk in an unrecognised firm commitment; or • hedges of a net investment in a foreign operation. At the inception of a hedge relationship, the Group formally designates and documents the hedge relationship to which the Group wishes to apply hedge accounting, the risk management objective and its strategy for undertaking the hedge. 149 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting (continued) Initial recognition and subsequent measurement (continued) 

The documentation includes identification of the hedging instrument, the hedged item, the nature of the risk being hedged and how the Group will assess whether the hedging relationship meets the hedge effectiveness requirements (including the analysis of sources of hedge ineffectiveness and how the hedge ratio is determined). A hedging relationship qualifies for hedge accounting if it meets all of the following effectiveness requirements: • There is “an economic relationship” between the hedged item and the hedging instrument. • The effect of credit risk does not “dominate the value changes” that result from that economic relationship. • The hedge ratio of the hedging relationship is the same as that resulting from the quantity of the hedged item that the Group actually hedges and the quantity of the hedging instrument that the Group actually uses to hedge that quantity of hedged item. Hedges which meet all the qualifying criteria for hedge accounting are accounted for as follows: 

Cash flow hedges 

The effective portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognised directly in other comprehensive income in the cash flow hedge reserve, while any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the statement of profit or loss. The cash flow hedge reserve is adjusted to the lower of the cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument and the cumulative change in fair value of the hedged item. The amounts accumulated in other comprehensive income are accounted for, depending on the nature of the underlying hedged transaction. If the hedged transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a non-financial item, the amount accumulated in equity is removed from the separate component of equity and included in the initial cost or other carrying amount of the hedged asset or liability. This is not a reclassification adjustment and will not be recognised in other comprehensive income for the period. This also applies where the hedged forecast transaction of a non-financial asset or non-financial liability subsequently becomes a firm commitment to which fair value hedge accounting is applied. For any other cash flow hedges, the amount accumulated in other comprehensive income is reclassified to the statement of profit or loss as a reclassification adjustment in the same period or periods during which the hedged cash flows affect the statement of profit or loss. If cash flow hedge accounting is discontinued, the amount that has been accumulated in other comprehensive income must remain in accumulated other comprehensive income if the hedged future cash flows are still expected to occur. Otherwise, the amount will be immediately reclassified to the statement of profit or loss as a reclassification adjustment. After the discontinuation, once the hedged cash flow occurs, any amount remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income is accounted for depending on the nature of the underlying transaction as described above. 

Financial instruments classified as equity 

Financial instruments issued by the Group are classified as equity instruments when all the following conditions have been met: • The financial instruments have no contractual obligation to pay cash or other financial assets to others, nor to exchange financial assets or liabilities with others under potential unfavourable circumstances; • The financial instruments will or may be settled in the Group’s own equity instruments: if the financial instrument is non-derivative, it should not have the contractual obligation to be settled by the Group delivering a variable number of its own equity instruments; if the financial instrument is derivative, it should solely be settled by the Group delivering a fixed number of its own equity instruments in exchange for a fixed amount of cash or other financial assets. Financial instruments classified as equity instruments are recognised initially at fair value, net of transaction costs incurred. 150 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Treasury shares 

Own equity instruments which are reacquired and held by the Company or the Group (treasury shares) are recognised directly in equity at cost. No gain or loss is recognised in the statement of profit or loss on the purchase, sale, issue or cancellation of the Group’s own equity instruments. 

Inventories 

Inventories comprise raw materials, work in progress, properties under development, completed properties held for sale and finished goods. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value. Cost is determined on the weighted average basis and, in the case of work in progress and finished goods, comprises direct materials, direct labour, other direct costs and an appropriate proportion of overheads. Net realisable value is based on estimated selling prices less any estimated costs to be incurred to completion and disposal. Development cost of properties comprises cost of land use rights, construction costs and borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation incurred during the construction period. Upon completion, the properties are transferred to completed properties held for sale. Net realisable value takes into account the price ultimately expected to be realised, less applicable variable selling expenses and the anticipated costs to completion. Properties under development are classified as current assets unless the construction period of the relevant property development project is expected to complete beyond normal operating cycle. 

Cash and cash equivalents 

Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of financial position comprise cash on hand and at banks, and short-term highly liquid deposits with a maturity of generally within three months that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash, subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value and held for the purpose of meeting short-term cash commitments. For the purpose of the consolidated statement of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and at banks, and short-term deposits as defined above, less bank overdrafts which are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Group’s cash management. 

Provisions 

A provision is recognised when a present obligation (legal or constructive) has arisen as a result of a past event and it is probable that a future outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, provided that a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. When the effect of discounting is material, the amount recognised for a provision is the present value at the end of the reporting period of the future expenditures expected to be required to settle the obligation. The increase in the discounted present value amount arising from the passage of time is included in finance costs in the statement of profit or loss. The Group provides for warranties in relation to the provision of construction services during the warranty period. Provision for these assurance-type warranties granted by the Group are initially recognised based on the best estimates of the Group, discounted to their present values as appropriate. 

Income tax 

Income tax comprises current and deferred tax. Income tax relating to items recognised outside profit or loss is recognised outside profit or loss, either in other comprehensive income or directly in equity. Current tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period, taking into consideration interpretations and practices prevailing in the countries in which the Group operates. Deferred tax is provided, using the liability method, on all temporary differences at the end of the reporting period between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes, except that deferred tax is not recognised for the Pillar Two income taxes. 151 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Income tax (continued) 

Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences, except: • when the deferred tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss and does not give rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences; and • in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, when the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future. Deferred tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences, and the carryforward of unused tax credits and any unused tax losses. Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences, and the carryforward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilised, except: • when the deferred tax asset relating to the deductible temporary differences arises from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss and does not give rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences; and • in respect of deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that it is probable that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised. The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at the end of each reporting period and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised. Unrecognised deferred tax assets are reassessed at the end of each reporting period and are recognised to the extent that it has become probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be recovered. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset if and only if the Group has a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets and current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities which intend either to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis, or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously, in each future period in which significant amounts of deferred tax liabilities or assets are expected to be settled or recovered. 

Government grants 

Government grants are recognised at their fair value where there is reasonable assurance that the grant will be received and all attaching conditions will be complied with. When the grant relates to an expense item, it is recognised as income on a systematic basis over the periods that the costs, for which it is intended to compensate, are expensed. Where the grant relates to an asset, the fair value is credited to a deferred income account and is released to the statement of profit or loss over the expected useful life of the relevant asset by equal annual instalments or deducted from the carrying amount of the asset and released to the statement of profit or loss by way of a reduced depreciation charge. 152 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Revenue recognition Revenue from contracts with customers 

Revenue from contracts with customers is recognised when control of goods or services is transferred to the customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. When the consideration in a contract includes a variable amount, the amount of consideration is estimated to which the Group will be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods or services to the customer. The variable consideration is estimated at contract inception and constrained until it is highly probable that a significant revenue reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognised will not occur when the associated uncertainty with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. When the contract contains a financing component which provides the customer with a significant benefit of financing the transfer of goods or services to the customer for more than one year, revenue is measured at the present value of the amount receivable, discounted using the discount rate that would be reflected in a separate financing transaction between the Group and the customer at contract inception. When the contract contains a financing component which provides the Group a significant financial benefit for more than one year, revenue recognised under the contract includes the interest expense accreted on the contract liability under the effective interest method. For a contract where the period between the payment by the customer and the transfer of the promised goods or services is one year or less, the transaction price is not adjusted for the effects of a significant financing component, using the practical expedient in IFRS 15. 

(a) Construction services 

Revenue from the provision of infrastructure construction services is recognised over time, using an input method to measure progress toward satisfaction of the service, because the Group’s performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced. The input method recognises revenue based on the proportion of the actual costs incurred relative to the estimated total costs for satisfaction of the construction services. Claims to customers are amounts that the Group seeks to collect from the customers as reimbursement of costs and margins for scope of works not included in the original construction contract. Claims are accounted for as variable consideration and constrained until it is highly probable that a significant revenue reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognised will not occur when the associated uncertainty with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The Group uses the most likely amount or the expected value method to estimate the amounts of claims, whichever more appropriate, to best predict the amount of variable consideration to which the Group will be entitled. 

(b) Provision of design and other services 

Revenue from the provision of infrastructure design and other services is recognised over time, using an input method to measure progress toward satisfaction of the service, because the Group’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. 

(c) Sale of goods 

Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised at the point in time when control of the asset is transferred to the customer, generally on delivery of the goods. 

(d) Significant financing component 

For contracts that include a significant financing component, the Group adjusts the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component and recognise revenue as the “cash selling price” of the underlying goods or services at the time of transfer. The “cash selling price” is generated by discounting the promised amount of consideration using the effective interest rate. The Group selects to use the practical expedient that it will not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component if the Group expects, at contract inception, that the period between when the Group transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less. 153 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Revenue recognition (continued) Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) (e) Warranties 

As required by law or agreed in the contract terms, the Group provides assurance-type warranties that promise the customers that the assets created in the construction services are as specified in the construction contracts. The Group recognises such assurance-type warranties as provisions. For the warranties that include services to customers in addition to assurance that the assets created are as specified in the contracts, the Group identifies such service-type warranties as separate performance obligations and allocates the transaction prices between the construction services and service-type warranties using the proportion of their stand-alone selling prices. The Group recognises the revenue of service-type warranties when customers obtain control of the services. In assessing whether a warranty includes a service to the customer in addition to the assurance that the asset created in the construction services complies with the agreed specifications, the Group considers factors including whether the warranty is required by law, the length of the warranty coverage period, and the nature of the tasks that the entity promises to perform. 

(f) Principal versus agent 

The Group determines whether it is a principal or an agent in the transactions by evaluating whether it controls each specified good or service before that good or service is transferred to the customer. The Group is a principal and recognises revenue in the gross amount of consideration received or receivable if it controls the specified good or service before that good or service is transferred to a customer. Otherwise, the Group is an agent and recognises revenue in the amount of any fee or commission to which it expects to be entitled. The fee or commission is the net amount of consideration that the Group retains after paying the other party the consideration received in exchange for the goods or services to be provided by that party, or is determined by certain agreed amounts or proportions. 

(g) Contract modifications 

When the construction contract between the Group and the customers is modified: (i) if the creation of new construction service and contract price are separately identified, and the new contract price reflects the separate selling price of the new construction service, the Group will treat the contract modification as a separate contract for accounting; (ii) if the contract modification does not belong to the above situation (i), and there is a clear distinction between transferred construction services and non-transferred construction services at the date of contract modification, the Group will regard it as the termination of the original contract. Meanwhile, the unperformed part of the original contract and the part of contract modification will be merged into a new contract for accounting; (iii) if the contract does not belong to the above situation (i), and there is no clear distinction between transferred construction services and non-transferred construction services at the date of contract modification, the Group will treat the part of modification as the component of original contract for accounting. The effect that the contract modification has on the transaction price is recognised as an adjustment to revenue at the date of the contract modification. 

Revenue from other sources 

Rental income is recognised on a time proportion basis over the lease terms. Variable lease payments that do not depend on an index or a rate are recognised as income in the accounting period in which they are incurred. 

Other income 

Interest income is recognised on an accrual basis using the effective interest method by applying the rate that exactly discounts the estimated future cash receipts over the expected life of the financial instrument or a shorter period, when appropriate, to the net carrying amount of the financial asset. Dividend income is recognised when shareholders’ right to receive payment has been established, it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the dividend will flow to the Group and the amount of the dividend can be measured reliably. 154 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Contract assets 

If the Group performs by transferring goods or services to a customer before being unconditionally entitled to the consideration under the contract terms, a contract asset is recognised for the earned consideration that is conditional. Contract assets are subject to impairment assessment, details of which are included in the accounting policies for impairment of financial assets. They are reclassified to trade receivables when the right to the consideration becomes unconditional. 

Contract liabilities 

A contract liability is recognised when a payment is received or a payment is due (whichever is earlier). from a customer before the Group transfers the related goods or services. Contract liabilities are recognised as revenue when the Group performs under the contract (i.e., transfers control of the related goods or services to the customer). 

Offsetting of contract assets and contract liabilities 

Contract assets and contract liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the statement of financial position if they belong to the same contract. 

Contract costs 

Other than the costs which are capitalised as inventories, property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, costs incurred to fulfil a contract with a customer are capitalised as an asset if all of the following criteria are met: (a) The costs relate directly to a contract or to an anticipated contract that the entity can specifically identify. (b) The costs generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying (or in continuing to satisfy) performance obligations in the future. (c) The costs are expected to be recovered. The capitalised contract costs are amortised and charged to the statement of profit or loss on a systematic basis that is consistent with the transfer to the customer of the goods or services to which the asset related. Other contract costs are expensed as incurred. 

Share-based payments 

The Company operates a share scheme. Employees (including directors) of the Group receive remuneration in the form of share-based payments, whereby employees render services in exchange for equity instruments (“equity-settled transactions”). The cost of equity-settled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is determined by the quoted price on the grant date in the active market, further details of which are given in note 36 to the financial statements. The cost of equity-settled transactions is recognised in employee benefit expense, together with a corresponding increase in equity, over the period in which the performance and/or service conditions are fulfilled. The cumulative expense recognised for equity-settled transactions at the end of each reporting period until the vesting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Group’s best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest. The charge or credit to the statement of profit or loss for a period represents the movement in the cumulative expense recognised as at the beginning and end of that period. Service and non-market performance conditions are not taken into account when determining the grant date fair value of awards, but the likelihood of the conditions being met is assessed as part of the Group’s best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest. Market performance conditions are reflected within the grant date fair value. Any other conditions attached to an award, but without an associated service requirement, are considered to be non-vesting conditions. Non-vesting conditions are reflected in the fair value of an award and lead to an immediate expensing of an award unless there are also service and/or performance conditions. 155 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Share-based payments (continued) 

For awards that do not ultimately vest because non-market performance and/or service conditions have not been met, no expense is recognised. Where awards include a market or non-vesting condition, the transactions are treated as vesting irrespective of whether the market or non-vesting condition is satisfied, provided that all other performance and/or service conditions are satisfied. Where the terms of an equity-settled award are modified, as a minimum an expense is recognised as if the terms had not been modified, if the original terms of the award are met. In addition, an expense is recognised for any modification that increases the total fair value of the share-based payments, or is otherwise beneficial to the employee as measured at the date of modification. Where an equity-settled award is cancelled, it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation, and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately. The dilutive effect of outstanding scheme is reflected as additional share dilution in the computation of earnings per share. 

Other employee benefits 

The Group operates various post-employment schemes, including both defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans and post-employment medical plans. 

(a) Pension obligations 

A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into a separate entity. The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay all employees the benefits relating to employee service in the current and prior periods. A defined benefit plan is a pension plan that is not a defined contribution plan. Typically defined benefit plans define an amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement, usually dependent on one or more factors such as age, years of service and compensation. The liability recognised in the statement of financial position in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period less the fair value of plan assets. The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method. The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of government bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension obligations. Past-service costs are recognised immediately in the consolidated statement of profit or loss. The net interest cost is calculated by applying the discount rate to the net balance of the defined benefit obligation. This cost is included in employee benefit expense in the consolidated statement of profit or loss. Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise. For defined contribution plans, the full-time employees of the Group in the PRC excluding Hong Kong and Macau (“Chinese Mainland”) are covered by government-sponsored or privately administered pension plans under which the employees are entitled to a monthly pension based on certain formula. The Group pays contributions to these pension plans monthly, on a mandatory or contractual basis. The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been made. The contributions are recognised as employee benefit expense as incurred. In addition, the Group participates in various defined contribution retirement schemes for its qualified employees in certain countries or jurisdictions outside Chinese Mainland. Employees’ and employers’ contributions are calculated based on various percentages of employees’ gross salaries of fixed sums and length of service. 156 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Other employee benefits (continued) (b) Other post-employment obligations 

The Group provides post-retirement healthcare benefits to their retirees. The entitlement to these benefits is usually conditional on the employee remaining in service up to retirement age and the completion of a minimum service period. The expected costs of these benefits are accrued over the period of employment using the same accounting methodology as used for defined benefit pension plans. Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise. These obligations are valued annually by independent qualified actuaries. 

(c) Termination benefits 

Termination benefits are payable when employment is terminated by the Group before the normal retirement date, or whenever an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benefits. The Group recognises termination benefits at the earlier of the following dates: (a) when the Group can no longer withdraw the offer of those benefits; and (b) when the entity recognises costs for a restructuring that is within the scope of IAS 37 and involves the payment of termination benefits. In the case of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy, the termination benefits are measured based on the number of employees expected to accept the offer. Benefits falling due more than 12 months after the end of the reporting period are discounted to their present value. 

(d) Housing funds 

All full-time employees of the Group in Chinese Mainland are entitled to participate in various government sponsored housing funds. The Group contributes on a monthly basis to these funds based on certain percentages of the salaries of the employees. The Group’s liability in respect of these funds is limited to the contributions payable in each period. 

(e) Bonus entitlements 

The expected cost of bonus payments is recognised as a liability when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of services rendered by employees and a reliable estimate of the obligation can be made. Liabilities for bonus are expected to be settled within 12 months and are measured at the amounts expected to be paid when they are settled. 

Borrowing costs 

Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of qualifying assets, i.e., assets that necessarily take a substantial period of time to get ready for their intended use or sale, are capitalised as part of the cost of those assets. The capitalisation of such borrowing costs ceases when the assets are substantially ready for their intended use or sale. All other borrowing costs are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Borrowing costs consist of interest and other costs that an entity incurs in connection with the borrowing of funds. 

Dividends 

Final dividends are recognised as a liability when they are approved by shareholders in a general meeting. Proposed final dividends are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. Interim dividends are simultaneously proposed and declared, because the Company’s memorandum and articles of association grant the directors the authority to declare interim dividends. Consequently, interim dividends are recognised immediately as a liability when they are proposed and declared. 157 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 2. ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 

2.5 Material accounting policies (continued) 

Foreign currencies 

These financial statements are presented in RMB, which is the Company’s functional currency. Each entity in the Group determines its own functional currency and items included in the financial statements of each entity are measured using that functional currency. Foreign currency transactions recorded by the entities in the Group are initially recorded using their respective functional currency rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the functional currency rates of exchange ruling at the end of the reporting period. Differences arising on settlement or translation of monetary items are recognised in the statement of profit or loss. Non-monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the dates of the initial transactions. Non-monetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was measured. The gain or loss arising on translation of a non-monetary item measured at fair value is treated in line with the recognition of the gain or loss on change in fair value of the item (i.e., translation difference on the item whose fair value gain or loss is recognised in other comprehensive income or profit or loss is also recognised in other comprehensive income or profit or loss, respectively). In determining the exchange rate on initial recognition of the related asset, expense or income on the derecognition of a non-monetary asset or non-monetary liability relating to an advance consideration, the date of initial transaction is the date on which the Group initially recognises the non-monetary asset or non-monetary liability arising from the advance consideration. If there are multiple payments or receipts in advance, the Group determines the transaction date for each payment or receipt of the advance consideration. The functional currencies of certain overseas subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are currencies other than RMB. As at the end of the reporting period, the assets and liabilities of these entities are translated into RMB at the exchange rates prevailing at the end of the reporting period and their statements of profit or loss are translated into RMB at the exchange rates that approximate to those prevailing at dates of the transactions. The resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the exchange reserve, except to the extent that the differences are attributable to non-controlling interests. On disposal of a foreign operation, the cumulative amount in the reserve relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in the statement of profit or loss. Any goodwill arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation and any fair value adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities arising on acquisition are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and translated at the closing rate. For the purpose of the consolidated statement of cash flows, the cash flows of overseas subsidiaries are translated into RMB at the exchange rates ruling at the dates of the cash flows. Frequently recurring cash flows of overseas subsidiaries which arise throughout the year are translated into RMB at the weighted average exchange rates for the year. 158 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES 

The preparation of the Group’s financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities, and their accompanying disclosures, and the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that could require a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of the assets or liabilities affected in the future. 

Judgements 

In the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies, management has made the following judgements, apart from those involving estimations, which have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements: 

Measurement of progress toward complete satisfaction of construction services 

The Group uses input method to measure the progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligations, and specifically, the proportion of actual construction costs incurred relative to the estimated total costs. Actual construction costs incurred include direct and indirect costs in the process of transferring goods from the Group to customers. The Group believes that contract price is based on construction costs. Therefore, the proportion of actual construction costs incurred relative to the total expected costs can reflect the progress toward satisfaction of construction service. Since the duration of construction is relatively long that it may cover more than one accounting period, the Group will review and revise the budget as the contract carries forward, and adjust revenue accordingly. 

Business model 

The classification of financial assets upon initial recognition depends on the business model of the Group for managing financial assets. In judging the business model, the Group considers the way of internal evaluating and reporting to key management personnel the performance of financial assets, the risks affecting the performance of financial assets and the way those risks are managed, as well as the way in which relevant business management personnel are compensated. In determining whether cash flows are going to be realised by collecting the financial assets’ contractual cash flows, the Group needs to consider the frequency, value and timing of sales before the maturity dates if any. 

Contractual cash flow characteristics 

The classification of financial assets upon initial recognition depends on the contractual cash flow characteristics of financial assets. It is necessary to judge whether the contractual terms only give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding, whether there are significant differences compared with the benchmark cash flow when evaluating the correction of the time value of money, and whether the fair value of the prepayment feature is insignificant for financial assets that include prepayment feature, etc. 

Determination of control over structured entities 

The Group invested in several structured entities which were mainly engaged in infrastructure investment activities. Based on the assessment following the basis of consolidation and accounting policies set out in notes 2.1 and 2.5 respectively, the Group has consolidated certain structured entities that it has control. For the investments that the Group has joint control on, they are accounted for as joint ventures in accordance with IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures. Equities held indirectly through venture capital organisations, or mutual funds, unit trusts and similar entities including investment-linked insurance funds are accounted for as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss in accordance with IFRS 9 Financial Instruments. Judgement is involved when performing the assessment. Should those joint ventures and financial assets through profit or loss be consolidated, net assets, revenue and profit of the Group could be affected. Management applies its judgement to determine whether the control indicators set out in note 2.1 indicate that the Group controls a structured entity. The Group acts as manager to a number of structured entities and also carries interests in these entities. Determining whether the Group controls such a structured entity usually focuses on the assessment of the aggregate economic interests of the Group in the entity (comprising any carried interest and expected management fees) and the decision-making authority of the entity. Further disclosure in respect of unconsolidated structured entities in which the Group has an interest has been set out in note 23. 159 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES 

# (CONTINUED) 

Judgements (continued) 

Financial instruments classified as equity 

Certain financial instruments of the Group, such as preference shares, are classified as equity, as the following conditions have been met: (i) The financial instruments have no contractual obligation to pay cash or other financial assets to others, nor to exchange financial assets or liabilities with others under potential unfavourable circumstances; and (ii) For the financial instruments that will or may be settled in the Group’s own equity instruments: if the financial instrument is non-derivative, it should not have the contractual obligation to be settled by the Group delivering a variable number of its own equity instruments; if the financial instrument is derivative, it should solely be settled by the Group delivering a fixed number of its own equity instruments in exchange for a fixed amount of cash or other financial assets. Further details are disclosed in notes 37. 

Determining whether an arrangement contains a lease 

The Group entered into general equipment lease arrangements in some construction projects. According to these lease arrangements, there is no identified asset or the supplier has substantive substitution rights for the general equipment. Thus, these general equipment lease arrangements do not contain a lease, and the Group take them as service acceptance. 

Significant judgement in determining the lease term of contracts with renewal options 

The Group has several lease contracts that include extension and termination options. The Group applies judgement in evaluating whether or not to exercise the option to renew or terminate the lease. That is, it considers all relevant factors that create an economic incentive for it to exercise either the renewal or termination. After the commencement date, the Group reassesses the lease term if there is a significant event or change in circumstances that is within its control and affects its ability to exercise or not the option to renew or to terminate the lease (e.g., construction of significant leasehold improvements or significant customisation to the leased asset). The Group includes the renewal period as part of the lease term for lease assets due to the significance of these assets to its operations. These leases have a short non-cancellable period and there will be a significant negative effect on operation if a replacement is not readily available. 

Estimation uncertainty 

The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the end of the reporting period, that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year, are described below. 

Impairment assessment on concession assets 

The Group operates certain concession assets and their impairment is reviewed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of the concession assets may not be recoverable in accordance with the accounting policy stated in note 2.5. The recoverable amounts of the concession assets have been determined based on a value-in-use method. The value-in-use calculations require the use of estimates on discount rates and projections of cash flows from the traffic volume and other income, deducting the necessary maintenance and operating costs incurred for the concession assets. Based on management’s best estimates, as at 31 December 2023, the Group recognised an accumulated impairment of RMB299 million (2022: RMB299 million) to profit or loss for concession assets. Further details are disclosed in note 18. 160 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES 

# (CONTINUED) 

Estimation uncertainty (continued) 

Fair value of financial instruments 

The fair values of listed financial instruments are based on quoted market prices, while the fair values of unlisted financial instruments have been estimated by the most appropriate valuation techniques. The Group uses its judgement to select a variety of methods and make assumptions that are mainly based on market conditions existing at the end of each reporting period. Further details are included in note 48 to the financial statements. 

Impairment of goodwill 

The Group tests the goodwill for impairment at least annually. Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the value in use of the cash-generating units to which goodwill has been allocated. The value-in-use calculation requires management to estimate the future cash flows expected to arise from the cash-generating units and a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value. Where the actual future cash flows are less than expected, an impairment loss may arise. Based on management’s best estimates, as at 31 December 2023, the Group recognised an accumulated impairment of RMB296 million (2022: RMB100 million) to profit or loss for goodwill. Details of the impairment test for goodwill are disclosed in note 18. 

Provision for ECLs on contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables 

The Group uses a provision matrix to calculate ECLs of the Group’s contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables. The provision rates are based on the ageing or the days past due for groupings of various customer segments that have similar loss patterns (i.e., by product or service type, customer type and rating, and coverage by letters of credit and other forms of credit insurance). The provision matrix is initially based on the Group’s historical observed default rates. The Group will calibrate the matrix to adjust the historical credit loss experience with forward-looking information. At each reporting date, the historical observed default rates are updated and changes in the forward-looking estimates are analysed. The assessment of the correlation among historical observed default rates, forecast economic conditions and ECLs is a significant estimate. The amount of ECLs is sensitive to changes in circumstances and forecast economic conditions. The Group’s historical credit loss experience and forecast of economic conditions may also not be representative of a customer’s actual default in the future. The information about the ECLs on the Group’s contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables is disclosed in note 25 and note 26 to the financial statements. 

Infrastructure construction and design services 

The recognition of revenue and cost of infrastructure construction and design services requires the management of the Group to make judgements and estimations. For onerous contracts, the present obligation under the contract must be recognised in the current period and measured as provisions, based on the estimated budgets and losses of the construction services. Because of the nature of the activity undertaken in construction, design and dredging businesses, the date at which the contract activity is entered into and the date when the activity is completed usually fall into different accounting periods. The Group reviews and revises the estimates of both contract revenue and contract costs in each contract budget as the contract progresses. The Group also monitors the payment progress from customers against the contract terms, and periodically evaluates the creditworthiness of the customers. If circumstances arise that a customer would default on all or part of its payments or otherwise fail to fulfil its performance obligations under the contract terms, the Group will reassess the outcome of the relevant contract and may revise the relevant estimates. The revision will be reflected in the consolidated statement of profit or loss in the period in which the circumstances that give rise to the revision become known by the Group. 161 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES 

# (CONTINUED) 

Estimation uncertainty (continued) 

Income taxes 

The Group is subject to income taxes in the PRC and other jurisdictions. Significant judgement is required in determining the worldwide provision for income taxes. There are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Where the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were initially recorded, such differences will impact the current income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made. Deferred tax assets relating to certain temporary differences and tax losses are recognised as management considers it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences or tax losses can be utilised. Where the expectation is different from the original estimate, such differences will impact the recognition of deferred tax assets and taxation in the periods in which such estimate is changed. Further details are disclosed in note 32. 

Pension benefits 

The present value of the defined benefit pension obligations depends on a number of factors that are determined on an actuarial basis using a number of assumptions. The assumptions used in determining the net cost (income) for pensions include the discount rate. Any changes in these assumptions will impact the carrying amount of pension obligations. The Group determines the appropriate discount rate at the end of each year. In determining the appropriate discount rate, the Group considers the interest rates of government bonds that are denominated in the currencies in which the benefits will be paid, and that have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension obligation. The key assumptions for pension obligations and sensitivity analysis of the discount rate are disclosed in note 33. 

Depreciation of property, plant and equipment 

Depreciation on the Group’s property, plant and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method to allocate cost up to residual values over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Management reviews the useful lives and residual values periodically to ensure that the method and rates of depreciation are consistent with the expected pattern of realisation of economic benefits from property, plant and equipment. The accounting estimate of the useful lives of property, plant and equipment is based on historical experience, taking into account anticipated technological changes. When the useful lives differ from the original estimated useful lives, management will adjust the estimated useful lives accordingly. It is possible that actual outcomes in the next financial period are different from estimates made based on historical experience, and it could cause a material adjustment to the depreciation and carrying amount of the Group’s property, plant and equipment. Further details are disclosed in note 15. 

Leases – Estimating the incremental borrowing rate 

The Group cannot readily determine the interest rate implicit in a lease, and therefore, it uses an incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”) to measure lease liabilities. The IBR is the rate of interest that the Group would have to pay to borrow over a similar term, and with a similar security, the funds necessary to obtain an asset of a similar value to the right-of-use asset in a similar economic environment. The IBR therefore reflects what the Group “would have to pay”, which requires estimation when no observable rates are available (such as for subsidiaries that do not enter into financing transactions) or when it needs to be adjusted to reflect the terms and conditions of the lease (for example, when leases are not in the subsidiary’s functional currency). The Group estimates the IBR using observable inputs (such as market interest rates) when available and is required to make certain entity-specific estimates (such as the subsidiary’s stand-alone credit rating). 162 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 4. OPERATING SEGMENT INFORMATION 

Management has determined the operating segments based on the reports reviewed by the President Office that are used to allocate resources to the operating segments and assess their performance. The President Office considers the business from the service and product perspectives. Management assesses the performance of the following four operating segments: (a) infrastructure construction of ports, roads, bridges and railways, municipal and environmental engineering and others (the “Construction”) (b) infrastructure design of ports, roads, bridges, railways and others (the “Design”) (c) dredging (the “Dredging”) (d) others The President Office assesses the performance of the operating segments based on operating profit excluding unallocated income or costs. Other information provided to the President Office is measured in a manner consistent with that in the consolidated financial statements. Sales between operating segments are carried out on terms with reference to the selling prices used for sales made to third parties. The revenue from external parties reported to the President Office is measured in a manner consistent with that in the consolidated statement of profit or loss. Operating expenses of a functional unit are allocated to the relevant operating segment which is the predominant user of the services provided by the unit. Operating expenses of shared services which cannot be allocated to a specific operating segment and corporate expenses are included as unallocated costs. Segment assets consist primarily of property, plant and equipment, investment properties, right-of-use assets, intangible assets, inventories, receivables, contract assets, equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, debt investments at amortised cost, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, derivative financial instruments, and cash and cash equivalents. They exclude deferred tax assets, investments in joint ventures and associates, the assets of the headquarters of the Company and the assets of CCCC Finance, a subsidiary of the Company. Segment liabilities comprise primarily payables, derivative financial instruments, and contract liabilities. They exclude deferred tax liabilities, tax payable, borrowings, the liabilities of the headquarters of the Company and the liabilities of CCCC Finance. Capital expenditure comprises mainly additions to property, plant and equipment (note 15), investment properties (note 16), right-of-use assets (note 17(a)) and intangible assets (note 18). 163 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 4. OPERATING SEGMENT INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

The segment results for the year ended 31 December 2023 and other segment information included in the consolidated financial statements are as follows: 

Year ended 31 December 2023 Construction Design Dredging Others Eliminations Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Total gross segment revenue 667,802 47,302 53,506 19,328 (32,292) 755,646 

Intersegment sales (9,884) (6,673) (353) (15,382) 32,292 –

Revenue 

(note 5) 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 – 755,646 

Segment results 34,061 3,660 2,505 209 18 40,453 

Unallocated loss (1,498) 

Operating profit 38,955 

Finance income 23,896 

Finance costs, net (24,310) 

Share of profits and losses of joint ventures and associates (1,003) Profit before tax 37,538 

Income tax expense (6,397) Profit for the year 31,141 Other segment information 

Depreciation 7,255 457 1,295 761 – 9,768 

Amortisation 3,130 117 27 11 – 3,285 

Write-down of inventories 209 – – 45 – 254 

Impairment of property, plant and equipment 5 – – – – 5

Impairment of intangible assets – – – 196 – 196 

Impairment of investments in joint ventures 248 – – – – 248 

Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets, net 5,779 1,086 803 233 – 7,901 

Capital expenditure 37,741 1,319 2,737 1,089 – 42,886 164 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 4. OPERATING SEGMENT INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

The segment results for the year ended 31 December 2022 and other segment information included in the consolidated financial statements are as follows: Year ended 31 December 2022 Construction Design Dredging Others Eliminations Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Total gross segment revenue 634,246 50,279 51,017 18,225 (34,683) 719,084 Intersegment sales (8,892) (9,912) (985) (14,894) 34,683 –

Revenue 

(note 5) 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 – 719,084 Segment results 28,183 3,776 2,415 240 27 34,641 Unallocated loss (639) Operating profit 34,002 Finance income 21,320 Finance costs, net (21,911) Share of profits and losses of joint ventures and associates (323) 

Profit before tax 33,088 Income tax expense (7,117) 

Profit for the year 25,971 

Other segment information 

Depreciation 8,144 592 1,252 549 – 10,537 Amortisation 2,799 79 36 4 – 2,918 Write-down of inventories 191 1 – 9 – 201 Impairment of property, plant and equipment 77 2 – – – 79 Impairment of intangible assets – – – 50 – 50 Impairment of right-of-use assets – 3 – – – 3Impairment of investments in joint ventures 1 – – – – 1Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets, net 7,669 1,050 688 328 – 9,735 Capital expenditure 35,409 989 1,703 781 – 38,882 The amounts provided to the President Office with respect to total assets and total liabilities are measured in a manner consistent with that of the consolidated financial statements. These assets and liabilities are presented based on the operating segments they are associated with. 165 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 4. OPERATING SEGMENT INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

The segment assets and liabilities as at 31 December 2023 are as follows: 

As at 31 December 2023 Construction Design Dredging Others Eliminations Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Segment assets 1,282,412 74,277 130,097 116,915 (81,021) 1,522,680 

Investments in joint ventures 59,671 

Investments in associates 53,820 

Other unallocated assets 48,091 Total assets 1,684,262 

Segment liabilities 566,716 41,151 65,426 15,209 (48,732) 639,770 

Unallocated liabilities 585,368 Total liabilities 1,225,138 

The segment assets and liabilities as at 31 December 2022 are as follows: As at 31 December 2022 Construction Design Dredging Others Eliminations Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Segment assets 1,178,160 66,597 118,617 109,327 (99,909) 1,372,792 Investments in joint ventures 51,731 Investments in associates 47,588 Other unallocated assets 44,602 

Total assets 1,516,713 Segment liabilities 503,436 39,623 53,182 9,638 (62,511) 543,368 Unallocated liabilities 545,853 

Total liabilities 1,089,221 166 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 4. OPERATING SEGMENT INFORMATION (CONTINUED) 

Geographical information 

(a) Revenue from external customers 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Chinese Mainland 639,710 620,706 Other regions (primarily including Australia, Hong Kong, and countries in Africa, Middle East and South East Asia) 115,936 98,378 

Total Revenue 755,646 719,084 

The revenue information above is based on the locations of the customers. 

(b) Non-current assets 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Chinese Mainland 269,079 275,914 Other regions (primarily including Australia, Hong Kong, and countries in Africa, Middle East and South East Asia) 49,002 45,299 

Total non-current assets 318,081 321,213 

The non-current asset information above is based on the locations of the assets and excludes financial assets, investments in joint ventures and associates, deferred tax assets and contract assets. 

Information about a major customer 

No revenue derived from services or sales to a single customer amounted to 10% or more of the Group’s revenue during 2023 and 2022. 167 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 5. REVENUE, OTHER INCOME AND OTHER GAINS/(LOSSES), NET 

Revenue from contracts with customers 

(i) Disaggregated revenue information 

For the year ended 31 December 2023 Segments Construction Design Dredging Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Type of goods or services 

Infrastructure construction services 632,137 21,277 7,273 297 660,984 

Infrastructure design services 1,403 18,548 617 – 20,568 

Dredging and filling services – – 41,580 – 41,580 

Others 24,378 804 3,683 3,649 32,514 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 755,646 

Geographical markets 

Chinese Mainland 550,081 38,761 47,034 3,834 639,710 

Other regions (primarily including Australia, Hong Kong, and countries in Africa, Middle East and South East Asia) 107,837 1,868 6,119 112 115,936 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 755,646 

Timing of revenue recognition 

Services transferred over time 633,532 40,580 49,473 297 723,882 

Services transferred at a point in time 8,171 – – – 8,171 

Merchandise transferred at a point in time 16,215 49 3,680 3,649 23,593 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 755,646 168 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 5. REVENUE, OTHER INCOME AND OTHER GAINS/(LOSSES), NET (CONTINUED) 

Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) 

(i) Disaggregated revenue information (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 

Segments Construction Design Dredging Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Type of goods or services 

Infrastructure construction services 594,998 22,522 7,238 63 624,821 Infrastructure design services 556 17,242 598 – 18,396 Dredging and filling services – – 38,580 – 38,580 Others 29,800 603 3,616 3,268 37,287 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 719,084 

Geographical markets 

Chinese Mainland 533,554 38,915 45,376 2,861 620,706 Other regions (primarily including Australia, Hong Kong, and countries in Africa, Middle East and South East Asia) 91,800 1,452 4,656 470 98,378 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 719,084 

Timing of revenue recognition 

Services transferred over time 595,551 40,331 46,416 63 682,361 Services transferred at a point in time 7,634 – – – 7,634 Merchandise transferred at a point in time 22,169 36 3,616 3,268 29,089 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 719,084 169 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 5. REVENUE, OTHER INCOME AND OTHER GAINS/(LOSSES), NET (CONTINUED) 

Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) 

(i) Disaggregated revenue information (continued) 

Set out below is the reconciliation of the revenue from contracts with customers to the amounts disclosed in the segment information: 

For the year ended 31 December 2023 Segments Construction Design Dredging Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Revenue from contracts with customers 

External customers 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 755,646 

Intersegment sales 9,884 6,673 353 15,382 32,292 

Intersegment adjustments and eliminations (9,884) (6,673) (353) (15,382) (32,292) 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 657,918 40,629 53,153 3,946 755,646 For the year ended 31 December 2022 

Segments Construction Design Dredging Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Revenue from contracts with customers 

External customers 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 719,084 Intersegment sales 8,892 9,912 985 14,894 34,683 Intersegment adjustments and eliminations (8,892) (9,912) (985) (14,894) (34,683) 

Total revenue from contracts with customers 625,354 40,367 50,032 3,331 719,084 170 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 5. REVENUE, OTHER INCOME AND OTHER GAINS/(LOSSES), NET (CONTINUED) 

Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) 

(i) Disaggregated revenue information (continued) 

The following table shows the amounts of revenue recognised in the current reporting period that were included in the contract liabilities at the beginning of the reporting period. 

2023 2022 

RMB Million 

RMB million Revenue recognised that was included in contract liabilities at the beginning of the reporting period: Construction 23,666 33,300 Design 1,841 1,914 Dredging 999 1,077 Others 868 209 

Total 27,374 36,500 

(ii) Performance obligations 

Information about the Group’s performance obligations is summarised below: 

Construction, design and dredging services 

The performance obligation is satisfied over time as services are rendered and payment is generally due within 90 days from the date of billing. A certain percentage of payment is retained by customers until the end of the retention period as the Group’s entitlement to the final payment is conditional on the satisfaction of the service quality by the customers over the period stipulated in the contracts. 

Others 

Others mainly include sale of goods. The performance obligation is satisfied upon delivery of the goods and payments are generally due within 30 to 90 days from delivery, except for new customers, where payment in advance is normally required. The remaining performance obligations of those uncompleted contracts expected to be recognised relate to construction, design, dredging services and others that are to be satisfied within 1 to 5 years. 171 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 5. REVENUE, OTHER INCOME AND OTHER GAINS/(LOSSES), NET (CONTINUED) 

Other income 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Rental income 962 1,072 Revenue from consulting services 659 553 Dividend income from equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – Listed equity instruments 850 863 – Unlisted equity instruments 23 17 Government grants 614 739 Dividend income from financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 284 241 Income from sale of scraps 513 288 Interest income on debt investments at amortised cost 169 69 Others 1,494 1,521 

Total other income 5,568 5,363 

Other (losses)/gains, net 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Gains on disposal of items of property, plant and equipment 61 666 Gains on disposal of items of intangible assets and other long-term assets 450 719 Gains on disposal of subsidiaries (note 43(ii)) 518 2,710 Gains on disposal of joint ventures and associates 7 79 Fair value (losses)/gains, net – Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (770) (169) – Derivative financial instruments – transactions not qualifying as hedges (278) 34 Foreign exchange difference, net 1,550 1,802 Gains on disposal of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 10 118 Losses on derecognition of contract assets and financial assets at amortised cost (1,873) (2,555) 

Total other (losses)/gains, net (325) 3,404 172 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 6. PROFIT BEFORE TAX 

The Group’s profit before tax is arrived at after charging: 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million Raw materials and consumables used* 230,060 219,569 Cost of goods sold 11,528 21,381 Subcontracting costs 303,415 284,715 Employee benefit expenses*: – Salaries, wages and bonuses 37,938 36,073 – Pension costs – defined contribution plans 5,957 5,392 – defined benefit plans 29 23 – Housing benefits 3,154 2,827 – Welfare, medical and other expenses 17,423 16,610 

Total 64,501 60,925 

Equipment and plant usage costs 16,705 14,266 Lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities (included in cost of sales) 1,797 2,031 Lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities (included in administrative expenses) 2 7Business tax and other taxes 1,912 1,738 Fuel 3,866 4,271 Utilities 2,153 1,887 Maintenance costs 2,481 1,768 Research and development costs (including raw materials and consumables used, employee benefit expenses, depreciation and amortisation) 27,316 23,475 Depreciation of property, plant and equipment* 15 7,870 8,919 Depreciation of investment properties* 16 464 350 Depreciation of right-of-use assets* 17(a) 1,434 1,268 Amortisation of intangible assets* 18 3,285 2,918 Auditors’ remuneration 28 28 Write-down of inventories to net realisable value 254 201 Impairment losses on financial assets and contract assets, net 25, 26 7,901 9,735 Impairment losses on right-of-use assets 17(a) – 3

* The raw materials and consumables used, the employee benefit expenses, and the depreciation and amortisation for the year charged for research and development activities are also included in the item of “Research and development costs”. 

# 7. FINANCE INCOME 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Interest income from: – Bank deposits 1,256 1,094 – Deposits in The People’s Bank of China and interbank placement 318 229 – Contract assets and receivables from Public-Private-Partnership(“PPP”) contracts and primary land development contracts 14,842 12,508 – Loan receivables 5,164 4,817 – Others 2,316 2,672 

Total 23,896 21,320 173 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 8. FINANCE COSTS, NET 

An analysis of finance costs is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Interests on: – Bank borrowings 21,254 20,193 – Other borrowings 215 201 – Corporate bonds 812 830 – Debentures 670 461 – Non-public debt instruments 467 492 – Lease liabilities 232 122 

Subtotal 23,650 22,299 

Less: Interest capitalised 1,841 1,954 

Net interest expense 21,809 20,345 

Foreign exchange difference on borrowings, net 437 30 Others 2,064 1,536 

Total 24,310 21,911 

Borrowing costs directly attributable to the construction and acquisition of qualifying assets were capitalised as part of the costs of those assets. A weighted average capitalisation rate of 3.74% (2022: 4.13%) per annum was used, representing the comprehensive cost rate of the borrowings used to finance the qualifying assets. Interest capitalised during the year was as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Inventories 691 403 Concession assets 994 1,478 Construction in progress 156 73 

1,841 1,954 174 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 9. DIRECTORS’ AND SUPERVISORS’ REMUNERATION 

Directors’ and supervisors’ remuneration for the year, disclosed pursuant to the Listing Rules, section 383(1)(a), (b), (c) and (f) of the Hong Kong Companies Ordinance and Part 2 of the Companies (Disclosure of Information about Benefits of Directors) Regulation, is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB’000 

RMB’000 Fees 257 347 Other emoluments: Salaries, allowances and benefits in kind 2,066 2,729 Performance related bonuses 3,021 4,606 Pension scheme contributions 399 435 

Subtotal 5,486 7,770 

Total fees and other emoluments 5,743 8,117 

(a) Independent non-executive directors 

The fees paid to independent non-executive directors during the year were as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB’000 

RMB’000 Mr. Huang Long – 30 Mr. Zheng Changhong – 30 Mr. Ngai Wai Fung – 54 Mr. Liu Hui 55 50 Mr. Chan Wing Tak Kevin 92 83 Mr. Zhou Xiaowen 55 50 Mr. Wu Guangqi 55 50 

Total 257 347 

There were no other emoluments payable to the independent non-executive directors during the year (2022: Nil). 175 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 9. DIRECTORS’ AND SUPERVISORS’ REMUNERATION (CONTINUED) 

(b) Executive directors, non-executive directors and supervisors 

Salaries, allowances and benefits in kind Performance related bonuses Pension scheme contributions Total RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 

2023 

Executive directors Mr. Wang Tongzhou 273 639 63 975 

Mr. Wang Haihuai (Chief executive) 273 639 63 975 

Mr. Liu Xiang 251 466 63 780 

Mr. Sun Ziyu (i) 94 133 21 248 

Subtotal 891 1,877 210 2,978 

Non-executive director Mr. Mi Shuhua – – – –

Subtotal – – – –

Supervisors Mr. Wang Yongbin 353 255 63 671 

Mr. Yao Yanmin 293 418 63 774 

Mr. Lu Yaojun 529 471 63 1,063 

Subtotal 1,175 1,144 189 2,508 

Total 2,066 3,021 399 5,486 

(i) Mr. Sun Ziyu retired as the executive director on 26 April 2023. 176 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 9. DIRECTORS’ AND SUPERVISORS’ REMUNERATION (CONTINUED) 

(b) Executive directors, non-executive directors and supervisors (continued) 

Salaries, allowances and benefits in kind Performance related bonuses Pension scheme contributions Total RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 RMB’000 2022 Executive directors Mr. Wang Tongzhou 278 1,018 58 1,354 Mr. Wang Haihuai (Chief executive) 278 1,374 58 1,710 Mr. Liu Xiang 254 813 58 1,125 Mr. Sun Ziyu 212 264 47 523 Subtotal 1,022 3,469 221 4,712 Non-executive directors Mr. Liu Maoxun 10 – 40 50 Mr. Mi Shuhua – – – –Subtotal 10 – 40 50 Supervisors Mr. Wang Yongbin 510 498 58 1,066 Mr. Yao Yanmin 573 347 58 978 Mr. Lu Yaojun 614 292 58 964 Subtotal 1,697 1,137 174 3,008 Total 2,729 4,606 435 7,770 There was no arrangement under which a director or a supervisor waived or agreed to waive any remuneration during the year. 177 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 10. FIVE HIGHEST PAID EMPLOYEES 

None of the directors and supervisors as mentioned in note 9 above was included in the five highest paid individuals. The emoluments of the five individuals whose emoluments were the highest in the Group during the year are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB’000 

RMB’000 Salaries, allowances and benefits in kind 1,975 2,247 Performance related bonuses 8,651 10,381 Pension scheme contributions 842 752 

Total 11,468 13,380 

The remuneration of the above five highest paid employees fell within the following bands. 

Number of employees 2023 2022 HK$2,000,000 to HK$2,500,000 (equivalent to approximately RMB1,812,400 to RMB2,265,500) 3 –HK$2,500,001 to HK$3,000,000 (equivalent to approximately RMB2,265,501 to RMB2,718,600) 2 3HK$3,000,001 to HK$3,500,000 (equivalent to approximately RMB2,718,601 to RMB3,171,700) – 1HK$3,500,001 to HK$4,000,000 (equivalent to approximately RMB3,171,701 to RMB3,624,800) – 1

Total 5 5178 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 11. INCOME TAX 

Most of the companies comprising the Group are subject to the PRC enterprise income tax, which was provided based on the statutory income tax rate of 25% (2022: 25%) of the assessable income of each of these companies during the year as determined in accordance with the relevant PRC income tax rules and regulations, except for certain PRC subsidiaries of the Company which were taxed at a preferential rate of 15% (2022: 15%). Taxation for other companies of the Group has been calculated based on the estimated assessable profit for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 31 December 2022 at the appropriate rates of taxation prevailing in the jurisdictions in which these companies operate. Taxes on profits assessable elsewhere have been calculated at the rates of tax prevailing in the jurisdictions in which the Group operates. 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) Current – PRC enterprise income tax 6,709 6,966 – Elsewhere 1,071 1,073 

Total Current 7,780 8,039 Deferred (note 32) (1,383) (922) 

Total tax charge for the year 6,397 7,117 

A reconciliation of the tax expense/(credit) applicable to profit before tax at the statutory tax rate for the jurisdiction in which the Company and the majority of its subsidiaries are domiciled to the tax expense at the effective tax rate, and a reconciliation of the applicable rate (i.e., the statutory tax rate) to the effective tax rate, are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million % RMB million %(Restated) Profit before tax 37,538 33,088 Tax at PRC statutory tax rate of 25% 9,385 25.0 8,272 25.0 Land appreciation tax in the PRC 193 0.5 643 1.9 Profits and losses attributable to joint ventures and associates 251 0.7 81 0.2 Income not subject to tax (589) (1.6) (260) (0.8) Additional tax concession on research and development costs (1,681) (4.5) (1,093) (3.3) Expenses not deductible for tax 255 0.7 81 0.2 Temporary differences utilised from previous periods (197) (0.6) (5) (0.1) Temporary differences not recognised 189 0.5 412 1.2 Tax losses utilised from previous periods (109) (0.3) (105) (0.3) Tax losses not recognised 848 2.3 1,067 3.2 Effect of differences in tax rates applicable to certain domestic and foreign subsidiaries (1,964) (5.2) (1,688) (5.1) Adjustments in respect of current income tax of previous years 67 0.2 (18) (0.1) Others (251) (0.7) (270) (0.8) 

Tax charge at the Group’s effective rate 6,397 17.0 7,117 21.5 

The share of tax attributable to joint ventures and associates amounting to approximately RMB433 million (2022: RMB266 million) is included in “Share of profits and losses of joint ventures and associates” in the consolidated statement of profit or loss. 179 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 12. HELD-FOR-SALE CATEGORY 

Book value Fair value Estimated disposal costs Estimated disposal time 

Disposal of a subsidiary CCCC TDC Yantai Environmental Protection Dredging Co. Ltd. (a) 1,212 1,242 – 2024 – Assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale 3,900 – Liabilities directly associated with the assets classified as held for sale (2,688) Others 2 2 – 2024 Total 1,214 1,244 Assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale 3,902 Liabilities directly associated with the assets classified as held for sale (2,688) (a) On 13 March 2023, CCCC Dredging announced the decision of its board of directors to dispose of CCCC TDC Yantai Environmental Protection Dredging Co. Ltd. (“Yantai Environmental”). The decision was approved by its ultimate holding company. Yantai Environmental engages in the manufacture and sale of electronic products. The disposal of Yantai Environmental would be completed in January 2024, final negotiations for the sale were in progress and Yantai Environmental was classified as a disposal group held for sale. The major classes of assets and liabilities of Yantai Environmental classified as held for sale as at 31 December 2023 are as follows: 

2023 RMB million 

Assets 

Property, plant and equipment 265 

Right-of-use assets 55 

Deferred tax assets 17 

Inventories 60 

Contract assets 1,087 

Trade and other receivables 2,262 

Cash and cash equivalents 154 

Assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale 3,900 

Liabilities 

Trade and other payables (2,612) 

Contract liabilities (51) 

Tax payable (20) 

Interest-bearing bank and other borrowings (1) 

Retirement benefit obligations (4) 

Liabilities directly associated with the assets classified as held for sale (2,688) 180 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 13. DIVIDENDS 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Proposed final dividend of RMB0.29253 per ordinary share (2022: RMB0.21707) 4,762 3,509 

The proposed final dividend for the year is subject to the approval of the Company’s shareholders at the forthcoming annual general meeting (“AGM”). 

# 14. EARNINGS PER SHARE ATTRIBUTABLE TO ORDINARY EQUITY HOLDERS OF THE PARENT 

The calculation of the basic earnings per share amount is based on the profit for the year attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent (exclusive of the interest on perpetual securities), and the weighted average number of ordinary shares of 16,165,711,425 (2022: 16,165,711,425) in issue during the year. As disclosed in note 36, the Company granted restricted shares to certain employees in 2023, the restricted shares had an anti-dilutive effect on the basic earnings per share for the year and were ignored in the calculation of diluted earnings per share. Therefore, the diluted earnings per share is equal to the basic earning per share. The calculation of basic earnings per share is based on: 

2023 2022 

Profit attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent (RMB million) 24,734 20,226 Less: Interest on perpetual securities (RMB million) (i) 1,327 1,559 

Total 23,407 18,667 

Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of calculating basic earnings per share (million) 16,166 16,166 

Basic earnings per share RMB1.45 RMB1.15 

(i) The perpetual securities issued by the Company were classified as equity instruments with deferrable accumulative interest. Interest of RMB1,327 million on the perpetual securities which has been accrued but not distributed during the year was deducted from earnings when calculating the earnings per share amount for the year ended 31 December 2023. 181 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 15. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 

Buildings Machinery Vessels and vehicles Other equipment Construction in progress Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2023 

At 31 December 2022, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 15,796 13,108 19,087 3,099 9,615 60,705 

Additions 156 2,964 1,488 1,572 9,286 15,466 

Acquisition from debt restructuring 123 – – – – 123 

Disposals (17) (670) (296) (140) – (1,123) 

Business combination 4,968 2,637 60 351 317 8,333 

Disposal of subsidiaries – (8) (2) – – (10) 

Transfer 2,375 1,811 2,936 218 (7,340) –

Transfer from investment properties 101 – – – – 101 

Transfer from inventories 393 – – – 185 578 

Transfer to inventories – – – – (931) (931) 

Transfer to Intangible assets – – – – (36) (36) 

Transfer to right-of-use assets – – – – (13) (13) 

Transfer to investment properties (28) – – – (233) (261) 

Transfer from right-of-use asset – – 444 – – 444 

Transfer to assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale (2) (1) (260) (2) – (265) 

Depreciation provided during the year (766) (3,505) (1,767) (1,832) – (7,870) 

Impairment – – – – (5) (5) 

Exchange realignment and others 26 5 8 (45) (128) (134) 

At 31 December 2023, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 23,125 16,341 21,698 3,221 10,717 75,102 

At 31 December 2023 Cost 29,934 40,917 48,448 17,120 10,739 147,158 

Accumulated depreciation and impairment (6,809) (24,576) (26,750) (13,899) (22) (72,056) 

Net carrying amount 23,125 16,341 21,698 3,221 10,717 75,102 182 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 15. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT (CONTINUED) 

Buildings Machinery Vessels and vehicles Other equipment Construction in progress Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2022 

At 31 December 2021, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 14,863 13,748 17,970 3,756 11,407 61,744 Additions 485 2,446 1,831 1,838 5,322 11,922 Capital contribution from non-controlling shareholders 29 – – – – 29 Disposals (246) (243) (40) (210) – (739) Business combination 1 9 1 2 2 15 Disposal of subsidiaries (2) (51) (18) (14) – (85) Transfer 1,551 543 1,356 244 (3,694) –Transfer from right-of-use assets – 29 – – – 29 Transfer from investment properties 297 – – – – 297 Transfer from inventories 56 15 – – 616 687 Transfer to Intangible assets – – – – (7) (7) Transfer to right-of-use assets – – – – (17) (17) Transfer to investment properties (360) – – – (3,976) (4,336) Depreciation provided during the year (907) (3,393) (2,146) (2,473) – (8,919) Impairment – (77) – (2) – (79) Exchange realignment and others 29 82 133 (42) (38) 164 At 31 December 2022, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 15,796 13,108 19,087 3,099 9,615 60,705 At 31 December 2022 Cost 21,832 36,002 45,016 16,813 9,620 129,283 Accumulated depreciation and impairment (6,036) (22,894) (25,929) (13,714) (5) (68,578) Net carrying amount 15,796 13,108 19,087 3,099 9,615 60,705 As at 31 December 2023, the Group was in the process of applying for the ownership certificates for certain of its properties with an aggregate carrying amount of approximately RMB2,434 million (2022: RMB1,928 million). The directors of the Company are of the opinion that the Group is entitled to lawfully and validly occupy or use these properties. As at 31 December 2023, certain bank and other borrowings were secured by property, plant and equipment, with a carrying amount of approximately RMB782 million (31 December 2022: Nil) (note 44(b)). 183 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 16. INVESTMENT PROPERTIES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Carrying amount at 1 January 10,633 6,702 Additions 29 4Transfer from property, plant and equipment 261 4,336 Transfer from inventories 302 423 Business combination 9 64 Transfer to property, plant and equipment (101) (297) Transfer to inventories (107) (89) Disposals (3) (134) Disposal of subsidiaries (988) (86) Depreciation provided during the year (464) (350) Exchange realignment 12 60 

Carrying amount at 31 December 9,583 10,633 

Cost 11,315 12,372 Accumulated depreciation and impairment (1,732) (1,739) 

9,583 10,633 Fair value at 31 December (a) 17,354 17,958 184 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 16. INVESTMENT PROPERTIES (CONTINUED) 

(a) As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s investment properties were fair valued by Jones Lang LaSalle Corporate Appraisal and Advisory Limited, an independent qualified valuer. The fair value of the investment properties located in Chinese Mainland as at 31 December 2023 and 31 December 2022 was determined using income approach and market comparison approach. 

Valuation techniques Significant unobservable/ observable inputs Fair value at 31 December 2023 

Fair value at 31 December 2022 

RMB million RMB million Investment properties located in Chinese Mainland Income approach: taking into account the net rental income of the properties derived mainly from the existing and/or achievable leases in the existing market with due allowance, which have been then capitalised to determine the fair value at an appropriate capitalisation rate Future rental inflows, and capitalisation rates. 

15,060 15,214 The rest of the investment properties located in Chinese Mainland Market comparison approach: with reference to comparable market transactions Comparable price in the market 

723 1,086 Investment properties located outside Chinese Mainland Market comparison approach: with reference to comparable market transactions Comparable price in the market 

826 850 Investment properties located outside Chinese Mainland Income approach: taking into account the net rental income of the properties derived mainly from the existing and/or achievable leases in the existing market with due allowance, which have been then capitalised to determine the fair value at an appropriate capitalisation rate Future rental inflows, discount rates and capitalisation rates. 

745 808 

17,354 17,958 

Fair value hierarchy 

The following table illustrates the fair value measurement hierarchy of the Group’s investment properties as at 31 December 2023 using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3): 

Valuation techniques Significant unobservable inputs Range 2023 2022 

Income approach (2022: Income approach) Discount rate 3.0%-12.0% 3.0%-12.0% Average monthly rental (per square meter) 

RMB3-RMB510 per square meter 

RMB3-RMB522 per square meter 185 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 16. INVESTMENT PROPERTIES (CONTINUED) 

Fair value hierarchy (continued) 

There were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 and into or out of Level 3 during the year (2022: Nil). (a) The investment properties are leased to third parties under operating leases, further details of which are included in note 17 to the financial statements. As at 31 December 2023, the Group was in the process of applying for the ownership certificates for certain properties with an aggregate carrying amount of approximately RMB357 million (31 December 2022: RMB633 million). The directors of the Company are of the opinion that the Group is entitled to lawfully and validly occupy or use these properties. 

# 17. LEASES The Group as a lessee 

The Group has lease contracts for various items of land, building, vessels, machinery, vehicles and other equipment used in its operations. Lump sum payments were made upfront to acquire the leased land from the owners with lease periods of 20 to 70 years and no ongoing payments will be made under the terms of these land leases. Leases of buildings generally have lease terms between 1 and 10 years. The terms of vessels lease are generally 1 to 10 years under operating leases, while the lease period is 8 to 25 years under finance leases. Machinery and vehicles generally have lease terms between 1 and 5 years. Other equipment generally has lease terms of 1 to 5 years or less and/or is individually of low value. Generally, the Group is restricted from assigning and subleasing the leased assets outside the Group. 

(a) Right-of-use assets 

The carrying amounts of the Group’s right-of-use assets and the movements during the year are as follows: 

Leasehold land Buildings Vessels Machinery Vehicles Other equipment Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2023 

At 31 December 2022, net of accumulated depreciation 15,404 2,220 444 123 22 61 18,274 

Additions 906 1,293 45 483 86 44 2,857 

Transfer from property, plant and equipment 13 – – – – – 13 

Business combinations 1,339 4 – – – – 1,343 

Transfer from inventories 92 – – – – – 92 

Depreciation charge (255) (939) (53) (104) (71) (12) (1,434) 

Transfer to property, plant and equipment – – (444) – – – (444) 

Transfer to inventories (359) – – – – – (359) 

Transfer to assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale (54) (1) – – – – (55) 

Disposal, retirement, and others 141 (81) 21 (19) 2 2 66 

At 31 December 2023 17,227 2,496 13 483 39 95 20,353 186 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 17. LEASES (CONTINUED) 

The Group as a lessee (continued) 

(a) Right-of-use assets (continued) 

Leasehold land Buildings Vessels Machinery Vehicles Other equipment Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2022 

At 31 December 2021, net of accumulated depreciation 14,385 2,053 509 174 233 63 17,417 Additions 672 924 2 50 25 6 1,679 Capital contribution from non-controlling shareholders 21 – – – – – 21 Transfer from property, plant and equipment 17 – – – – – 17 Business combinations 15 3 – – – – 18 Transferred from inventories 49 – – – – – 49 Depreciation charge (228) (878) (45) (84) (25) (8) (1,268) Transfer to property, plant and equipment – – – (29) – – (29) Impairment (3) – – – – – (3) Disposal of subsidiaries (4) – – – – – (4) Disposal, retirement, or others 480 118 (22) 12 (211) – 377 At 31 December 2022 15,404 2,220 444 123 22 61 18,274 As at 31 December 2023, certain of the Group’s right-of-use assets with a net carrying amount of approximately RMB9,015 million (31 December 2022: RMB8,764 million) were pledged to secure general banking facilities granted to the Group (notes 31(e) and 44(b)). 

(b) Lease liabilities 

The carrying amount of lease liabilities (included under interest-bearing bank and other borrowings) and the movements during the year are as follows: 

2023 2022 

Lease liabilities Lease liabilities 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Carrying amount at 1 January 2,386 2,658 New leases 1,831 775 Interest expense 232 122 Payments (1,673) (1,169) 

Carrying amount at 31 December 2,776 2,386 

Analysed into: Current portion 926 801 Non-current portion 1,850 1,585 

The maturity analysis of lease liabilities is disclosed in note 49(c) to the consolidated financial statements. 187 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 17. LEASES (CONTINUED) 

The Group as a lessee (continued) 

(c) The amounts recognised in profit or loss in relation to leases are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Interest on lease liabilities 232 122 Depreciation charge of right-of-use assets 1,434 1,268 Expense relating to short-term leases (included in cost of sales) 1,795 2,026 Expense relating to leases of low-value assets (included in administrative expenses) 2 7Variable lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities (included in cost of sales) 2 5

Total amount recognised in profit or loss 3,465 3,428 

(d) The total cash outflow for leases and future cash outflows relating to leases that have not yet commenced are disclosed in notes 40(c) and 49(c), respectively, to the consolidated financial statements. 

The Group as a lessor 

(a) Operating lease 

The Group leases its investment properties (note 16) and property, plant and equipment (note 15) consisting of certain of commercial and industrial properties in Chinese Mainland and overseas under operating lease arrangements. The terms of the leases generally require the tenants to pay security deposits and provide for periodic rent adjustments according to the then prevailing market conditions. Rental income recognised by the Group during the year was RMB962 million (2022: RMB1,072 million). As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s operating arrangements for leased property, plant and equipment are as follows: 

Machinery Vessels and vehicles Total 

RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2022, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 891 631 1,522 Additions 571 198 769 Lease expiration (55) (235) (290) Depreciation (232) (60) (292) At 31 December 2023, net of accumulated depreciation and impairment 1,175 534 1,709 188 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 17. LEASES (CONTINUED) 

The Group as a lessor (continued) 

(a) Operating lease (continued) 

At 31 December 2023, the undiscounted lease payments receivables by the Group in future periods under non-cancellable operating leases with its tenants are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Within 1 year 592 600 1 year to 2 years 385 453 2 years to 3 years 228 343 3 years to 4 years 152 207 4 years to 5 years 193 128 Over 5 years 181 350 

Total 1,731 2,081 

(b) Finance lease 

Financing income from net lease investment was RMB2,734 million (2022: RMB2,414 million). At 31 December 2023, the Group had contracted with lessees for the following future undiscounted lease payments under non-cancellable finance leases are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Lease payments receivables – Within 1 year 21,477 16,598 – 1 year to 2 years 17,089 13,855 – 2 years to 3 years 8,805 8,377 – 3 years to 4 years 2,653 3,601 – 4 years to 5 years 1,041 2,023 – Over 5 years 548 1,154 

Subtotal 51,613 45,608 Less: Unearned finance lease income 4,184 5,585 

Net investment in the lease 47,429 40,023 189 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 18. INTANGIBLE ASSETS 

Concession assets Goodwill Trademarks, patents, proprietary technologies and copyrights Computer software Others Total 

RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2023 

Cost at 1 January 2023, net of accumulated amortisation and impairment 212,291 5,182 1,153 498 414 219,538 

Additions 20,830 – 44 406 3,254 24,534 

Business combinations 11,651 330 291 9 1,142 13,423 

Transfer from property, plant and equipment – – – 3 33 36 

Disposal of subsidiaries (note 43) (41,655) – – – – (41,655) 

Disposal – – (20) (7) (2) (29) 

Amortisation provided during the year (2,963) – (75) (193) (54) (3,285) 

Impairment written off during the year – (196) – – – (196) 

Exchange realignment 457 139 20 – 1 617 

Others (12,435) – – – – (12,435) 

At 31 December 2023 188,176 5,455 1,413 716 4,788 200,548 

At 31 December 2023 Cost 201,214 5,751 1,718 1,933 5,210 215,826 

Accumulated amortisation and impairment (13,038) (296) (305) (1,217) (422) (15,278) 

Net carrying amount 188,176 5,455 1,413 716 4,788 200,548 

31 December 2022 

Cost at 1 January 2022, net of accumulated amortisation and impairment 222,097 5,120 1,138 406 340 229,101 Additions 24,815 – 49 295 118 25,277 Transfer from property, plant and equipment – – – 7 – 7Business combinations – 18 – – – 18 Asset acquisition 7,696 – – – – 7,696 Disposal of subsidiaries (note 43) (34,605) – – (1) – (34,606) Disposal – – – (14) – (14) Amortisation provided during the year (2,645) – (34) (195) (44) (2,918) Impairment written off during the year – (50) – – – (50) Exchange realignment – 95 – – – 95 Others (5,067) (1) – – – (5,068) At 31 December 2022 212,291 5,182 1,153 498 414 219,538 At 31 December 2022 Cost 223,353 5,282 1,455 1,550 782 232,422 Accumulated amortisation and impairment (11,062) (100) (302) (1,052) (368) (12,884) Net carrying amount 212,291 5,182 1,153 498 414 219,538 190 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 18. INTANGIBLE ASSETS (CONTINUED) 

As at 31 December 2023, the net carrying amount of concession assets consisted of RMB168,207 million (2022: RMB175,141 million) under operation and RMB19,969 million (2022: RMB37,150 million) under construction, respectively. As at 31 December 2023, the Group recognised an accumulated impairment of RMB299 million (2022: RMB299 million), based on the impairment tests for concession assets in the infrastructure construction segment. As at 31 December 2023, certain bank and other borrowings were secured by concession assets with a total carrying amount of approximately RMB129,813 million (2022: RMB146,235 million) (notes 31(e) and 44(b)). 

Impairment testing of goodwill 

Goodwill is allocated to the Group’s cash-generating units identified within respective operating segments. Goodwill of the Group mainly relates to the followings: (a) the goodwill included in the Construction segment that arose in connection with the Group’s acquisition of the 100% equity interest in John Holland Group Pty Limited (“John Holland”) in April 2015 and acquisition of the 100% equity interest in RCR Holdings (“RCR”) in February 2019, collectively referred to as John Holland cash-generating unit (“John Holland CGU”); (b) the goodwill included in the Design segment that arose in connection with the Group’s acquisition of the 80% equity interest in Concremat Engenharia e Tecnologia S.A. (“Concremat CGU”) in January 2017; and (c) the goodwill included in the Other segment that arose in connection with the Group’s acquisition of the 100% equity interest in Friede Goldman United, Ltd. (“F&G CGU”) in August 2010. The following is a summary of goodwill allocation: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million John Holland CGU (i) 4,756 4,617 Concremat CGU (i) 252 252 F&G CGU (i) – 195 Other CGUs 447 118 

Total 5,455 5,182 

(i) For goodwill in connection with John Holland CGU, Concremat CGU and F&G CGU, the recoverable amount was determined based on value-in-use calculation. The calculation uses cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by management covering a five-year period. For the John Holland CGU, the key assumptions is set out below: 

2023 2022 

John Holland 

John Holland 

Terminal growth rate (1) 2% 2% Before tax discount rate (2) 11.1% 12.9% 

(1) The terminal growth rate is the average annual revenue growth rate over the five-year forecast period. It is based on past performance and management’s expectations of market development. (2) The discount rate used is before tax and reflects specific risks relating to the CGU. As at 31 December 2023, the Group recognised an accumulated impairment of RMB296 million (2022: RMB100 million) for the goodwill allocated to F&G CGU, while no impairment was recognised for the goodwill allocated to John Holland CGU and Concremat CGU based on the assessment as at 31 December 2023 and 2022. 191 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 19. INVESTMENTS IN JOINT VENTURES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million At 1 January 51,731 44,577 Additions 6,821 6,822 Disposals (489) (744) Share of profits or losses, net (1,409) (666) Dividend distribution (464) (616) Initial recognition of fair value of interests in joint ventures arising from disposal of subsidiaries 4,229 2,321 Conversion into subsidiaries resulting from increase in equity interests in joint ventures (652) (166) Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures (10) (22) Impairment (248) (1) Others 162 226 

At 31 December 59,671 51,731 

In the opinion of the directors, none of the joint ventures is individually material to the Group. The following table illustrates the aggregate financial information of the Group’s joint ventures that are not individually material: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Share of the joint ventures’ losses for the year (1,409) (666) Share of the joint ventures’ other comprehensive loss (10) (22) Share of the joint ventures’ total comprehensive loss (1,419) (688) 

Aggregate carrying amount of the Group’s investments in the joint ventures 59,671 51,731 

All of the joint ventures of the Group are accounted for using the equity method. The Group’s receivable and payable balances with and guarantees provided to the joint ventures are disclosed in notes 46(b) and 46(c) to the financial statements. As at 31 December 2023, approximately 9.18% of the aggregate carrying amount of the Group’s investments in the joint ventures was directly held by the Company. 192 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 20. INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million At 1 January 47,588 40,772 Additions 5,940 5,442 Disposals (255) (18) Share of profits, net 406 343 Dividend distribution (535) (285) Initial recognition of fair value of interests in associates arising from disposal of subsidiaries 584 978 Share of other comprehensive income of associates 34 360 Others 58 (4) 

At 31 December 53,820 47,588 

Particulars of the Group’s material associate is as follows: 

Name Particulars of issued shares held Place of incorporation/ registration and business Percentage of ownership interest attributable to the Group Principal activity 

Shanghai Zhenhua Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. (“ZPMC”) Ordinary shares Chinese Mainland 16.24% Manufacture of heavy-duty equipment Although the Group holds less than 20% equity interest in ZPMC, ZPMC has been accounted for as an associate since the Group is the second largest shareholder of ZPMC, only next to the Company’s parent CCCG and has the right to nominate directors to the board of directors of ZPMC and therefore has significant influence over ZPMC. ZPMC is directly held by the Company. ZPMC, which is considered a material associate of the Group, is a strategic partner of the Group and is accounted for using the equity method. As at 31 December 2023, approximately 23.84% of the aggregate carrying amount of the Group’s investments in the associates was directly held by the Company. 193 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 20. INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES (CONTINUED) 

The following table illustrates the summarised financial information in respect of ZPMC and reconciled to the carrying amount in the consolidated financial statements: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Non-current assets 39,354 39,366 Current assets 45,511 38,847 

Total assets 84,865 78,213 

Current liabilities (48,199) (36,351) Non-current liabilities (17,799) (23,740) 

Total liabilities (65,998) (60,091) 

Non-controlling interests (3,110) (2,954) Perpetual securities (500) (500) 

Equity attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent 15,257 14,668 

Reconciliation to the Group’s interest in the associate: Proportion of the Group’s ownership 16.24% 16.24% Group’s share of net assets of the associate, excluding goodwill 2,512 2,421 Goodwill on acquisition (less cumulative impairment) 1,911 1,911 

Carrying amount of the investment 4,423 4,332 

Revenue 32,933 30,183 Profit attributable to owners of the parent 520 376 Other comprehensive loss attributable to owners of the parent 34 94 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to owners of the parent 554 470 Dividend received – 43 194 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 20. INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES (CONTINUED) 

The following table illustrates the aggregate financial information of the Group’s associates that are not individually material: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Share of the associates’ profit for the year 322 281 Share of the associates’ other comprehensive income 28 345 

Share of the associates’ total comprehensive income 350 626 

Aggregate carrying amount of the Group’s investments in the associates 49,397 43,256 

All of the associates of the Group are accounted for using the equity method. The Group’s trade receivable and payable balances with and the guarantees provided to the associates are disclosed in notes 46 (b) and 46(c) to the financial statements. 

# 21. FINANCIAL ASSETS AT FAIR VALUE THROUGH PROFIT OR LOSS 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Listed equity investments (note a) 584 993 Unlisted investments – Investments in structured entities (note 23) 20,776 17,257 – Unlisted equity investments 3,763 2,084 – Future purchase option (note c) 2,740 2,118 – Investments in assets-backed securities (note 23) 37 30 – Wealth management products (note b) 254 307 

Subtotal 28,154 22,789 Less: Non-current portion Unlisted investments 27,316 21,489 

Total current portion 838 1,300 

(a) The listed equity investments at 31 December 2023 were classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss as they were held for trading. The fair value of these investments was based on the quoted market prices at the end of the reporting period. (b) The above wealth management products issued by banks in Chinese Mainland are mandatorily classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss as their contractual cash flows are not solely payments of principal and interest. (c) The Group purchased future purchase options to buy back equity interests in certain companies it disposed of in prior years at a discounted price. As at 31 December 2023, the fair value of the future purchase options was RMB2,740 million (2022: RMB2,118 million). 195 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 22. EQUITY INVESTMENTS DESIGNATED AT FAIR VALUE THROUGH OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (i) Equity instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income comprise the following individual instruments: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Listed equity instruments – China Merchants Bank Co., Ltd. 11,761 15,752 – China Merchants Securities Co., Ltd. 3,749 3,655 – Yutong Bus Co., Ltd. 542 307 – China Everbright Bank Co., Ltd. 82 229 – China Development Bank Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. 194 146 – CECEP Environmental Protection Equipment Co., Ltd. 147 146 – Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. – 143 – Zhongtong Bus Holding Co., Ltd. 42 56 – Others 213 269 

Subtotal 16,730 20,703 

Unlisted equity instruments – Lunan High Speed Railway Co., Ltd. 1,267 1,298 – Shandong Zilin Expressway Co., Ltd. 663 194 – Shandong Jiwei Expressway Co., Ltd. 346 346 – Beijing CEDC Ltd. 372 321 – Shandong Expressway Jiqing Midline Highway Co., Ltd. 242 242 – Hunan Bainan Expressway Construction Development Co., Ltd. 403 173 – Jiangsu Xitai Tunnel Co., Ltd. 287 149 – Shanghai Kerry Oils & Grains Industries Co., Ltd. 28 48 – Others 1,087 653 

Subtotal 4,695 3,424 

Total 21,425 24,127 

The above equity investments were irrevocably designated at fair value through other comprehensive income as the Group considers these investments to be strategic in nature. 

(ii) Disposal of equity investments 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group has sold certain equity investments, as these investments no longer suited the Group’s investment strategy. The equity investments sold had a fair value of RMB404 million (2022: RMB175 million) at the time of sale and the Group realised a gain of RMB121 million (2022: RMB86 million), which had already been included in other comprehensive income and transferred to retained earnings directly upon disposal. 

(iii) Dividends 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group recognised dividends in a total amount of RMB892 million (2022: RMB874 million), including RMB19 million relating to equity investments derecognised during the reporting period and RMB873 million (2022: RMB874 million) relating to equity investments held at the end of the reporting period, respectively. 196 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 23. UNCONSOLIDATED STRUCTURED ENTITIES 

The Group is principally involved with structured entities through financial investments. The Group determines whether or not to consolidate these structured entities depending on whether the Group has control over them. The unconsolidated structured entities include private equity funds, unit trust funds, trust products and asset management plans, etc. The nature and purpose of these structured entities are to engage in infrastructure investment activities. These structured entities were financed through the issue of units to investors. As at 31 December 2023, the maximum exposure to loss and the book values of relevant investments of the Group arising from the interests held in structured entities that are sponsored by the Group or the third party financial institutions are set out as below: 

2023 2022 

Carrying amount Maximum exposure to loss 

Carrying amount Maximum exposure to loss 

RMB million RMB million 

RMB million RMB million 

Investments in structured entities 20,776 20,776 17,257 17,257 Investments in asset-backed securities 37 37 30 30 

Total 20,813 20,813 17,287 17,287 

In 2023, the Group received management fees, commission and performance fees amounting to RMB82 million (2022: RMB38 million) from unconsolidated structured entities sponsored by the Group. As disclosed in notes 26(f) and 41(iii)(b), the Group has entered into agreements with certain financial institutions to establish ABS and ABN arrangements. As at 31 December 2023, in addition to the liquidity support provided by the Group as disclosed, the Group has invested asset-backed securities with an aggregated amount of RMB37 million (2022: RMB30 million). The directors of the Company evaluate that the position of subordinated tranches invested is low, and therefore determined not to consolidate these ABS and ABN. As at 31 December 2023, except for those disclosed and note 41(iii), there were no contractual liquidity arrangements, guarantees or other commitments between the Group and the unconsolidated structured entities (2022: Nil). 197 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 24. INVENTORIES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Raw materials 15,346 16,819 Work in progress 1,415 884 Properties under development (note a) 50,949 51,086 Completed properties held for sale (note b) 19,238 7,515 Finished goods 853 1,433 Others 220 526 

Total 88,021 78,263 

At 31 December 2023, certain of the Group’s properties under development and completed properties held for sale with an aggregate carrying amount of RMB18,199 million (2022: RMB10,184 million) were pledged to secure the Group’s bank loans (notes 31(e) and 44(b)). (a) Properties under development comprise: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Land use rights 33,826 29,845 Construction cost 13,865 18,181 Finance costs capitalised 3,258 3,060 

Total 50,949 51,086 

All of the properties under development are expected to be completed within the Group’s normal operating cycle and are included under current assets. (b) The amount of completed properties held for sale expected to be recovered beyond one year is RMB11,667 million (2022: RMB5,365 million). The remaining amount is expected to be recovered within one year. 198 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 25. CONTRACT ASSETS 

Contract assets are initially recognised for revenue earned from the provision of construction, design and dredging services. Upon settlement with the customer, the amounts recognised as contract assets are reclassified to trade receivables. The increase in contract assets in 2023 and 2022 was mainly resulted from the increase in the ongoing provision of construction and dredging services at the end of each of the years. 

31 December 2023 31 December 2022 1 January 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million RMB million Contract assets arising from: Infrastructure construction 426,628 370,597 295,073 Infrastructure design 12,706 12,241 9,266 Dredging 17,120 13,574 27,123 Others 419 208 5

Subtotal 456,873 396,620 331,467 Impairment (4,261) (3,349) (3,022) 

Net carrying amount 452,612 393,271 328,445 

Portion classified as non-current 282,355 242,716 198,395 

Current portion 170,257 150,555 130,050 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, RMB4,261 million (2022: RMB3,349 million) was recognised as an allowance for expected credit losses on contract assets. As at 31 December 2023, the expected timing of recovery or settlement for contract assets was subject to the specific contract terms and the progress of the performance obligations. The movements in the loss allowance for impairment of contract assets are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

At beginning of year 3,349 3,022 Impairment losses, net 1,008 504 Others (96) (177) 

At end of year 4,261 3,349 

An impairment analysis is performed at each reporting date using a provision matrix to measure expected credit losses. The provision rates for the measurement of the expected credit losses of the contract assets are based on those of the trade receivables as the contract assets and the trade receivables are from the same customer bases. The provision rates of contract assets are based on the groupings of various customer segments with similar loss patterns (i.e., by service type, customer type). The calculation reflects the probability-weighted outcome, the time value of money and reasonable and supportable information that is available at the reporting date about past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. 199 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 25. CONTRACT ASSETS (CONTINUED) 

Set out below is the information about the credit risk exposure on the Group’s contract assets using a provision matrix: 

2023 2022 

Expected credit loss rate 0.85% 0.78% Gross carrying amount (RMB million) 454,864 395,571 Expected credit losses (RMB million) 3,847 3,083 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Trade and bills receivables (note a) 143,180 133,504 Impairment (23,987) (22,375) 

Net carrying amount 119,193 111,129 

Long-term receivables (note b) 308,864 253,776 Impairment (10,295) (8,123) 

Net carrying amount 298,569 245,653 

Other receivables: Prepayments 33,053 34,869 Deposits (note d) 26,700 27,431 Others 68,374 52,314 

Subtotal 128,127 114,614 Impairment (note c) (7,521) (5,226) 

Net carrying amount 120,606 109,388 

Total 538,368 466,170 

Portion classified as non-current Long-term receivables 221,762 176,550 Other receivables: Prepayments 5,982 5,938 Deposits 1,922 1,576 Others 6,513 6,124 

Total non-current portion 236,179 190,188 

Total current portion 302,189 275,982 200 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES (CONTINUED) 

(a) The majority of the Group’s revenues are generated through infrastructure construction, infrastructure design and dredging contracts and settlements are made in accordance with the terms specified in the contracts governing the relevant transactions. The Group seeks to maintain strict control over its outstanding receivables and has a credit control department to minimise credit risk. Overdue balances are reviewed regularly by senior management. In view of the aforementioned and the fact that the Group’s trade receivables relate to a large number of diversified customers, there is no significant concentration of credit risk. An ageing analysis of trade and bills receivables as at the end of the reporting period, net of provisions, is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Within 6 months 71,583 63,564 6 months to 1 year 13,188 9,781 1 year to 2 years 14,284 22,389 2 years to 3 years 11,390 6,206 Over 3 years 8,748 9,189 

Total 119,193 111,129 

The movements in provision for impairment of trade and bills receivables are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million At beginning of year 22,375 17,795 Impairment losses, net 3,268 5,447 Disposal of subsidiaries – (62) Amount written off* (1,161) (1,027) Others (495) 222 

At end of year 23,987 22,375 

* During the year ended 31 December 2023, an accumulated impairment of RMB616 million (2022: RMB1,003 million) was written off because the relevant trade and bills receivables were derecognised due to the arrangement of non-recourse factoring agreements, ABS, ABN, and endorsement. An impairment analysis is performed at each reporting date using a provision matrix to measure expected credit losses. The provision rates are based on the ageing of the balances for groupings of various customer segments with similar loss patterns (i.e., by service type, customer type). The calculation reflects the probability-weighted outcome, the time value of money and reasonable and supportable information that is available at the reporting date about past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. 201 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES (CONTINUED) 

(a) (continued) Set out below is the information about the credit risk exposure on the Group’s trade and bills receivables using a provision matrix: 

As at 31 December 2023 Ageing Less than 1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 3 years 3 to 4 years 4 to 5 years Over 5 years Total 

Expected credit loss rate 1.42% 14.98% 24.87% 40.93% 55.16% 87.57% 13.88% 

Gross carrying amount (RMB million) 85,850 16,385 14,686 5,824 4,369 7,496 134,610 

Expected credit losses (RMB million) (1,221) (2,454) (3,653) (2,384) (2,410) (6,564) (18,686) 

As at 31 December 2022 

Ageing Less than 1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 3 years 3 to 4 years 4 to 5 years Over 5 years Total Expected credit loss rate 1.32% 13.82% 25.85% 35.88% 58.38% 82.68% 12.74% Gross carrying amount (RMB million) 73,825 25,610 8,034 5,582 3,700 5,896 122,647 Expected credit losses (RMB million) (974) (3,539) (2,077) (2,003) (2,160) (4,875) (15,628) In addition to the above provision matrix, the Group has made individual loss allowance for certain customers while the credit risk increased significantly. As at 31 December 2023, the accumulated individual loss allowance was RMB5,301 million (31 December 2022: RMB6,747 million) with a carrying amount before loss allowance of RMB8,570 million (31 December 2022: RMB10,857 million). 202 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES (CONTINUED) 

(b) Long-term receivables mainly represented amounts due from certain construction works with payment periods over one year. 

31 December 2023 31 December 2022 1 January 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million RMB million Long-term receivables arising from: Infrastructure construction 280,536 228,134 201,001 Infrastructure design 9,439 8,343 8,002 Dredging 17,941 16,903 16,731 Others 948 396 665 

Subtotal 308,864 253,776 226,399 Impairment (10,295) (8,123) (5,842) 

Net carrying amount 298,569 245,653 220,557 Portion classified as non-current 221,762 176,550 160,686 

Current portion 76,807 69,103 59,871 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, RMB1,434 million (2022: RMB2,440 million) was recognised as an allowance for expected credit losses on long-term receivables. The movements in the loss allowance for impairment of long-term receivables are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

At beginning of year 8,123 5,842 Impairment losses, net 1,434 2,440 Amount written off (179) (215) Others 917 56 

At end of year 10,295 8,123 

An impairment analysis is performed at each reporting date using a provision matrix to measure expected credit losses. The provision rates for the measurement of the expected credit losses of the long term receivables are based on those of the trade receivables as long term receivables and the trade receivables are from the same customer bases. The provision rates of long term receivables are based on the groupings of various customer segments with similar loss patterns (i.e., by service type, customer type). The calculation reflects the probability-weighted outcome, the time value of money and reasonable and supportable information that is available at the reporting date about past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. 203 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES (CONTINUED) 

(b) (continued) Set out below is the information about the credit risk exposure on the Group’s long-term receivables using a provision matrix: 

2023 2022 Expected credit loss rate 0.99% 1.13% Gross carrying amount (RMB million) 292,026 244,875 Expected credit losses (RMB million) 2,891 2,761 

(c) The movements in the loss allowance for impairment of other receivables are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million At beginning of year 5,226 3,919 Impairment losses, net 2,191 1,344 Disposal of subsidiaries – (33) Amount written off (7) (14) Others 111 10 

At end of year 7,521 5,226 

An impairment analysis is performed at each reporting date using a provision matrix to measure expected credit losses. The provision rates of other receivables are based on the groupings of various customer segments with similar loss patterns (i.e., by service type, customer type). The calculation reflects the probability-weighted outcome, the time value of money and reasonable and supportable information that is available at the reporting date about past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. Set out below is the information about the credit risk exposure on the Group’s other receivables using a provision matrix: 

2023 2022 Expected credit loss rate 3.70% 2.95% Gross carrying amount (RMB million) 123,032 111,161 Expected credit losses (RMB million) 4,558 3,281 204 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 26. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES (CONTINUED) 

(d) Deposits mainly represented tender and performance bonds due from customers. (e) As at 31 December 2023, trade receivables of RMB66,523 million (2022: RMB51,804 million) had been transferred to the banks in accordance with non-recourse factoring agreements. In the opinion of the directors, the substantial risks and rewards associated with the trade receivables have been transferred and therefore the relevant receivables have been derecognised. (f) The Group has entered into certain agreements with certain financial institution so as to establish ABS and ABN. The ABS and ABN are bonds or notes backed by trade receivables and long-term receivables. The Group sell pools of trade receivables and long-term receivables to a SPV, whose sole function is to buy such assets in order to securitise them. The SPV, which is usually a corporation, then sells them to a trust. The trust repackages the loans as interest-bearing securities and issues them. As at 31 December 2023, the relevant outstanding contract assets, trade receivables and long-term receivables under the ABS and ABN amounted to RMB34,152 million (2022: RMB34,880 million). Such trade receivables and long-term receivables were derecognised as the directors are of the opinion that the substantial risks and rewards associated with the trade receivables and long-term receivables have been transferred and therefore qualified for derecognition. (g) In 2023, the Group transferred a portion of its trade receivables to a special purpose entity, which issued asset-backed securities to investors. The Group assumed the credit risk of the transferred trade receivables by subscribing to subordinated asset-backed securities. Receivables transferred under the arrangement but not yet settled were RMB560 million (31 December 2022: RMB1,995 million). As the Group retained a significant portion of the risk and return related to the relevant trade receivables, the Group did not derecognize the related trade receivables. (h) The Group entered into accounts receivable factoring arrangements with certain financial institutions and transferred certain accounts receivable to financial institutions. Under this arrangement, if the accounts receivable debtor delays payment and the Group is required to repay the money, the Group retains virtually all of the risks and rewards on the ownership of the financial asset and does not terminate recognition of the financial asset. After the transfer, the Group no longer reserves the right to use it, including the right to sell, transfer or pledge it to other third parties. As at 31 December 2023, trade receivables transferred under the arrangement but not yet settled were RMB3,808 million (31 December 2022: Nil) and long-term receivables transferred under the arrangement but not yet settled were RMB5,734 million. (i) As at 31 December 2023, outstanding bills receivable of RMB401 million (2022: RMB405 million) were endorsed to suppliers or discounted with banks. In the opinion of directors, the Group has retained the substantial risks and rewards, which include default risks relating to such bills receivable, and accordingly, it continued to recognise the full carrying amounts of the bills receivable. In addition, as at 31 December 2023, outstanding bills receivable of RMB686 million (2022: RMB458 million) were endorsed to suppliers or discounted with banks. In the opinion of the directors, the Group has transferred substantially all risks and rewards relating to such bills receivable which were fully derecognised. (j) As at 31 December 2023, certain of the Group’s outstanding trade and other receivables(excluding PPP projects) with a net carrying amount of approximately RMB42,288 million (2022: RMB37,910 million) were pledged to secure general banking facilities and other borrowings, and certain of the Group’s outstanding trade receivables from PPP projects with a net carrying amount of approximately RMB176,508 million (2022:RMB138,678 million) have been pledged to secure bank borrowings (notes 31(e), 29(c) and 44(b)). 205 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 27. DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 

2023 2022 

Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities 

RMB million RMB million 

RMB million RMB million 

Forward currency contracts – Cash flow hedges – 5 7 7

Interest rate swap 48 – 62 –Foreign exchange option 365 – 619 –

Total 413 5 688 7

Portion classified as non-current: Interest rate swap 48 – 62 –Foreign exchange option 365 – 619 –

Current portion – 5 7 7

# 28. CASH AND BANK BALANCES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Restricted bank deposits (note a) 7,119 5,579 Time deposits with an initial term of over three months (note b) 3,610 4,081 

Subtotal 10,729 9,660 

Cash and cash equivalents (note c) 110,204 103,663 

Total 120,933 113,323 

(a) As at 31 December 2023, restricted bank deposits mainly included deposits for issuance of bank acceptance notes, performance bonds, letters of credit to customers, and mandatory reserve deposits placed with the People’s Bank of China by CCCC Finance. (b) Time deposits with an initial term of over three months are excluded from cash and cash equivalents, as management is of the opinion that these time deposits are not readily convertible to known amounts of cash without significant risk of changes in value. (c) Monetary funds in assets held for sale amounted to RMB154 million are classified as cash and cash equivalents. 206 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 28. CASH AND BANK BALANCES (CONTINUED) 

At the end of the reporting period, the cash and bank balances of the Group denominated in RMB amounted to RMB83,997 million (2022: RMB76,673 million). The RMB is not freely convertible into other currencies, however, under Chinese Mainland’s Foreign Exchange Control Regulations and Administration of Settlement, Sale and Payment of Foreign Exchange Regulations, the Group is permitted to exchange RMB for other currencies through banks authorised to conduct foreign exchange business. As at 31 December 2023, less than 3% (2022: less than 3%) of the cash and bank balances denominated in currencies other than RMB were deposited in banks in certain countries which are subject to foreign exchange control and the currencies are not freely convertible into other currencies or remitted out of those countries. Cash at banks earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates. Short-term time deposits are made for varying periods depending on the immediate cash requirements of the Group and earn interest at the respective short-term time deposit rates. The bank balances and time deposits are deposited with creditworthy banks with no recent history of default. 

# 29. TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Trade and bills payables (note a) 391,789 353,164 Deposits from suppliers 45,775 43,056 Retentions 56,756 47,365 Deposits in CCCC Finance (note b) 13,530 11,078 Other taxes 39,565 34,520 Payroll and social security 2,762 2,310 Other borrowings (note c) 20,244 3,802 Accrued expenses and others 47,036 31,832 

Total 617,457 527,127 

Portion classified as non-current Retentions 43,131 36,247 Other borrowings 2,465 31 Other taxes 516 328 Others 7,009 5,383 

Total non-current portion 53,121 41,989 

Total current portion 564,336 485,138 207 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 29. TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES (CONTINUED) 

(a) An ageing analysis of trade and bills payables as at the end of the reporting period is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Within 1 year 343,316 321,250 1 year to 2 years 33,762 18,641 2 years to 3 years 6,595 5,912 Over 3 years 8,116 7,361 

Total 391,789 353,164 

(b) CCCC Finance, a subsidiary of the Company, accepted deposits from CCCG and fellow subsidiaries. These deposits were due within one year with an average annual interest rate of 0.8% (2022: 0.8%). (c) As at 31 December 2023, the borrowings were secured by the Group’s trade and other receivables, the borrowings interest ranging approximately from 2.82% to 5.75%. 

# 30. CONTRACT LIABILITIES 

Details of contract liabilities are as follows: 

December 31 December 31 January 1 

2023 2022 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million RMB million Contract liabilities arising from: Infrastructure construction 63,428 66,267 70,612 Infrastructure design 5,397 6,689 6,008 Dredging 3,973 3,432 3,238 Others 678 1,032 1,046 

Total 73,476 77,420 80,904 

Contract liabilities mainly include short-term advances received to render construction, design and dredging services. The increase in the book value of contract liabilities this year is mainly due to the settlement period and time point agreed upon by the owner according to the contract. The decrease in contract liabilities this period is mainly due to the project meeting the revenue recognition conditions and carrying forward advance payment for engineering and sales. 208 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 31. INTEREST-BEARING BANK AND OTHER BORROWINGS 

2023 2022 Notes 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Non-current 

Long-term bank borrowings – secured (e) 266,124 257,606 – guaranteed (f) 13,215 14,453 – unsecured or unguaranteed 88,290 68,235 

Subtotal 367,629 340,294 

Long-term other borrowings – secured (e) 337 819 – guaranteed (f) 3,993 2,370 – unsecured or unguaranteed 352 1,068 

Subtotal 4,682 4,257 

Corporate bonds 16,314 14,558 Non-public debt instruments 9,239 11,952 Lease liabilities 17(b) 1,850 1,585 

Total non-current borrowings 399,714 372,646 

Current 

Current portion of long-term bank borrowings – secured (e) 26,118 15,650 – guaranteed (f) 2,134 5,361 – unsecured or unguaranteed 12,236 18,491 

Subtotal 40,488 39,502 

Short-term bank borrowings – secured (e) 6,816 11,125 – guaranteed (f) 296 196 – unsecured or unguaranteed 41,778 24,299 

Subtotal 48,890 35,620 

Current portion of long-term other borrowings – secured (e) 517 587 – guaranteed (f) – 150 – unsecured or unguaranteed 69 343 

Subtotal 586 1,080 

Short-term other borrowings – secured (e) – –– unsecured or unguaranteed 139 409 

Subtotal 139 409 

Corporate bonds 6,521 5,588 Debentures 6,030 8,532 Non-public debt instruments 8,332 2,172 Lease liabilities 17(b) 926 801 

Total current borrowings 111,912 93,704 

Total borrowings 511,626 466,350 209 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 31. INTEREST-BEARING BANK AND OTHER BORROWINGS (CONTINUED) 

(a) The Group’s borrowings (excluding lease liabilities) were repayable as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Bank borrowings – Within one year or on demand 89,378 75,122 – In the second year 52,241 40,299 – In the third to fifth years, inclusive 97,762 75,240 – Beyond five years 217,626 224,755 

Subtotal 457,007 415,416 

Others, excluding lease liabilities – Within one year or on demand 21,608 17,781 – In the second year 5,965 9,250 – In the third to fifth years, inclusive 20,983 18,665 – Beyond five years 3,287 2,852 

Subtotal 51,843 48,548 

Total 508,850 463,964 

(b) The carrying amounts of the borrowings are denominated in the following currencies: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Renminbi 481,310 435,073 United States dollar 23,850 26,176 Euro 3,159 3,038 Japanese yen 37 41 Hong Kong dollar 91 241 Others 3,179 1,781 

Total 511,626 466,350 

(c) An Analysis of the carrying amounts of borrowings by the type of interest rate is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Fixed interest rate 149,387 138,632 Variable interest rate 362,239 327,718 

Total 511,626 466,350 210 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 31. INTEREST-BEARING BANK AND OTHER BORROWINGS (CONTINUED) 

(d) Borrowings of the Group, excluding corporate bonds, debentures, non-public debt instruments, and lease liabilities, bore interest at effective rates ranging from 0.89% to 8.09% (2022: 0.30% to 7.50%) per annum at the end of the reporting period, and two overseas bank borrowing bore interest ranging from 9.38% to 18.00% (2022: 9.38% to 16.70%). (e) As at 31 December 2023 and 2022, the borrowings were secured by the Group’s property, plant and equipment (note 15), right-of-use assets (note 17(a)), concession assets and trade receivables from PPP projects (note 18, note26), inventories (note 24) and trade and other receivables (excluding PPP projects) (note 26). (f) Guaranteed borrowings were guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company. 

# 32. DEFERRED TAX 

The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year, without taking into consideration the offsetting of balances within the same tax jurisdiction, are as follows: 

Deferred tax liabilities 

2023 Fair value adjustments of equity investments at fair value through other comprehensive income Undistributed profits in subsidiaries Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2022 2,339 1,965 5,105 9,409 

Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS12 (note 2.2(c)) – – 92 92 

At 1 January 2023 (Restated) 2,339 1,965 5,197 9,501 

Charged to profit or loss during the year (note 11) – 15 1,693 1,708 

Credited to other comprehensive income (654) – (31) (685) 

Business combinations (1) – (56) (57) 

Disposal of subsidiaries – – (180) (180) 

Transfer to tax payable upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – – – –

Exchange differences 73 – 107 180 

At 31 December 2023 1,757 1,980 6,730 10,467 211 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 32. DEFERRED TAX (CONTINUED) 

Deferred tax assets 

2023 Impairment of financial assets and contract assets Tax losses Discount on long-term receivables Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

31 December 2022 5,844 3,495 368 3,074 12,781 

Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS12 (note 2.2(c)) – – – 93 93 

At 1 January 2023 (Restated) 5,844 3,495 368 3,167 12,874 

Credited to profit or loss during the year (note 11) 1,213 768 86 1,024 3,091 

Credited/(Charged) to other comprehensive income (6) (20) – 230 204 

Business combinations 55 – – 29 84 

Disposal of subsidiaries 15 119 – 8 142 

Exchange differences (47) (157) (2) 16 (190) 

At 31 December 2023 7,074 4,205 452 4,474 16,205 

Deferred tax liabilities 

2022 Fair value adjustments of equity investments at fair value through other comprehensive income Undistributed profits in subsidiaries Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 31 December 2021 4,908 1,947 4,338 11,193 Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS12 (note 2.2(c)) – – 43 43 At 1 January 2022 (Restated) 4,908 1,947 4,381 11,236 Charged to profit or loss during the year (Restated) (note 11) – 18 714 732 Credited to other comprehensive income (1,342) – – (1,342) Business combinations – – (9) (9) Disposal of subsidiaries – – (33) (33) Transfer to tax payable upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income (1,330) – – (1,330) Exchange differences 103 – 144 247 At 31 December 2022 (Restated) 2,339 1,965 5,197 9,501 212 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 32. DEFERRED TAX (CONTINUED) 

Deferred tax assets 

2022 Impairment of financial assets and contract assets Tax losses Discount on long-term receivables Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 31 December 2021 4,331 2,883 316 3,498 11,028 Effect of adoption of amendments to IAS12 (note 2.2(c)) – – – 44 44 At 1 January 2022 4,331 2,883 316 3,542 11,072 Credited/(Charged) to profit or loss during the year (restated) (note 11) 1,493 596 15 (450) 1,654 Credited to other comprehensive income – – – 149 149 Business combinations 11 7 – – 18 Disposal of subsidiaries (17) (1) (7) – (25) Exchange differences 26 10 44 (74) 6At 31 December 2022 (Restated) 5,844 3,495 368 3,167 12,874 For presentation purposes, certain deferred tax assets and liabilities have been offset in the statement of financial position. The following is an analysis of the deferred tax balances of the Group for financial reporting purposes: 

2023 2022 

Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities 

Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities 

RMB million RMB million 

RMB million RMB million (Restated) (Restated) The gross balance 16,205 10,467 12,874 9,501 Offsetting (6,088) (6,088) (5,025) (5,025) 

Total 10,117 4,379 7,849 4,476 

The Group has have not been recognised in respect of these losses amounting to RMB27,710 million (2022: RMB27,498 million) as they have arisen in subsidiaries that have been loss-making for some time and it is not considered probable that taxable profits will be available against which the tax losses can be utilised. As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s unrecognized deductible provisional difference for deferred tax assets was RMB9,544 million (2022: RMB9,577million) as the directors believe it is not probable that such deductible temporary differences would be recognised. There are no income tax consequences attaching to the payment of dividends by the Company to its shareholders. 213 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 32. DEFERRED TAX (CONTINUED) 

The Group’s unrecognized tax losses and deductible provisional difference for deferred tax assets are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Tax losses 27,710 27,498 Deductible provisional difference 9,544 9,577 

The above tax losses of RMB119 million are available indefinitely and RMB27,591 million are available within 1 to 5 years for offsetting against future taxable profits of the companies in which the losses arose. 

# 33. RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS 

The Group provided supplementary pension subsidies and medical benefits to its retired or early retired employees in Chinese Mainland who retired prior to 1 January 2006, which are considered to be defined benefit plans, and recognised a liability for the unfunded employee benefit obligations in the consolidated statement of financial position as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Present value of defined benefit obligations 1,009 948 Portion classified as current portion 102 101 

Non-current portion 907 847 

The movements in the present value of the defined benefit obligations are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million At 1 January 948 1,062 Past service cost 5 (4) Interest cost 24 27 

Subtotal 977 1,085 Remeasurements – Gains from changes in financial assumptions 14 –– Experience gains (12) –

Subtotal 979 1,085 Payments (187) (137) Business combinations 221 –Liabilities held for sale (note 12) (4) –

At 31 December 1,009 948 214 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 33. RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS (CONTINUED) 

The above obligations were determined based on actuarial valuation performed by an independent actuary, Towers Watson Management Consulting (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. Beijing Branch, using the projected unit credit method. The significant actuarial assumptions are as follows: 

2023 2022 

Discount rate 2.50% 2.75% Medical cost growth rate 4.00%-8.00% 4.00%-8.00% 

A quantitative sensitivity analysis for significant assumptions as at the end of the reporting period is shown below: 

Impact on defined benefit obligations 2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Discount rate: – 0.25% increase (14) (12) – 0.25% decrease 14 12 Medical cost growth rate: – 1.00% increase 9 8– 1.00% decrease (8) (7) 

The sensitivity analysis above has been determined based on a method that extrapolates the impact on the retirement benefit obligations as a result of reasonable changes in key assumptions occurring at the end of the reporting period. The sensitivity analysis is based on a change in a significant assumption, keeping all other assumptions constant. The sensitivity analysis may not be representative of an actual change in the retirement benefit obligations as it is unlikely that changes in assumptions would occur in isolation of one another. The following undiscounted payments are expected contributions to the defined benefit plan in future years: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Within 1 year 102 101 1 year to 2 years 119 116 2 years to 5 years 284 285 Over 5 years 685 626 

Total 1,190 1,128 

The average duration of the defined benefit plan obligation at the end of the reporting period was 7 years (2022: 6 years). 215 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 34. PROVISIONS 

Provision for foreseeable losses on contract assets Repair funds Pending lawsuits Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 1 January 2023 1,608 1,448 45 64 3,165 

Additional provisions 497 333 84 77 991 

Business combination – – – 49 49 

Utilised/reversed during the year (891) (43) – (29) (963) 

Disposal of subsidiaries – (39) – – (39) 

At 31 December 2023 1,214 1,699 129 161 3,203 

Non-current portion 1,214 1,699 129 161 3,203 

Provision for foreseeable losses on contract assets Repair funds Pending lawsuits Others Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million At 1 January 2022 2,162 1,348 96 80 3,686 Additional provisions 426 278 29 7 740 Utilised/reversed during the year (980) (178) (80) (23) (1,261) At 31 December 2022 1,608 1,448 45 64 3,165 Non-current portion 1,608 1,448 45 64 3,165 

# 35. SHARE CAPITAL AND PREMIUM 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Issued and fully paid: 11,845,185,425 (2022: 11,747,235,425) A shares of RMB1.00 each 11,845 11,747 4,418,476,000 (2022: 4,418,476,000) H shares of RMB1.00 each 4,419 4,419 

Total 16,264 16,166 

During the year of 2023, CCCG, the parent company, increased its shareholding of H shares in the Company by 31,971,000 H shares. Prior to the increase of shareholding, CCCG held 9,640,032,604 shares of the Company (including 9,374,616,604 A shares and 265,416,000 H shares), representing approximately 59.63% of the total issued shares of the Company. Subsequent to the increase of shareholding, CCCG holds 9,672,003,604 shares of the Company (including 9,374,616,604 A shares and 297,387,000 H shares), representing approximately 59.47% of the total issued shares of the Company. 216 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 35. SHARE CAPITAL AND PREMIUM (CONTINUED) 

A summary of movements in the Company’s share capital is as follows: 

Number of shares in issue Share capital 

RMB million At 1 January 2022 16,165,711,425 16,166 At 31 December 2022 and 1 January 2023 16,165,711,425 16,166 Issue of restricted shares (Note (a)) 97,950,000 98 At 31 December 2023 16,263,661,425 16,264 

Note (a): During the year of 2023, CCCC, the Company, granted 97,950,000 restricted shares to its employees in the Group. 

# 36. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS 

On 27 April 2023, the Company’s general meeting of shareholders approved the 2022 Restricted Shares Incentive Scheme (the “Scheme”). Subsequently, out of the 115,550,000 restricted shares approved under the Scheme, 97,950,000 restricted shares were granted to employees of the Group. On 5 June 2023, the Company completed the registration of the 97,950,000 restricted shares granted under the Scheme at the Shanghai branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Co., Ltd. The offer of a grant of restricted share may be accepted from the date of offer, upon payment of a nominal consideration of RMB5.33 for each restricted share by the grantee. The unlocking dates of the incentive shares are the first trading day after the expiry of the 24 months, 36 months and 48 months of the registration date. If performance conditions stipulated in the Scheme are satisfied, 34%, 33% and 33% of the restricted shares shall be unlocked respectively for each restricted share by the grantee. The Group accounts for the Scheme as an equity settled plan. The fair value of the shares granted was valued by reference to the market prices of the Company’s shares at the grant date. The fair value of the restricted shares granted during the year was RMB629 million (RMB:6.42 each), of which the Group recognized a share-based payment expense of RMB146 million (2022: nil) during the year ended 31 December 2023. Particulars and movements of the incentive shares under the scheme ：

Date of grant (based on IFRS 2) As at 1 January 2023 Granted during the year Forfeited during the year Exercisable as at the end of year (number of shares) (number of shares) (number of shares) 

27 April 2023 – 97,950,000 (1,000,000) 96,950,000 217 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 37. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CLASSIFIED AS EQUITY 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Perpetual securities 35,000 37,988 

a) Renewable medium-term notes 

As approved by NAFMII, one tranche of renewable medium-term note was issued by the Company in 2022, with a nominal value of RMB2,000 million. There is no maturity date for the renewable medium-term note and the holders have no right to receive a return of principal. The initial interest rates of the renewable medium-term notes were 3.70% for type one and 3.88% for type two per annum respectively, which will be reset once in every three years, respectively, since the issuance date. Pursuant to the terms of the renewable medium-term note, the Company may elect to defer the distribution of interest, and is not subject to any restriction as to the number of times the distribution can be deferred. The renewable medium-term note is subject to redemption in whole, at the option of the Company, three years, after the issue date, at its principal amount together with accrued interest. 

b) Renewable corporate bonds 

As approved by CSRC, three tranches of renewable corporate bonds were issued by the Company in 2021. The first tranche has a nominal value of RMB1,500 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 3.3% for type one and 3.6% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years for type one and every five years for type two since the issuance date. The second tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 3.18% for type one and 3.53% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years for type one and every five years for type two since the issuance date. The third tranche have a nominal value of RMB500 million. The initial interest rate of this tranche of bond was 3.14% per annum, which will be reset once in every three years since the issuance date. There is no maturity date for these bonds and the holders have no right to receive a return of principal. Pursuant to the terms of these bonds, the Company may elect to defer the distribution of interest, and is not subject to any restriction as to the number of times the distribution can be deferred. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if it has the unavoidable liability to pay additional taxes for the survival of bonds due to changes or amendments to laws, regulations or judicial interpretations of relevant laws and regulations. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if the Company can no longer account the bonds as equity in its consolidated financial statements due to changes in the accounting standards of the enterprise or other laws and regulations. Except for the above two cases, the Company has no rights or obligations to redeem the bonds. As approved by CSRC, seven tranches of renewable corporate bonds were issued by the Company in 2022. The first tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 2.99% for type one and 3.45% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years for type one and every five years for type two since the issuance date. The second, third, and fourth tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, RMB3,000 million, RMB2,000 million, respectively. The initial interest rate of these tranche of bonds were 2.98%, 3.07%, 2.78% per annum, which will be reset once in every three years since the issuance date. The fifth tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 2.44% for type one and 2.69% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years since the issuance date. The sixth tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 2.44% for type one and 2.70% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years since the issuance date. The seventh tranche has a nominal value of RMB3,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 2.98% for type one and 3.20% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every three years since the issuance date. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if it has the unavoidable liability to pay additional taxes for the survival of bonds due to changes or amendments to laws, regulations or judicial interpretations of relevant laws and regulations. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if the Company can no longer account the bonds as equity in its consolidated financial statements due to changes in the accounting standards of the enterprise or other laws and regulations. Except for the above two cases, the Company has no rights or obligations to redeem the bonds. 218 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 37. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CLASSIFIED AS EQUITY (CONTINUED) 

b) Renewable corporate bonds (continued) 

As approved by the CSRC, two tranches of renewable corporate bonds were issued by the Company in 2023. The first tranche has a nominal value of RMB1,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds was 3.10% per annum, which will be reset once in every two years since the issuance date. The second tranche has a nominal value of RMB2,000 million, and the initial interest rate of this tranche of bonds were 3.03% for type one and 3.13% for type two per annum, which will be reset once in every two years for type one and three years for type two since the issuance date. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if it has the unavoidable liability to pay additional taxes for the survival of bonds due to changes or amendments to laws, regulations or judicial interpretations of relevant laws and regulations. The Company has the right to redeem the bonds if the Company can no longer account the bonds as equity in its consolidated financial statements due to changes in the accounting standards of the enterprise or other laws and regulations. Except for the above two cases, the Company has no rights or obligations to redeem the bonds. 

c) Renewable infrastructure debt investment plans 

The Company entered into two contracts with investors to implement the infrastructure debt investment plans in 2020. The first contract has a nominal value of RMB6,000 million, the initial interest rate of this contract was 4.80%, 4.72% and 4.77% per annum, which will be reset once three years after ten years of the issuance date. The second contract has a nominal value of RMB4,000 million, the initial interest rate of this contract was 4.69% per annum, which will be reset once three years after ten years of the issuance date. There is no maturity date for these contracts and the investors have no right to receive a return or principal. Pursuant to the terms of these contracts, the Company may elect to defer the distribution of interest and is not subject to any restriction as to the number of times the distribution can be deferred. These contracts are subject to redemption in whole, at the option of the Company, ten years after the issue date, at its principal amount together with accrued interest. The directors of the Company are of the opinion that the Company has no contractual obligations to repay the principal or to pay any distribution for these renewable financial instruments and therefore these financial instruments have been classified as equity. 219 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 38. RESERVES 

Capital reserve Statutory surplus reserve General reserve Remeasurement reserve Investment revaluation reserve Hedging reserve Safety production reserve Exchange reserve Retained earnings Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2022 17,751 9,025 778 (64) 13,209 – 3,929 (289) 163,860 208,199 

Business combination under common control (206) – – – 7 – – – 720 521 

Accounting policy exchange – – – – – – – – 1 1

At 1 January 2023 17,545 9,025 778 (64) 13,216 – 3,929 (289) 164,581 208,721 

Profit for the year – – – – – – – – 24,734 24,734 

Changes in fair value of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – – (2,729) – – – – (2,729) 

Cash flow hedges, net of tax – – – – – (4) – – – (4) 

Share of other comprehensive loss of joint ventures and associates – – – – 24 – – – – 24 

Share of other reserves of joint ventures and associates 4 – – – – – – – – 4

Actuarial loss on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax – – – (1) – – – – – (1) 

Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – – – – – 594 – 594 

Issuance of perpetual securities (15) – – – – – – – – (15) 

Final 2022 dividend declared – – – – – – – – (3,509) (3,509) 

Share based payment 146 146 

Business combination under common control (88) – – – – – – – – (88) 

Spin-off and separate listing of three subsidiaries 4,929 – – – – – – – – 4,929 

Transaction with non-controlling interests (463) – – – – – – – (7) (470) 

Interest on perpetual securities – – – – – – – – (1,393) (1,393) 

Transfer to statutory surplus reserve (a) – 2,260 – – – – – – (2,260) –

Transfer to general reserve (b) – – 95 – – – – – (95) –

Transfer to safety production reserve (c) – – – – – – 922 – (922) –

Transfer of fair value reserve upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – – – – (93) – – – 93 –

At 31 December 2023 22,058 11,285 873 (65) 10,418 (4) 4,851 305 181,222 230,943 220 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 38. RESERVES (CONTINUED) 

Capital reserve Statutory surplus reserve General reserve Remeasurement reserve Investment revaluation reserve Hedging reserve Safety production reserve Exchange reserve Retained earnings Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2021 13,689 8,282 637 (63) 17,806 10 2,968 (3,214) 150,485 190,600 Business combination under common control 420 – – – (7) – – – 543 956 Accounting policy exchange – – – – – – – – 1 1

At 1 January 2022 14,109 8,282 637 (63) 17,799 10 2,968 (3,214) 151,029 191,557 Profit for the year – – – – – – – – 20,226 20,226 Changes in fair value of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – – (4,836) – – – – (4,836) Cash flow hedges, net of tax – – – – – (10) – – – (10) Share of other comprehensive loss of joint ventures and associates – – – – 339 – – – – 339 Actuarial loss on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax – – – (1) – – – – – (1) Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – – – – – 2,925 – 2,925 Share of other reserves of joint ventures and associates (36) – – – – – – – – (36) Issuance of perpetual securities (30) – – – – – – – – (30) Final 2021 dividend declared – – – – – – – – (3,293) (3,293) Capital contribution from non-controlling interests 4,335 – – – – – – – – 4,335 Business combination under common control (243) – – – – – – – – (243) Spin-off and separate listing of three subsidiaries (510) – – – – – – – – (510) Transaction with non-controlling interests (79) – – – – – – – – (79) Interest on perpetual securities – – – – – – – – (1,622) (1,622) Transfer to statutory surplus reserve (a) – 743 – – – – – – (743) –Transfer from general reserve (b) – – 141 – – – – – (141) –Transfer to safety production reserve (c) – – – – – – 961 (961) –Transfer of fair value reserve upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – – – – (86) – – – 86 –Others (1) – – – – – – – – (1) 

At 31 December 2022 17,545 9,025 778 (64) 13,216 – 3,929 (289) 164,581 208,721 221 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 38. RESERVES (CONTINUED) 

(a) Statutory surplus reserve 

In accordance with the PRC Company Law and the Company’s articles of association, the Company is required to appropriate 10% of its profit after tax as determined in accordance with the relevant accounting principles and financial regulations applicable to PRC enterprises (“PRC GAAP”) and regulations applicable to the Company, to the statutory surplus reserve until such reserve reaches 50% of the registered capital of the Company. The appropriation to the reserve must be made before any distribution of dividends to owners. The statutory surplus reserve can be used to offset previous years’ losses, if any, and part of the statutory surplus reserve can be capitalised as the Company’s share capital provided that the amount of such reserve remaining after the capitalisation shall not be less than 25% of the share capital of the Company. For the year ended 31 December 2023, the board of directors proposed an appropriation of 10% (2022: 10%) of the Company’s profit after tax, as determined under PRC GAAP, of RMB2,260 million (2022: RMB743 million) to the statutory surplus reserve. 

(b) General reserve 

CCCC Finance, one of the subsidiaries of the Company, is required by the Ministry of Finance to maintain a general reserve within equity, through the appropriation of profit, which should not be less than 1.5% of the year-end balance of its risk assets. The general reserve balance of CCCC Finance as at 31 December 2023 amounted to RMB873 million (2022: RMB778 million). 

(c) Safety production reserve 

Pursuant to certain regulations issued by the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Work Safety, the Group is required to set aside from profit after tax an amount to a safety production reserve at different rates ranging from 1.5% to 2% of the total construction contract revenue recognised for the year. The reserve can be utilised for improvements of safety on the construction work, and the amounts are generally expenses in nature and charged to the consolidated statement of profit or loss as incurred, and at the same time the corresponding amounts of safety production reserve fund were utilised and transferred back to retained profits until such special reserve was fully utilised. 222 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 39. PARTLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES WITH MATERIAL NON-CONTROLLING 

# INTERESTS 

Details of the Group’s subsidiaries that have material non-controlling interests are set out below: Percentage of equity interests held by non-controlling interests: 

2023 2022 

(%) 

(%) CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP 40.00 40.00 CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 25.19 25.19 CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. 34.84 34.84 CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. 28.80 28.80 CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 17.61 17.61 CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 28.50 28.50 CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 10.69 10.69 CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 13.77 13.77 Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. 28.92 28.92 CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. 8.06 9.51 CCCC (Tianjin) Rail Transit Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 48.45 45.41 CCCC Design Consulting Group Co., Ltd. 46.12 N/A Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. 15 N/A 

Profit/(loss) for the year allocated to non-controlling interests: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP 11 1CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 348 148 CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. 200 200 CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. 281 230 CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 225 173 CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 385 287 CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 87 87 CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 174 174 Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. 274 230 CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. 101 101 CCCC Design Consulting Group Co., Ltd. 314 N/A Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. (19) N/A 223 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 39. PARTLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES WITH MATERIAL NON-CONTROLLING INTERESTS (CONTINUED) 

Dividends distributed to non-controlling interests: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million (Restated) CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP 42 –CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 311 145 CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. 199 173 CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. 282 195 CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 226 155 CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 392 234 CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 87 87 CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 174 174 Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. 282 191 CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. 101 66 

Accumulated balances of non-controlling interests at the reporting date: 

2023 2022 

RMB million RMB million (Restated) CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP 3,739 3,770 CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 4,111 4,074 CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. 2,498 2,497 CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. 2,874 2,875 CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 2,463 2,470 CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 4,895 4,913 CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 1,092 1,092 CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. 2,123 2,123 Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. 3,488 3,496 CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. (note a) 1,313 1,001 CCCC (Tianjin) Rail Transit Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 2,068 1,570 CCCC Design Consulting Group Co., Ltd. 5,979 N/A Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. 2,311 N/A 

(a) In 2023, the Company has made capital contributions of RMB3,886 million in total to CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd.. As of 31 December 2023, the Company has made completed cash contributions totalling RMB3,000 million and non-cash contributions totalling RMB886 million. Upon completion of the capital contribution, the accumulated balance of non-controlling interests of CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. was increased by RMB312 million. 224 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 39. PARTLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES WITH MATERIAL NON-CONTROLLING INTERESTS (CONTINUED) 

The following tables illustrate the summarised financial information of the above subsidiaries. The amounts disclosed are before any inter-company eliminations: 

2023 CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd. CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. CCCC (Tianjin) Rail Transit Investment and Construction Co., Ltd CCCC Design Consulting Group Co., Ltd. Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Revenue – 130,175 73,619 43,131 54,009 88,151 50,249 50,345 54,977 12,337 – 13,369 6,958 

Profit for the year 27 2,711 2,301 1,487 1,543 2,228 831 3,409 2,593 2,584 – 1,795 659 

Total comprehensive income 27 2,710 2,328 1,484 1,552 2,227 871 3,228 2,580 2,572 – 1,756 659 

Current assets – 83,602 33,123 34,946 42,696 81,058 43,114 28,167 33,146 35,420 28 17,871 2,510 

Non-current assets 9,439 129,643 55,101 49,951 44,911 60,696 42,336 58,158 56,117 34,702 12,359 9,621 9,587 

Current liabilities 65 114,934 49,626 49,715 53,191 86,193 55,836 42,209 44,770 24,926 1,952 11,649 3,003 

Non-current liabilities – 56,492 18,449 15,325 13,126 24,918 12,452 15,837 20,061 20,995 6,167 3,046 257 

Net cash flows (used in)/generated from operating activities – 1,970 4,584 103 2,377 1,562 3,814 5,055 542 1,307 (2,141) 10 1,919 

Net cash flows (used in)/generated from investing activities 42 (25,050) (4,447) (4,263) (4,301) (3,730) (2,113) (6,243) (7,862) (13,221) – (112) (585) 

Net cash flows (used in)/generated from financing activities (42) 23,402 855 4,595 2,466 (199) (681) 1,307 8,956 12,174 2,119 (2,082) (179) 

Exchange gains on cash and cash equivalents – 2 (4) (6) – (7) 10 (26) (1) – – 6 –

Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents – 324 988 429 542 (2,374) 1,030 93 1,635 260 (22) (2,178) 1,155 225 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 39. PARTLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES WITH MATERIAL NON-CONTROLLING INTERESTS (CONTINUED) 

The following tables illustrate the summarised financial information of the above subsidiaries. The amounts disclosed are before any inter-company eliminations: (continued) 2022 CCCC (Beijing) One-term Equity Investment Fund LLP CCCC First Highway Engineering Group Co., Ltd. CCCC Second Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Forth Highway Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Third Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. CCCC Forth Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd. Road & Bridge International Co., Ltd. CCCC Urban Investment Holding Co., Ltd. CCCC (Tianjin) Rail Transit Investment and Construction Co., Ltd RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Revenue – 131,136 67,438 48,359 54,490 87,909 47,885 45,665 53,141 10,666 170 Profit for the year 2 2,122 1,894 1,884 792 1,999 706 2,820 2,141 2,358 –Total comprehensive income 2 2,093 1,925 1,874 840 1,933 654 2,829 2,119 2,358 –Current assets – 73,054 33,037 33,376 38,565 81,089 37,260 23,893 26,920 26,736 51 Non-current assets 9,439 123,756 48,581 41,567 42,351 56,343 37,200 49,743 49,316 25,826 9,131 Current liabilities 50 98,313 46,684 41,464 49,030 86,759 46,607 32,423 38,399 24,531 1,952 Non-current liabilities – 57,435 16,048 14,635 11,574 20,947 11,197 15,131 16,654 9,804 6,167 Net cash flows (used in)/generated from operating activities – 2,915 4,290 (2,162) 2,955 5,702 2,608 5,974 891 2,321 (2,504) Net cash flows (used in)/generated from investing activities – (20,612) (4,064) (1,017) 266 (5,189) (2,483) (3,607) (5,644) (4,266) –Net cash flows (used in)/generated from financing activities – 19,300 266 3,982 (1,524) 1,712 971 (672) 5,408 1,587 2,483 Exchange gains on cash and cash equivalents – 4 3 7 29 17 4 24 1 – –Net increase/ (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents – 1,607 495 810 1,726 2,242 1,100 1,719 656 (358) (21) 226 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 40. NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (a) Major non-cash transactions 

During the year, the Group has below significant non-cash transactions: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Increase in right-of-use assets 1,951 1,007 Bank acceptance bills endorsed settlement of trade and other payables 1,117 1,493 

(b) Changes in liabilities arising from financing activities 

2023 Bank and other loans Lease liabilities Corporate bonds Debentures Non-public debt instruments Dividend Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2022 424,965 2,386 20,146 8,532 14,124 2,096 472,249 

Changes from financing cash flows 57,830 (1,673) 1,838 (3,161) 2,970 (10,775) 47,029 

New leases – 1,821 – – – – 1,821 

Foreign exchange movement 437 – – – – – 437 

Declared dividends – – – – – 11,457 11,457 

Interest expense 21,469 232 812 670 467 – 23,650 

Increase arising from business combinations 11,897 10 - – - – 11,907 

Decrease arising from disposal of subsidiaries (39,750) – – – - (3) (39,753) 

Others 5,809 – 39 (11) 10 – 5,847 

At 31 December 2023 482,657 2,776 22,835 6,030 17,571 2,775 534,644 

(c) Total cash outflow for leases 

The total cash outflow for leases included in the statement of cash flows is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Within operating activities 1,797 1,963 Within investing activities 906 598 Within financing activities 1,796 1,163 

Total 4,499 3,724 227 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 41. CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEE COMMITMENT (i) Claims 

The Group has been named defendants in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business. Provision has been made for the probable losses to the Group on those claims when management can reasonably estimate the outcome of the lawsuits taking into account the legal advice. No provision has been made for those pending lawsuits with a maximum compensation amount of RMB2,894 million (31 December 2022: RMB2,554 million) related mainly to disputes with customers and subcontractors, as the outcome of the lawsuits cannot be reasonably estimated or management believes the outflow of resources is not probable. Pending lawsuits of which the probability of loss is remote or the claim amount is insignificant to the Group were not included in the above. 

(ii) Loan guarantees 

(a) The Group has acted as the guarantor for several borrowings of RMB3,714 million (31 December 2022: RMB3,378 million) made by certain joint ventures and associates of the Group. The above amount represents the maximum exposure to default risk under the loan guarantee. (b) The Group provides guarantees to banks for the mortgage loans of the property buyers in certain real estate projects. As at 31 December 2023, the outstanding balance of guarantees provided by the Group was approximately RMB4,462 million (31 December 2022: RMB3,815 million). 

(iii) Liquidity support 

(a) Beijing North Huade Neoplan Bus Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company, provides liquidity support to Changchun Public Transportation (Group) Co., Ltd. for sale-leaseback rent payable to Huaxia Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. As at 31 December 2023, the outstanding balance of rent payable by Changchun Public Transportation (Group) Co., Ltd. to Huaxia Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. was RMB48 million (31 December 2022: RMB97 million). (b) The Group has entered into certain agreements with financial institutions to set up asset-backed securities (ABS) and asset-backed notes (ABN) arrangements. As at 31 December 2023, out of the ABS and ABN in issue with an aggregate amount of RMB72,543 million (31 December 2022: RMB59,390 million), RMB67,089 million (31 December 2022: RMB54,284 million) had been issued to preferential investors. Under the clauses of the agreements, the Group is subject to the obligations of liquidity supplementary payments to preferential investors when the cash available for distribution of the principal and return to preferential investors at the due date is not sufficient. As of 31 December 2023, no provision has been made for the above liquidity supports as management estimates the outflow of resources is not probable. 228 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 42. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS (a) Acquisition of subsidiaries not under common control 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group obtained control over several companies from certain independent third parties, at a total consideration of RMB6,602 million. The Group has elected to measure the non-controlling interests in these companies at the non-controlling interests’ proportionate shares of identifiable net assets of these companies. The fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities of all the acquired companies at the date of acquisition were as follows: 

Acquisition date fair value 

RMB million Non-current assets 16,480 Current assets 2,933 Current liabilities (1,324) Non-current liabilities (11,711) Total identifiable net assets at fair value 6,378 Non-controlling interests 106 Goodwill on acquisition 330 Consideration 6,602 Less: Fair value of initial equity interests in these companies at acquisition date 1,605 Satisfied by cash 2,330 Satisfied by non-cash 2,667 An analysis of the cash flows in respect of the acquisition of subsidiaries is as follows: 

2023 RMB million 

Cash consideration (2,330) 

Cash and bank balances acquired 2,883 

Net inflow of cash and cash equivalents included in cash flows from investing activities 553 

Since the acquisition, the acquirees contributed RMB67 million to the Group’s revenue and caused a income of RMB12 million to the Group’s profit for the year ended 31 December 2023. Had the combination taken place at the beginning of the year, the revenue of the Group and the profit of the Group for the year would have been RMB756,268 million and RMB31,198 million, respectively. 229 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 42. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS (CONTINUED) 

(b) Acquisition of a subsidiary under common control 

On 31 May 2023, the Group acquired an 80% interest in Zhongjiao Dingxin Equity Investment Management Co., Ltd (“Zhongjiao Dingxin”) from China Communications Real Estate Group Co., Ltd, China Real Estate Development Group Limited and China Real Estate Co., Ltd. Since Zhongjiao Dingxin and the Group are both under common control of CCCG before and after the acquisition, the acquisition is accounted for as merger accounting, i.e., the assets and liabilities of Zhongjiao Dingxin are consolidated by the Group using the existing book values from the CCCG’s perspective, as if the current group structure had been in existence throughout the periods presented, with the difference between the book value of the net assets of Zhongjiao Dingxin and the consideration directly credited to equity. The comparative figures of the consolidated financial statements have also been restated as a result of the merger accounting. The book values of Zhongjiao Dingxi’s assets and liabilities as at Merger date and 31 December 2022 were as follows: 

Merger date 31 December 2022 Book value Book value 

RMB million RMB million Non-current assets 12 12 Current assets 110 119 Current liabilities (3) (11) Non-current liabilities (6) (7) Net assets 113 113 Non controlling interest (23) Difference directly credited to equity (2) Cash consideration 88 230 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 42. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS (CONTINUED) 

(c) Asset swap 

As disclosed in note 2.3, the control over Qilianshan Cement and the Qilianshan constitutes business combinations not under common control. The book values of the Three Municipal Institutes, and fair values of Qilianshan Cement as well as the Qilianshan as at Combination date were as follows: 

Combination date Combination date Total book values fair values 

RMB million RMB million RMB million Non-current assets 14,128 2,567 11,561 Current assets 10,383 3,550 6,833 Current liabilities (9,047) (3,174) (5,873) Non-current liabilities (1,931) (1,631) (300) Net assets 13,533 1,312 12,221 Non-controlling interest (2,998) Difference directly credited to equity (214) Consideration 10,321 

# 43. DISPOSAL OF SUBSIDIARIES 

(i) Information about the subsidiaries being disposed of: In 2023, the Group disposed of the risks and rewards of an 80% equity interest in China Communications (Xinghua) Port Development Co., Ltd. (“Xinhua Port”) to SWGF-CCCC asset-backed securities plan established and managed by Shenwan Hongyuan Securities Co. Ltd. After the disposal, the Group also lost its power to direct the relevant activities of Xinhua Port. As a result, upon the disposal, the Group lost control over Xinhua Port. The Group and Xiaogan Urban Construction Investment Company (“Xiaogan Urban”) are the only two shareholders of Xiaogan Jinhuai Culture Media Co., Ltd. (“Xiaogan Jinhuai “), Xiaogan Jinhuai has entered the operation period, in view of the operational experience of Xiaogan Urban in city facilities, the two shareholders agreed that Xiaogan Urban to lead Xiaogan Jinhuai’s management affairs, and in 2023 revised the articles of association and replaced the directors dispatched personnel. As at 31 December 2023, the group no longer has control over Xiaogan Jinhuai. In addition, the Company disposed of certain subsidiaries such as CCCC Qingyuan Investment and Development Co., Ltd., Hunan Zhongjiao Linlian High-speed Development and Investment Co., Ltd., and Guizhou Zhongjiao Deyu Expressway Co., Ltd. through equity transfer transactions. upon the disposals, the Group lost control over these companies. During the year, the Company disposed of these subsidiaries for a total disposal consideration of RMB6,572 million. 231 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 43. DISPOSAL OF SUBSIDIARIES (CONTINUED) 

(ii) The financial information of subsidiaries disposed of by the Group at the date of disposal is as follows: 

2023 2022 

Total Total 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Non-current assets 57,490 38,307 – Intangible assets (note 18) 41,655 34,606 Current assets 3,089 6,322 Current liabilities (5,591) (11,813) Non-current liabilities (41,720) (22,829) 

Subtotal 13,268 9,987 Non-controlling interests (2,027) (741) 

Subtotal 11,241 9,246 

Gains on disposal of subsidiaries (note 5) 518 2,710 

Total considerations 11,759 11,956 

Represented by: Fair values of residual interests in joint ventures 4,183 2,320 Fair values of residual interests in associates 584 978 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 420 1,663 Consideration 6,572 6,995 

Total 11,759 11,956 

(iii) An analysis of the cash flows in respect of the disposal of subsidiaries is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Cash received from disposal of subsidiaries in current year 3,578 6,328 Cash and bank balances of subsidiaries disposed of (850) (1,591) Cash received from disposal of subsidiaries in prior years 1,438 4,317 Cash received from equity transfer proceeds received in advance this year 922 –

Net inflow of cash and cash equivalents in respect of the disposal of subsidiaries 5,088 9,054 232 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 44. PLEDGE OF ASSETS 

(a) At 31 December 2023, the restricted deposits were RMB7,119 million (2022: RMB5,579 million). (b) Details of the Group’s assets secured for interest-bearing bank and other borrowings are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Property, plant and equipment (note 15) 782 –Right-of-use assets (note 17(a)) 9,015 8,764 Concession assets and trade receivables from PPP projects (note 18, note 26) 306,321 284,913 Inventories (note 24) 18,199 10,184 Trade and other receivables (excluding PPP projects) (note 26) 42,288 37,910 

Total 376,605 341,771 

# 45 COMMITMENTS (i) Capital expenditure commitments 

Capital expenditure contracted for but not yet incurred at the end of the reporting period was as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Intangible assets – concession assets 51,388 84,425 Property, plant and equipment 1,713 2,335 

Total 53,101 86,760 

(ii) Other commitment 

In accordance with the financial services framework agreement between CCCC Finance and CCCG, CCCC Finance provides financial services to CCCG and its subsidiaries. In 2023, the maximum daily balance of loan services under the deposit services and loan services framework agreement is RMB29,078 million, the maximum daily balance of guarantee letter services under the guarantee letter services framework agreement is RMB5,010 million, and the maximum daily balance of bills issuance services and bonds subscription under the other credit services framework agreement is RMB1,372 million. 233 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS 

(a) In addition to the transactions detailed elsewhere in these financial statements, the Group had the following transactions with related parties during the year: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Transactions with CCCG 

– Revenue from the provision of construction services and construction-related services 3,416 2,053 – Rental income 3 1– Rental charges 296 289 – Interest expenses on deposits placed in CCCC Finance 28 31 – Loans to CCCG by CCCC Finance 3,000 300 – Interest income from loans provided by CCCC Finance 84 6– Other borrowings from CCCG 3,961 307 – Interest expenses on loans 39 4

Transactions with fellow subsidiaries 

– Revenue from the provision of construction and construction-related services 10,593 11,342 – Revenue from sale of goods 831 1,172 – Rental income 30 12 – Interest expenses on deposits placed in CCCC Finance 60 75 – Loans from fellow subsidiaries 100 191 – Interest expenses on loans 5 –– Purchases of materials 2,889 1,531 – Subcontracting and service charges 3,095 2,949 – Rental charges 36 1– Loans to fellow subsidiaries by CCCC Finance 1,395 1,180 – Interest income from loans provided by CCCC Finance 24 18 – Factoring to fellow subsidiaries 440 340 – Interest income from factoring 20 52 – Finance lease loans to fellow subsidiaries 699 1,040 – Interest income from finance lease loans 69 109 234 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Transactions with fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures and associates 

– Finance lease loans to fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures and associates – 33 – Interest income from finance lease loans 5 1– Factoring to fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures and associates 320 320 – Interest income from factoring 8 8– Revenue from the provision of construction and construction-related services 573 307 – Revenue from sale of goods – 2

Transactions with joint ventures and associates 

– Revenue from the provision of construction and construction-related services 59,815 73,140 – Revenue from sale of goods 48 483 – Purchases of materials 530 265 – Subcontracting and service charges 2,344 902 – Rental income 45 19 – Interest expense on deposits placed in CCCC Finance 30 19 – Loans from joint ventures and associates 7,673 10,644 – Interest expenses on loans 47 31 – Loans to a joint venture by CCCC Finance – 182 – Interest income from loans by CCCC Finance 7 7– Loans to joint ventures and associates 6,514 7,301 – Interest income from other loans 573 559 – Factoring to joint ventures and associates 131 70 – Interest income from factoring 21 29 – Finance lease loans to joint ventures and associates 92 127 – Interest income from finance lease loans 135 152 

These transactions were carried out by reference to the prices and terms that would be available to third parties in the ordinary course of business. ZPMC is an associate and also a fellow subsidiary of the Company. The transaction with ZPMC and its subsidiaries for 2023 and 2022, and the outstanding balances with ZPMC and its subsidiaries as at 31 December 2023 and 31 December 2022 were included in the category of transactions and balances with fellow subsidiaries. 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

(a) In addition to the transactions detailed elsewhere in these financial statements, the Group had the following transactions with related parties during the year: (continued) 235 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

(b) Outstanding balances with related parties: Balances with related parties other than government-related entities: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Trade and bills receivables due from 

– CCCG 478 409 – Fellow subsidiaries 2,716 3,293 – Joint ventures and associates 7,894 5,729 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 47 54 

Subtotal 11,135 9,485 

Long-term trade receivables due from 

– CCCG 2,030 1,793 – Fellow subsidiaries 6,273 5,580 – Joint ventures and associates 20,805 19,355 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 200 418 

Subtotal 29,308 27,146 

Prepayments to 

– Fellow subsidiaries 256 665 – Joint ventures and associates 615 156 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 4 1

Subtotal 875 822 

Other receivables due from* 

– CCCG 3,541 475 – Fellow subsidiaries 3,167 1,543 – Joint ventures and associates 11,033 10,611 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 8 8

Subtotal 17,749 12,637 

Contract assets 

– CCCG 203 190 – Fellow subsidiaries 2,008 1,866 – Joint ventures and associates 5,764 5,118 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 61 51 

Subtotal 8,036 7,225 

Total 67,103 57,315 

* Except for those loans to related parties included in other receivables which are interest-bearing, outstanding balances with related parties are unsecured, interest-free and repayable in cash. 236 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

(b) Outstanding balances with related parties: (continued) 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Trade and bills payables due to 

– Fellow subsidiaries 4,221 2,764 – Joint ventures and associates 1,757 1,514 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 24 17 

Subtotal 6,002 4,295 

Long-term trade payables due to 

– CCCG – 60 – Fellow subsidiaries 2,715 2,822 – Joint ventures and associates 364 315 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 7 25 

Subtotal 3,086 3,222 

Contract liabilities 

– CCCG 81 62 – Fellow subsidiaries 521 565 – Joint ventures and associates 6,093 6,995 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 36 19 

Subtotal 6,731 7,641 

Other payables* 

– CCCG 1,713 941 – Fellow subsidiaries 10,184 9,141 – Joint ventures and associates 8,371 5,786 

Subtotal 20,268 15,868 

Total 36,087 31,026 

* Including deposits from related parties 237 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

(c) Guarantees with related parties: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Outstanding loan guarantees provided to 

– Joint ventures 1,952 1,629 – Associates 1,762 1,749 

Total 3,714 3,378 

Outstanding guarantees provided by CCCG 9,102 9,101 

(d) Commitments with related parties: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Provision of construction services 

– CCCG 5,909 2,369 – Fellow subsidiaries 16,010 18,265 – Joint ventures and associates 83,389 106,950 – Fellow subsidiaries’ joint ventures 489 890 

Total 105,797 128,474 

Purchase of services and goods 

– Fellow subsidiaries 4,136 2,479 – Joint ventures and associates 1,196 33 

Total 5,332 2,512 

(e) Key management compensation: 

2023 2022 

RMB’000 

RMB’000 

Short term employee benefits 11,036 17,539 Post-employment benefits 659 797 

Total 11,695 18,336 238 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 46. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (CONTINUED) 

(f) Equity transactions with related parties 

During the year ended 31 December 2023, the Group contributed RMB393 million in total to share capitals of companies set up together with fellow subsidiaries of CCCG. 

(g) Other transactions with related parties 

a) During the year, the Group acquired an 80% equity interest in Zhongjiao Dingxin, a subsidiary of CCCG, at a consideration of RMB88 million from China Communications Real Estate Group Co., Ltd, China Real Estate Development Group Limited and China Real Estate Co., Ltd. Upon completion of the transaction, the Group holds 80% of the equity interest in Zhongjiao Dingxin. b) During the year, the Company spined off and listed its subsidiaries, namely CCCC Highway Consultants Co., Ltd., CCCC First Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. and CCCC Second Highway Consultants Co., Ltd. (“Three Highway Institutes”), and China Urban-Rural spined off and listed its subsidiaries (“Three Municipal Institutes”) by reorganization with Gansu Qilianshan Cement Group Co., Ltd. (“Qilianshan”). Upon completion of the spin-off and reorganization, three highway institutes and the three municipal institutes have become the wholly-owned subsidiaries of Qilianshan, and the Company has become the controlling shareholder of Qilianshan holding approximately 53.88% equity interests in Qilianshan. c) As of 31 December 2023, CCCC Finance, a subsidiary of the Company, provided migrant workers’ wage guarantees, advance payment guarantees and performance guarantees to related parties in the amount of RMB998 million (31 December 2022: RMB1,840 million). d) In accordance with the financial services framework agreement between CCCC Finance and CCCG, CCCC Finance provides financial services to CCCG and its subsidiaries. In 2023, the maximum daily balance of loan services under the deposit services and loan services framework agreement is RMB29,078 million, the maximum daily balance of guarantee letter services under the guarantee letter services framework agreement is RMB5,010 million, and the maximum daily balance of bills issuance services and bonds subscription under the other credit services framework agreement is RMB1,372 million. e) As of 31 December 2023, the outstanding balances of the bond investments in China Communications Real Estate Group Co., Ltd, held by CCCC Finance was RMB600 million and during the year, the interest of RMB29 million was accrued and recovered. f) During the year, CCCC Third Harbor Engineering Co., Ltd., one of CCCC’s subsidiary, withdrew its capital contribution by RMB147 million in China Communications Real Estate Zhoushan Development Co., Ltd. (“Zhoushan Development”), which is a joint venture of the Group with 49% equity interest and is under the ultimate control of CCCG. g) During the year, Hong Kong Zhenhua, one of CCCC’s subsidiary, acquired 17.25% equity in Overseas Real Estate USA held by CCCC Overseas Real Estate Co., Ltd. at a delivery price of RMB495 million. Upon completion of the transaction, the proportion of equity held by the Group in Overseas Real Estate USA increased from 77.90% to 95.15%. h) During the year, CCCC Leasing, a subsidiary of the Company, increased its share capital from RMB5,700 million to RMB9,000 million through the conversion of share premium and reserves, and cash. CCCC Capital, ZPMC, Chuwa Bussan, CCCI, CACC, RB Investment and CCCC Leasing entered into the capital increase agreement. As CACC and ZPMC are subsidiaries of CCCG, the capital increase constitutes a connected transaction of the Company. Upon completion of the transaction, CCCC Leasing will be owned as to 90.2% from 91% by the Company through its subsidiaries CCCC Capital, Chuwa Bussan, CCCI and RB Investment. 239 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 47. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY 

The carrying amounts of each of the categories of financial instruments as at the end of the reporting period are as follows: 

2023 

Financial assets 

Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at amortised cost Total Debt investments Equity investments Held for trading RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss – – 28,154 – 28,154 

Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – 21,425 – – 21,425 

Derivative financial instruments – – 413 – 413 

Debt investments at amortised cost – – – 1,240 1,240 

Trade and other receivables excluding prepayments and other non-financial assets 961 – – 505,315 506,276 

Cash and bank balances – – – 120,933 120,933 

Total 961 21,425 28,567 627,488 678,441 

Financial liabilities 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at amortised cost Total RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Borrowings (excluding lease liabilities) – 529,094 529,094 

Derivative financial instruments 5 – 5

Trade and bills payables (note 29) – 391,789 391,789 

Deposits from suppliers (note 29) – 45,775 45,775 

Retentions (note 29) – 56,756 56,756 

Deposits in CCCC Finance (note 29) – 13,530 13,530 

Financial liabilities included in other payables and accruals – 45,992 45,992 

Total 5 1,082,936 1,082,941 240 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 47. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY (CONTINUED) 

The carrying amounts of each of the categories of financial instruments as at the end of the reporting period are as follows: (continued) 

2022 

Financial assets 

Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at amortised cost Total Debt investments Equity investments Held for trading RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss – – 22,789 – 22,789 Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – 24,127 – – 24,127 Derivative financial instruments – – 688 – 688 Debt investments at amortised cost – – – 1,764 1,764 Trade and other receivables excluding prepayments and other non-financial assets 1,755 – – 404,255 406,010 Cash and bank balances – – – 113,323 113,323 Total 1,755 24,127 23,477 519,342 568,701 

Financial liabilities 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at amortised cost Total RMB million RMB million RMB million Borrowings (excluding lease liabilities) – 467,766 467,766 Derivative financial instruments 7 – 7Trade and bills payables (note 29) – 353,164 353,164 Deposits from suppliers (note 29) – 43,056 43,056 Retentions (note 29) – 47,365 47,365 Deposits in CCCC Finance (note 29) – 11,078 11,078 Financial liabilities included in other payables and accruals – 31,696 31,696 Total 7 954,125 954,132 241 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 48. FAIR VALUE AND FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 

The carrying amounts and fair values of the Group’s financial instruments, other than lease liabilities and those with carrying amounts that reasonably approximate to fair values, are as follows: 

Carrying amounts Fair values 2023 2022 2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million RMB million 

RMB million 

Financial liabilities Non-current Bank borrowings 367,629 340,294 367,564 340,253 Corporate bonds 16,314 14,558 16,419 14,561 Non-public debt instruments 9,239 11,952 8,903 11,481 Other borrowings (other than lease liabilities) 4,682 4,257 4,719 4,235 

Total 397,864 371,061 397,605 370,530 

Management has assessed that the fair values of cash and bank balances, financial assets included in trade and other receivables, and financial liabilities included in trade and other payables approximate to their carrying amounts. The fair values of the financial assets and liabilities are included at the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale. The following methods and assumptions were used to estimate the fair values: The fair values of the non-current portion of interest-bearing bank and other borrowings and non-public debt instruments (excluding lease liabilities) have been calculated by discounting the expected future cash flows using rates currently available for instruments with similar terms, credit risk and remaining maturities. The changes in fair value as a result of the Group’s own non-performance risk for interest-bearing bank and other borrowings and non-public debt instruments (excluding lease liabilities) as at 31 December 2023 were assessed to be insignificant. The fair value of financial instruments traded in an active market is determined at the quoted market price; and the fair value of those not traded in an active market is determined by the Group using valuation techniques. The valuation models used mainly comprise the discounted cash flow model and the market comparable corporate model. The inputs of the valuation technique mainly include future cash flows, PBR (price/book ratio) of companies in same category and unit prices of comparable property. The Group enters into derivative financial instruments with various counterparties, principally financial institutions with high credit ratings. Derivative financial instruments, including forward currency contracts, interest rate swaps and total return swaps, are measured using valuation techniques similar to forward pricing and swap models, using present value calculations. The models incorporate various market observable inputs including the credit quality of counterparties, foreign exchange spot and forward rates and interest rate curves. The carrying amounts of forward currency contracts interest rate swaps and total return swaps are the same as their fair values. As at 31 December 2023, the mark-to-market value of the derivative asset position was net of a credit valuation adjustment attributable to derivative counterparty default risk. The changes in counterparty credit risk had no material effect on the hedge effectiveness assessment for derivatives designated in hedge relationship and other financial instruments recognised at fair value. Fair value measurement categorised within level 3 adopts discounted cash flow method. The unobservable inputs are weighted average capital costs and long-term growth rates. 242 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 48. FAIR VALUE AND FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY OF FINANCIAL 

# INSTRUMENTS (CONTINUED) 

The fair values of listed equity investments are based on quoted market prices. The fair values of unlisted equity investments have been estimated by the most appropriate valuation techniques based on assumptions that are not supported by observable market prices or rates, including: (i) market approach by using initial cost of the investment itself or a multiple of earnings, or of revenue depending on the stage of development of an enterprise; and (ii) income approach by using the discounted cash flows or earnings of underlying business based on reasonable assumptions and estimations of expected future cash flows (or expected future earnings), the terminal value, and the appropriate risk-adjusted rate that captures the risk inherent in the projections. The directors believe that the estimated fair values resulting from the valuation technique, which are recorded in the consolidated statement of financial position, and the related changes in fair values, which are recorded in other comprehensive income or profit or loss, are reasonable, and that they were the most appropriate values at the end of the reporting period. The Group invests in unlisted investments, which represent wealth management products issued by financial institutions in Chinese Mainland. The Group has estimated the fair values of these unlisted investments by using a discounted cash flow valuation model based on the market interest rates of instruments with similar terms and risks. 

Fair value hierarchy 

The following tables illustrate the fair value measurement hierarchy of the Group’s financial instruments: 

Assets and liabilities measured at fair value: 

As at 31 December 2023 Fair value measurement using Quoted prices in active markets Significant observable inputs Significant unobservable inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Assets 

Bills receivable – 961 – 961 

Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 16,730 – 4,695 21,425 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 838 129 27,187 28,154 

Derivative financial instruments – Interest rate swap – 48 – 48 

– Foreign exchange option – – 365 365 

Total 17,568 1,138 32,247 50,953 

Liabilities 

Derivative financial instruments – Forward currency contracts – 5 – 5243 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 48. FAIR VALUE AND FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY OF FINANCIAL 

# INSTRUMENTS (CONTINUED) 

Fair value hierarchy (continued) 

The following tables illustrate the fair value measurement hierarchy of the Group’s financial instruments: (continued) 

Assets and liabilities measured at fair value: (continued) 

As at 31 December 2022 

Fair value measurement using Quoted prices in active markets Significant observable inputs Significant unobservable inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Assets 

Bills receivable – 1,755 – 1,755 Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 20,703 – 3,424 24,127 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 1,300 – 21,489 22,789 Derivative financial instruments – Forward currency contracts – 7 – 7– Interest rate swap – 62 – 62 – Forward equity contracts – – – –– Foreign exchange option – – 619 619 Total 22,003 1,824 25,532 49,359 

Liabilities 

Derivative financial instruments – Forward currency contracts – 7 – 7During the year, there were no transfers of fair value measurements between Level 1 and Level 2 and no transfers into or out of Level 3 for both financial assets and financial liabilities (2022: Nil). The movements in fair value measurements within Level 3 during the year are as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

At 1 January 25,532 17,994 

Total losses recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss included in other gains (963) (58) Total losses recognised in other comprehensive income (14) (523) Purchases 9,387 14,909 Disposals (1,695) (6,790) 

At 31 December 32,247 25,532 244 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 48. FAIR VALUE AND FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY OF FINANCIAL 

# INSTRUMENTS (CONTINUED) 

Fair value hierarchy (continued) 

Liabilities for which fair values are disclosed: 

As at 31 December 2023 Fair value measurement using Quoted prices in active markets Significant observable inputs Significant unobservable inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Bank borrowings – 367,564 – 367,564 

Corporate bonds 4,000 12,419 – 16,419 

Non-public debt instruments – 8,903 – 8,903 

Other borrowings (other than lease liabilities) – 4,719 – 4,719 

Total 4,000 393,605 – 397,605 

As at 31 December 2022 Fair value measurement using Quoted prices in active markets Significant observable inputs Significant unobservable inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Bank borrowings – 340,253 – 340,253 Corporate bonds 4,000 10,561 – 14,561 Non-public debt instruments – 11,481 – 11,481 Other borrowings (other than lease liabilities) – 4,235 – 4,235 Total 4,000 366,530 – 370,530 245 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 49. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES 

The Group’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks: market risk (including foreign currency risk, interest rate risk and price risk), credit risk and liquidity risk. The Group’s overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Group’s financial performance. The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge certain risk exposures. Risk management is carried out by the finance department under policies approved by the board of directors. The finance department identifies, evaluates and hedges financial risks in close co-operation with the Group’s operating units. The board provides principles for overall risk management, as well as policies covering specific areas, such as foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk, credit risk, use of derivative financial instruments and non-derivative financial instruments, and investment of excess liquidity. 

(a) Market risk 

(i) Foreign currency risk 

The functional currency of the majority of the entities within the Group is RMB. Most of the Group’s transactions are based and settled in RMB. Foreign currencies are used to settle the Group’s revenue from overseas operations, the Group’s purchases of machinery and equipment from overseas suppliers, and certain expenses. RMB is not freely convertible into other foreign currencies and conversion of RMB into foreign currencies is subject to rules and regulations of foreign exchange control promulgated by the PRC Government. As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s aggregate net liabilities of RMB432 million, including trade and other receivables, cash and bank balances, trade and other payables and borrowings, were denominated in foreign currencies, mainly USD. To manage the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations, the Group continually assesses its exposure to currency risks, and a portion of those risks is hedged by using derivative financial instruments when management considers necessary. As at 31 December 2023, if RMB had strengthened/weakened by 5% against USD with all other variables held constant, pre-tax profit for the year would had been decreased/increased by approximately RMB224 million (2022: RMB563 million), mainly as a result of foreign exchange losses/ gains on translation of USD-denominated trade and other receivables, cash and cash equivalents. 

(ii) Price risk 

The Group is exposed to equity securities price risk because of investments held by the Group and classified in the consolidated statement of financial position either as equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income or financial assets or financial assets at fair value through profit or loss. To manage its price risk arising from investments in equity securities, the Group diversifies its portfolio. Diversification of the portfolio is done in accordance with the limits set by the Group. The table below summarises the impact of increases/decreases of quoted price in open markets on the Group’s pre-tax profit for the year and on equity. The analysis is based on the assumption that the equity price had increased/decreased by 10% with all other variables held constant: 

2023 2022 

Increase/decrease in quoted price in open markets 10% 10% 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Impact on profit before tax for the year 58 99 Impact on equity (excluding retained profits) 1,673 2,070 246 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 49. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES 

# (CONTINUED) 

(a) Market risk (continued) 

(iii) Interest rate risk 

The Group’s interest rate risk mainly arises from borrowings. Borrowings obtained at variable rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk which is partially offset by cash held at variable rates. During 2023 and 2022, the Group’s borrowings at variable rates were mainly denominated in RMB, USD, Euro and Hong Kong dollar. Borrowings obtained at fixed rates expose the Group to fair value interest rate risk. Increase in interest rates will increase the cost of new borrowings and the interest expense with respect to the Group’s outstanding floating rate borrowings, and therefore could have an adverse effect on the Group’s financial position. Management continuously monitors the interest rate position of the Group and makes decisions with reference to the latest market conditions. From time to time, the Group may enter into interest rate swap agreements to mitigate its exposure to interest rate risks in connection with the floating rate borrowings, although the directors did not consider it was necessary to do so in 2023 and 2022. As at 31 December 2023, the Group’s borrowings of approximately RMB315,954 million (31 December 2022: RMB281,850 million) were at variable rates. As at 31 December 2023, if interest rates on borrowings had been 1% higher/lower with all other variables held constant, profit before tax for the year would have decreased/increased by RMB3,160 million (31 December 2022: RMB2,819 million), mainly as a result of higher/lower interest expense on floating rate borrowings. 

(b) Credit risk 

The carrying amounts of cash and bank balances, trade and other receivables except for prepayments and derivative financial instruments represent the Group’s maximum exposure to credit risk in relation to financial assets. 

Maximum exposure and year-end staging as at 31 December 2023 

The tables below show the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Group’s credit policy, which is mainly based on past due information unless other information is available without undue cost or effort, and year-end staging classification as at 31 December. The amounts presented are net carrying amounts for financial assets and the exposure to credit risk for the financial guarantee contracts. 

As at 31 December 2023 12-month ECLs Lifetime ECLs Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Simplified approach RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Contract assets * – – – 452,612 452,612 

Trade and other receivables * 313,270 42,253 2,920 118,232 476,675 

Debt investments at amortised cost – – 1,240 – 1,240 

Restricted bank deposits and time deposits with an initial term of over three months – Not yet past due 10,729 – – – 10,729 

Cash and cash equivalents – Not yet past due 110,204 – – – 110,204 

Guarantees given to banks in connection with facilities granted to associates and joint ventures 3,714 – – – 3,714 

Total 437,917 42,253 4,160 570,844 1,055,174 247 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 49. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES 

# (CONTINUED) 

(b) Credit risk (continued) 

As at 31 December 2022 12-month ECLs Lifetime ECLs Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Simplified approach RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Contract assets * – – – 393,271 393,271 Trade and other receivables * 267,172 27,376 407 109,377 404,332 Debt investments at amortised cost – – 1,764 – 1,764 Restricted bank deposits and time deposits with an initial term of over three months – Not yet past due 9,660 – – – 9,660 Cash and cash equivalents – Not yet past due 103,663 – – – 103,663 Guarantees given to banks in connection with facilities granted to associates and joint ventures 3,378 – – – 3,378 Total 383,873 27,376 2,171 502,648 916,068 * For contract assets, trade and other receivables to which the Group applies the simplified approach for impairment, information based on the provision matrix is disclosed in note 25 and note 26 to the financial statements, respectively. As at 31 December 2023, the financial assets classified to stage 3 for lifetime ECLs are debt investments at amortised cost, other receivables and long-term receivables with a gross carrying amount of approximately RMB10,051 million (2022: RMB7,068 million). Further quantitative data in respect of the Group’s exposure to credit risk arising from other receivables and long-term receivables are disclosed in note 26 to the consolidated financial statements. 248 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 49. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES 

# (CONTINUED) 

(c) Liquidity risk 

Liquidity risk encompasses the risk that the Group cannot meet its financial obligations in full. The Group’s maturity analysis of borrowings that shows the remaining contractual maturities is disclosed in note 31. Prudent liquidity risk management includes maintaining sufficient cash and the availability of funding from an adequate amount of committed credit facilities. Due to the capital intensive nature of the Group’s business, the Group ensures that it maintains flexibility through keeping sufficient cash and cash equivalents and credit lines to meet its liquidity requirements. The Group finances its working capital requirements through a combination of funds generated from operations and banks and other borrowings. The table below analyses the Group’s non-derivative financial liabilities and derivative financial instruments into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period at the end of the reporting period to the contractual maturity dates, and the amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows. 

2023 Less than 1 year Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 5 years Over 5 years Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

Borrowings (excluding lease liabilities) 127,540 71,350 149,461 268,667 617,018 

Lease liabilities 926 925 799 644 3,294 

Trade and other payables (excluding statutory and non-financial liabilities) 521,573 42,465 8,168 2,254 574,460 

Net-settled derivative financial instruments 5 – – – 5

Total 650,044 114,740 158,428 271,565 1,194,777 

2022 Less than 1 year Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 5 years Over 5 years Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million Borrowings (excluding lease liabilities) 107,942 65,061 131,688 288,787 593,478 Lease liabilities 997 582 687 628 2,894 Trade and other payables (excluding statutory and non-financial liabilities) 448,587 31,339 8,819 1,501 490,246 Net-settled derivative financial instruments 7 – – – 7Total 557,533 96,982 141,194 290,916 1,086,625 The Group’s contractual amounts relating to loan guarantees and liquidity support are disclosed in note 41 of the consolidated financial statements. Derivative financial instruments comprise forward currency contracts used by the Group to hedge the exposure to foreign currency risk. 249 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 49. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES 

# (CONTINUED) 

(d) Capital risk management 

The Group’s objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders, return capital to shareholders, issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt. The Group monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio. This ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total capital. Net debt is calculated as total borrowings less cash and cash equivalents. Total capital is calculated as “Equity” as shown in the consolidated statement of financial position plus net debt. The Group aims to maintain the gearing ratio at a reasonable level. 

31 December 2023 31 December 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million Total borrowings (note 31) 511,626 466,350 Less: Cash and cash equivalents (note 28) 110,358 103,663 

Net debt 401,268 362,687 

Total equity 459,124 427,492 

Total capital 860,392 790,179 

Gearing ratio 46.6% 45.9% 

The Group’s gearing ratio increases from 45.90% to 46.60% on 31 December 2023 as compared with the ratio as at 31 December 2022. 

# 50. EVENT AFTER THE REPORTING PERIOD 

On 28 March 2024, the board of directors of the Company resolved that a final dividend of RMB0.29253 per share, totalling approximately RMB4,762 million, is to be distributed to shareholders, subject to approval of shareholders at the forthcoming AGM. Such final dividend proposed after the end of the reporting period has not been recognised as a liability at the end of the reporting period. 

# 51. COMPARATIVE AMOUNTS 

As stated in note 2.2(c) and note 2.3, due to adoption of amendments to IAS 12 and the acquisition of subsidiaries under common control as mentioned in note 42(b), the comparative information has been restated. 250 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 52. STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION OF THE COMPANY 

Information about the statement of financial position of the Company at the end of the reporting period is as follows: 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Non-current assets 

Property, plant and equipment 171 132 Right-of-use assets 79 16 Investment properties 1,645 1,699 Intangible assets 636 400 Investments in subsidiaries 172,171 155,176 Investments in joint ventures 5,480 4,797 Investments in associates 12,832 11,395 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 799 537 Equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 5,609 7,507 Contract assets 1,478 2,487 Trade and other receivables 3,150 2,951 Loans to subsidiaries 427 427 Amounts due from subsidiaries 687 1,307 

Total non-current assets 205,164 188,831 

Current assets 

Inventories 488 471 Contract assets 7,369 5,951 Trade and other receivables 12,418 13,782 Loans to subsidiaries 3,564 18,711 Amounts due from subsidiaries 42,828 36,585 Restricted bank deposits 77 4Cash and cash equivalents 23,269 17,782 

Total current assets 90,013 93,286 

Current liabilities 

Trade and other payables 6,350 4,092 Contract liabilities 3,429 6,326 Amounts due to subsidiaries 62,756 65,105 Tax payables 1,669 1,010 Interest-bearing bank and other borrowings 32,535 33,591 Retirement benefit obligations 2 2

Total current liabilities 106,741 110,126 

Net current liabilities (16,728) (16,840) 

Total assets less current liabilities 188,436 171,991 

Continued/ ⋯251 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

2023 2022 

RMB million 

RMB million 

Total assets less current liabilities 188,436 171,991 

Non-current liabilities 

Trade and other payables 186 373 Deferred income 5 13 Amounts due to subsidiaries 6,289 6,088 Interest-bearing bank and other borrowings 24,381 20,819 Deferred tax liabilities 570 1,061 Retirement benefit obligations 22 23 Provisions 4 4

Total non-current liabilities 31,457 28,381 

Net assets 156,979 143,610 

Equity 

Share capital 16,264 16,166 Treasury shares (522) –Share premium 20,049 19,625 Financial instruments classified as equity 35,000 37,988 Reserves (note) 86,188 69,831 

Total equity 156,979 143,610 

# 52. STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION OF THE COMPANY 

# (CONTINUED) 252 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

31 December 2023 

# 52. STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION OF THE COMPANY 

# (CONTINUED) 

Note: A summary of the Company’s reserves is as follows: 

Capital reserve Statutory surplus reserve Remeasurement reserve Investment revaluation reserve Exchange reserve Retained earnings Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2022 21,754 9,573 62 5,412 (13) 33,043 69,831 

Profit for the year – – – – – 22,595 22,595 

Changes in fair value of equity instruments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – (1,424) – – (1,424) 

Share of other comprehensive loss of joint ventures and associates – – – 5 – – 5

Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – – 39 – 39 

Equity trading (87) – – – – – (87) 

Issue of perpetual securities (15) – – – – – (15) 

Share based payment 146 – – – – – 146 

Final 2022 dividend declared – – – – – (3,509) (3,509) 

Interest on perpetual securities – – – – – (1,393) (1,393) 

Transfer to statutory surplus reserve – 2,260 – – – (2,260) –

At 31 December 2023 21,798 11,833 62 3,993 26 48,476 86,188 

Capital reserve Statutory surplus reserve Remeasurement reserve Investment revaluation reserve Exchange reserve Retained earnings Total RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million RMB million 

At 31 December 2021 21,103 8,431 63 12,245 (77) 27,677 69,442 Profit for the year – – – – – 7,435 7,435 Changes in fair value of equity instruments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income, net of tax – – – (2,860) – – (2,860) Share of other comprehensive loss of joint ventures and associates – – – 15 – – 15 Actuarial loss on retirement benefit obligations, net of tax – – (1) – – – (1) Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations – – – – 64 – 64 Equity trading 680 – – – – – 680 Issuance of perpetual securities (29) – – – – – (29) Final 2021 dividend declared – – – – – (3,293) (3,293) Interest on perpetual securities – – – – – (1,622) (1,622) Transfer to statutory surplus reserve – 743 – – – (743) –Transfer of fair value reserve upon the disposal of equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income – 399 – (3,988) – 3,589 –

At 31 December 2022 21,754 9,573 62 5,412 (13) 33,043 69,831 

# 53. APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

The financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the board of directors on 28 March 2024. 253 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# TERMS & GLOSSARIES 

# DEFINITIONS 

“A Shares” domestic shares in the ordinary share capital of the Company with a nominal value of RMB1.00 each, which are listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange “AGM” the annual general meeting of the Company for the year 2023 to be held in 2024 “Articles of Association” the articles of associations of the Company, approved on 8 October 2006, and as amended thereafter “Board” the board of directors of the Company “BOT” build, operate and transfer “CCCC” or “Company” China Communications Construction Company Limited, a joint stock limited company with limited liability incorporated under the laws of the PRC on 8 October 2006, and except where the context requires otherwise, all of its subsidiaries “CCCC Capital” CCCC Capital Holdings Limited* ( 中交資本控股有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Dredging” CCCC Dredging (Group) Co., Ltd.* ( 中交疏浚 (集團 )股份有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Finance” CCCC Finance Company Limited* ( 中交財務有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Construction Group” CCCC Construction Group Co., Ltd.* ( 中交建築集團有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Haifeng” CCCC Haifeng Wind Power Development Co., Ltd.*( 中交海峰風電發展股份有限公司 ), a connected subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Haifeng Group” CCCC Haifeng and its subsidiaries “CCCC Investment” CCCC Investment Co., Ltd.* ( 中交投資有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Leasing” CCCC Financial Leasing Co., Ltd.* ( 中交融資租賃有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCC Second Harbour” CCCC Second Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd.* ( 中交第二航務工程局有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CCCG” China Communications Construction Group (Limited), a wholly state-owned company incorporated on 8 December 2005 in the PRC which currently holds approximately 59.63% equity interest in the Company “CCCG Group” CCCG and its subsidiaries, excluding the Company and its subsidiaries “CFHCC” CCCC First Harbour Engineering Co., Ltd.* ( 中交第一航務工程局有限公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “CRBC” China Road and Bridge Corporation* ( 中國路橋工程有限責任公司 ), a subsidiary of the Company “Director(s)” the director(s) of the Company “EPC” Engineer-Procure-Construct, being the general contracting of design-procurement-construction “Group” the Company itself and all of its subsidiaries 254 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# TERMS & GLOSSARIES 

“H Shares” overseas-listed foreign invested ordinary share(s) in the ordinary share capital of the Company, with a nominal value of RMB1.00 each, which are listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange “Hong Kong” the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC “Hong Kong dollars” or “HKD” the lawful currency of Hong Kong “Hong Kong Listing Rules” The Rules Governing the Listing of Securities on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited “Hong Kong Stock Exchange” The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited “Macau” the Macau Special Administrative Region of the PRC “Model Code” the Model Code for Securities Transactions by Directors of Listed Issuers “PPP” Public-Private-Partnership, the cooperative model between governments and private sector, which refers to the mechanisms through which governments build profit sharing, risk pooling and long-term cooperating relationship with the private sector, such as granting exclusivity rights, services purchasing and co-investment, so as to enhance the availability of public products and services and improve supplying efficiency “PRC” or “China” or “Mainland China” the People’s Republic of China excluding, for the purposes of this report, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan “RMB” or “Renminbi” the lawful currency of the PRC “SASAC” State-owned Assets Supervisor and Administration Commission of the State Council “Shanghai Listing Rules” the Rules Governing the Listing of Stocks on Shanghai Stock Exchange “Shareholder(s)” the shareholder(s) of the Company “Supervisor(s)” the supervisor(s) of the Company “USD” United States dollars, the lawful currency of the United States of America “ZPMC” Shanghai Zhenhua Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. ( 上海振華重工 (集團 )股份有限公司 ), a company incorporated on 14 February 1992 in the PRC, the A shares of which are listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange under stock code 600320 and the B shares of which are listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange under stock code 900947, and a non wholly-owned subsidiary of CCCG “%” percent 255 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CORPORATE INFORMATION 

# I. CORPORATE INFORMATION 

Legal name of the Company in Chinese: 中國交通建設股份有限公司 

Legal Chinese abbreviation of the Company: 中國交建 

Legal name of the Company in English: China Communications Construction Company Limited Legal English abbreviation of the Company: CCCC Legal representative of the Company: WANG Tongzhou 

# II. CONTACT PERSON AND CONTACT DETAILS 

Company Secretary: YU Jingjing Address: 85 De Sheng Men Wai Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, China Tel: 8610-82016562 Fax: 8610-82016524 E-mail: ir@ccccltd.cn 

# III. BASIC INFORMATION 

Registered address of the Company: 85 De Sheng Men Wai Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, China Postal code: 100088 Office address of the Company: 85 De Sheng Men Wai Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, China Postal code: 100088 Company website: http://www.ccccltd.cn E-mail: ir@ccccltd.cn 

# IV. INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND PLACE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION 

Newspapers designated by the Company for disclosure of information (A Shares): China Securities Journal, Shanghai Securities News, Securities Times and Securities Daily Website designated by China Securities Regulatory Commission for publishing annual reports of A Shares: www.sse.com.cn Website designated by the Hong Kong Stock Exchange for publishing annual reports of H Shares: www.hkexnews.hk Place available for inspection of the Company’s annual reports of A Shares: 19th Floor, 85 De Sheng Men Wai Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, China Place available for inspection of the Company’s annual reports of H Shares: Room 2805, 28th Floor, Convention Plaza Office Tower, 1 Harbour Road, Wanchai, Hong Kong, China 256 CHINA COMMUNICATIONS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# CORPORATE INFORMATION 

# V. BASIC INFORMATION ON SHARES OF THE COMPANY 

Listing place of A Shares: Shanghai Stock Exchange Abbreviation of A Shares: 中國交建 

Stock code of A Shares: 601800 Listing place of H Shares: The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited Abbreviation of H Shares: CHINA COMM CONS Stock code of H Shares: 01800 

# VI. OTHER INFORMATION OF THE COMPANY 

Domestic Auditors: Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP Level 16, Ernst & Young Tower, Oriental Plaza, No. 1 East Chang An Avenue, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, China Signing auditors: CHEN Jing and LI Xiaodong International Auditors: Ernst & Young Certified Public Accountants Registered Public Interest Entity Auditor 27/F, One Taikoo Place, 979 King’s Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong Hong Kong legal advisors: Baker & McKenzie 14/F, One Taikoo Place, 979 King’s Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong PRC legal advisors: Guantao Law Firm 19/F, Tower B, Xinsheng Plaza, 5 Finance Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, China Authorised representatives of H Shares: WANG Tongzhou, YU Jingjing H Share registrar: Computershare Hong Kong Investor Services Limited Shops 1712–1716, 17th Floor, Hopewell Centre, 183 Queen’s Road East, Wanchai, Hong Kong
