Title: Jill Stein Quotes About Political Parties | A-Z Quotes

URL Source: https://www.azquotes.com/author/41999-Jill_Stein/tag/political-parties

Markdown Content:
Quotes ›Authors ›J ›Jill Stein ›Political Parties

All quotes New Quotes (419)Clinton Community Democracy Democratic Party Elections Parties Political Parties more...

*    
*   In other words, "speaking truth" as a social movement may move you forward in some ways, but to really lock in and have real enduring change, it takes both a movement on the ground and an independent political party that is itself the defiance of that two-party corporate big-money control of politics.

Jill Stein Real, Moving, Party Source: www.pqmonthly.com  
*   Historically, if you look back at the struggle to end slavery, the struggle to gain womens' right to vote, the labor movement - these were big social transitions in which there was a movement on the ground in which a lot of people died, but it also took an independent political party.

Jill Stein Party, Struggle, Independent Source: www.pqmonthly.com  
*   With an abusive political relationship, with a political party that's throwing you under the bus, sister, I'm sorry to say but you don't have a future in this political party. You know, what they did to Bernie Sanders is what they have done to every progressive candidate and every real progressive movement within the party. They allow it to show its face and then they use the kill switch.

Jill Stein Sorry, Real, Party "Off Message" with Glenn Thrush, www.politico.com. September 19, 2016.  
*   You know, Bernie [Sanders] is - he is a team player. I think he's on the wrong team, perhaps because he's been in Washington, D.C., too long, because he used to really understand independent politics and why we cannot have a viable political system unless we have independent political parties. Otherwise we just keep marching to the right.

Jill Stein Team, Party, Independent Source: www.politico.com  
*   This is true to party tyranny and it locks people in, especially outrageous at this time that people feel like they are being thrown under the bus by these two political parties and are demanding, you know, other options in large numbers.

Jill Stein Party, Two, Numbers Source: www.cpa-connecticut.com  
*   We must challenge to fight at every level, including Congress and to make that challenge political and to organize as a political party is how we get traction.

Jill Stein Party, Fighting, Political Source: www.cpa-connecticut.com  
*   In my view, what really counts here, as our political system falls apart before our very eyes, where voters really feel like they've been thrown under the bus, for good reason, and where they are dropping out of these two corporate-sponsored political parties.

Jill Stein Party, Fall, Eye Source: www.democracynow.org  
*    

Send Report
-----------

Quote:

Mistake:

Choose...

1.   The author didn't say that
2.   There is a mistake in the text of this quote
3.   The quote belongs to another author
4.   Other error

Comments:

Email for contact (not necessary):

All Jill Stein quotes New Quotes (419)Clinton Community Democracy Democratic Party Elections Parties Political Parties more...

You May Also Like:

Gary Johnson

Rocky Anderson

Virgil Goode

Ralph Nader

Roseanne Barr

Cynthia McKinney

Dennis Kucinich
