Title: Image of the Day - NASA

URL Source: https://www.nasa.gov/image-of-the-day/

Published Time: 2023-09-07T13:29:24-04:00

Markdown Content:
During its close flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on December 30, 2023, NASA’s Juno spacecraft captured some of the most...

This NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image features the nebula LMC N44C.

This stunning Earth image taken from the International Space Station looks at a large lake in eastern Kazakhstan with golden...

A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket carrying NASA’s IMAP (Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration Probe), the agency’s Carruthers Geocorona Observatory, and National Oceanic...

NASA astronaut Nick Hague watches as Robert Schmidle Pitts Aerobatics perform, Friday, Sept. 12, 2025, during the Joint Base Andrews...

NASA’s 10 new astronaut candidates were introduced Monday, Sept. 22, 2025, following a competitive selection process of more than 8,000...

IC 348 is a star-forming region in our Milky Way galaxy.

In this infrared photograph, the Optical Communications Telescope Laboratory at JPL’s Table Mountain Facility near Wrightwood, California, beams its eight-laser...

The Milky Way appears above Earth's bright atmospheric glow in this photograph from the International Space Station as it soared...

NASA astronaut Zena Cardman processes bone cell samples inside the Kibo laboratory module's Life Science Glovebox on Aug. 28, 2025.

Westerlund 1 is the biggest and closest “super” star cluster to Earth. Data from Chandra and other telescopes are helping...

NASA astronauts Matthew Dominick (left) and Mark Vande Hei (right) prepare to fly out to a landing zone in the...

The Sun blew out a coronal mass ejection along with part of a solar filament over a three-hour period on...

NASA's James Webb Space Telescope captured newborn stars forming in clouds of dust and gas (colored golden and orange in...

Dinner is served aboard the International Space Station! One tray features shrimp cocktail on whole grain wheat crackers, while the...

From left to right, NASA astronauts Victor Glover, Artemis II pilot; Reid Wiseman, Artemis II commander; CSA (Canadian Space Agency)...

NASA astronaut and Expedition 68 Flight Engineer Frank Rubio is pictured inside the cupola, the International Space Station's "window to...

Orion Mission Evaluation Room (MER) team member works during an Artemis II mission simulation on Aug. 19, 2025, from the...

NASA astronauts Jonny Kim and Zena Cardman, both Expedition 73 Flight Engineers, pose for a portrait inside the International Space...

Sea ice is frozen seawater that floats in the ocean. This photo, taken from NASA’s Gulfstream V Research Aircraft on July...

This long-exposure photograph, taken over 31 minutes from a window inside the International Space Station’s Kibo laboratory module, captures the...

In the sparsely populated Kimberley region of Western Australia, jagged landforms reach like fingers into the turquoise-blue ocean waters. Along...

NASA astronaut Zena Cardman poses for a portrait in a photography studio at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas.

NASA’s X-59 quiet supersonic research aircraft sits on the ramp at sunrise before ground tests at Lockheed Martin’s Skunk Works...

The parachute of the Enhancing Parachutes by Instrumenting the Canopy test experiment deploys following an air launch from an Alta...

California's San Francisco Bay Area surrounded by the cities of San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose, and their suburbs, is...

Viking 1 was launched by a Titan-Centaur rocket from Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 5:22 p.m....

The Moon's light is refracted by Earth's atmosphere, giving it a spheroid shape in this April 13, 2025, photograph from...

NASA astronauts Christina Koch, Artemis II mission specialist, and Victor Glover, Artemis II pilot, walk on the crew access arm...

Former NASA astronaut Shane Kimbrough is photographed during a spacewalk in January 2017.

Eleven International Space Station crew members gather inside the International Space Station's Unity module for a portrait on Aug. 3,...

An alligator moves through a brackish waterway at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The center shares space with the...

This NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image shows a portion of the Tarantula Nebula.

Roscosmos cosmonaut Kirill Peskov, left, NASA astronauts Nichole Ayers and Anne McClain, and JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency) astronaut Takuya...

NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope and NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory have teamed up to identify a new possible example of a...

The Artemis II crew (from left to right) CSA (Canadian Space Agency) Jeremy Hansen, mission specialist; Christina Koch, mission specialist;...

This view of tracks trailing NASA's Curiosity rover was captured July 26, 2025, as the rover simultaneously relayed data to...

Second Lady Usha Vance hosted a special Summer Reading Challenge event at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston on Aug....

In this 30 second exposure photograph, a meteor streaks across the sky during the annual Perseid and Alpha Capricornids meteor...

A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket carrying the company's Dragon spacecraft is launched on NASA’s SpaceX Crew-11 mission to the International...

1 2 3…132 Next »
