Title: 

URL Source: https://payloadasia.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/PLA_April-May_2022-PreFinal.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 06 Jun 2023 06:25:01 GMT

Markdown Content:
MCI (P) 002/07/2016 ISSN 2010-4227 

THE TRADE MAGAZINE FOR THE ASIA-PACIFIC AND MIDDLE EAST REGION VOL. 38, NO. 3 APRIL/MAY 2022 

# DRONES USHER 

# NEW ERA FOR 

# AIR LOGISTICS For the deliveries of today and tomorrow, the 777-8F includes the very best of the 777F and 777X, making it the most capable and fuel-efficient twin-engine freighter ever. It’s cleaner and quieter while delivering the highest payload and most range capability of any twin-engine freighter. We’re committed to helping our customers across the globe by creating a freighter that delivers a more sustainable and more profitable future for everyone. 

# DELIVERING A BETTER FUTURE WITH THE 777-8F 

# 777X boeing.com/commercial/freighters Logistics players and air freight 

professionals, including shipper clients, 

right now are dealing with what comes as 

a ‘nasty cocktail’ of external factors that 

are putting pressure on rates and the 

industry at large. 

In Asia, Shanghai has been a bottleneck 

and a shift to air cargo has seen massive 

inflation in the transport of goods by 

plane. Data from the Baltic Air Freight 

Index suggest elevated pricing relative to 

that in 2021 on Asia-origin lanes. 

Elsewhere, challenges abound and one 

company is looking to put its name on the 

map by taking on almost any task with 

out-of-the-box solutions. Get to know 

more about Challenge Group and the 

company’s plans on page 22. 

In our C-suite section, we got a chance to talk to Vivien Lau, chief executive 

of Jardine Aviation Services, as she gives us a glimpse of her leadership style 

as well as in-depth insights on the latest developments in Hong Kong. Turn 

to page 18 for our C-Suite interview. 

We also talked to leading cargo drone developers and operators in Asia 

Pacific and around the globe for a sneak peek on the products that will soon 

be ready for commercial operations. Get to know the companies that are 

advancing air transport and logistics on page 20 for our cover story. 

To make it more interesting, this issue also features interviews with leading 

charter specialists and project cargo transport companies. We also covered 

TIACA’s 2-day executive summit held in March, which gathered the next 

generation of air cargo specialists and professionals in San Francisco. 

The magazine won’t be complete without the latest and insights from our 

newsmakers. Enjoy and share this bimonthly issue for April and May to stay 

updated with the latest news and exclusives in the air cargo and logistics 

industry. 

EDITORIAL/PUBLISHER 

Keen  Whye Lee 

Publisher 

publisher@harvest-info.com 

Giullian Navarra 

PLA Editor 

editor-pla@harvest-info.com 

OPERATIONS 

Mari Vergara 

Head of Operations 

mari@asiantvawards.com 

MARKETING 

Lali Singson 

Marketing Manager 

mktg@harvest-info.com 

SALES 

Simon Lee 

Hong Kong, Europe and 

Middle East 

sales@harvest-info.com 

Chua Chew Huat 

Asia Pacific 

sales-sg@harvest-info.com 

Matt Weidner 

North America 

mtw@weidcom.com 

TECHNICAL SUPPORT 

Michael Magsalin 

tech@harvest-info.com 

Harvest Information Pte. Ltd. 

150 Orchard Road, #07-05 

Orchard Plaza 

Singapore 169206 

150 Orchard Road, #07-05 

Orchard Plaza, Singapore 169206 

Giullian Navarra 

Chief Editor 

# EDITOR’S  NOTE 

1APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 2APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 2

EU to halt cargo-in-cabin flights 

from August 

Drone players on their next 

move to usher in new era for 

air freight and logistics 

Case study: Supplying 250 

million antigen test kits in a 

turbulent market 

Project cargo specialist deugro 

on securing air capacity at a 

time of disruption 

GMR Hyderabad unveils new 

express facility 

Asia Cargo Network launches 

new airline in Indonesia 

ACS Singapore: Moving big like 

the locals 

TIACA covers all angles at this 

year’s Executive Summit 

EVA Air greenlights 777-300 

freighter conversions 

dnata to purchase Cologne 

Bonn cargo handler 

Maersk’s new air freight 

company prepares to take off 

Jardine’s Vivien Lau on ground 

handling, Hong Kong and more 

German airport group Fraport 

divests stake in China 

EFW to convert 29 Airbus 

widebody A330s for ATSG 

Agility’s airport services unit 

confirms Menzies takeover 

DHL Express taps Singapore 

Air’s 777F on e-commerce 

04  19 

24 

26 

07 

11 

14 

18 05 

08 

12 

16 

06 

10 

09 

13 

# 16 

# CONTENT  PAGE 

C-SUITE 

Jardine’s Vivien Lau on 

air cargo, Hong Kong 

and more 

# 22 

EXCLUSIVE 

Rebranded Challenge Group flexes 

its aviation and air cargo expertise 

NEWS 

C-SUITE 

FEATURE  COVER STORY 

INSIGHTS 

EVENTS 

TIACA covers all angles 

at this year’s Executive 

Summit 18 qrcargo.com 

Moved by people 

# From Hano, Hô Ch Mnh Cty and beyond to the world! 

We speak fluent cargo! Whether t s general cargo, safe or most other commodtes; at Qatar Arways Cargo, we are traned to gve your shpments the attenton they deserve. 33 Qatar Arways Cargo specalsts n Vetnam and 1,500 tonnes of capacty/week are at your dsposal. 

# VIETNAM 4APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - CARRIERS 

# Lufthansa Cargo’s 

# A321P2F takes 

# maiden flight 

# IAG Cargo returns 

# to Australia with 

# pax-freighter 

# flights 

# EU to halt cargo-

# in-cabin flights 

# from August 

Lufthansa Cargo’s first Airbus A321 

freighter, under flight number LH835, 

took off for its maiden flight on 15 

March 2022 from Frankfurt (FRA) to 

Dublin (DUB) before continuing to 

Manchester (MAN), kickstarting the 

German airline’s medium-haul cargo 

network. 

Dorothea von Boxberg, Lufthansa 

Cargo chief, said the addition of 

the narrowbody freighter will allow 

IAG Cargo has restarted its London 

Heathrow to Sydney route for 

the first time since early 2020, as 

Australia reopened its borders to 

vaccinated passengers all over the 

world. 

Cargo-in-cabin flights beyond 31 

July are set to cease across the 

Europe Union, according to a recent 

statement from the EU Aviation Safety 

Agency (EASA). 

The use of the passenger cabin for 

cargo has been permitted for airlines 

since 2020, after the EASA issued 

approvals and exemptions on a

case-by-case basis. These were time-

limited, and although the agency 

extended the rules in August of last 

year, it will not extend the timeframe 

this time. 

The agency has determined that the 

exemptions delivered in this context 

will not be extended from August. The 

same applies for existing approvals 

that have been granted based on the 

use of the deviation on transportation 

the airline to tap the fast-growing 

e-commerce sector with same-

day solutions within Europe and to 

select medium-haul routes through 

scheduled and charter flights. 

Lufthansa Cargo plans to add 

Istanbul (IST), Tel Aviv (TLV), Malta 

(MLA) and Tunis (TUN) to its network 

by deploying the A321 freighter, as 

well as Cairo (CAI) starting March 

29 for the summer schedule. A

second A321P2F is expected to enter 

service in late summer, which will 

also be operated under a wet lease 

agreement by Lufthansa CityLine. 

Starting 27 March, IAG Cargo will 

utilise one of British Airways’ B787-9 

widebody aircraft with the capacity 

to transport up to 13 tonnes of cargo 

(10 compatible pallets) on a daily 

rotation with the route connection 

via Singapore. 

IAG Cargo said it started taking 

bookings on 15 March. Popular 

items typically exported from the 

region include vegetables and fresh 

fruits such as melons and mangoes. 

The service will also facilitate 

transportation of electronics, luxury 

goods and cosmetics into the region. 

of cargo in passengers compartments. 

These new rules also apply to ‘any 

certification projects for which the 

approval is issued after that date.’ 

In a statement on 11 April, the EASA 

concluded that ‘logistical challenges 

that arose in 2020 as a result of the 

Covid-19 crisis no longer exist to the 

same extent.’ 5APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - CARRIERS 

# EVA Air 

# greenlights 777-

# 300 freighter 

# conversions 

EVA Airways (EVA Air) has 

announced plans to convert three 

Boeing 777-300ER passenger planes 

into freighters after reporting a net 

income of TW$6.6 billion or US$232 

million for 2021, on the back of 

strong cargo demand. 

The Taiwanese carrier selected Israel 

Aerospace Industries to convert the 

long-haul widebody aircraft, with 

the total transaction price estimated 

at US$120 million at US$40 million 

apiece. 

The airline said that whilst the 

redesigned Boeing 777-300ERSF 

offers six tonnes less payload 

capacity than the 777F at 100 tonnes, 

its longer frame offers 25 percent 

greater cargo volume, making it 

suitable for conducting e-commerce 

operations. 

# Vietnam’s first 

# local cargo 

# airline awaits PM 

# approval 

New all-cargo airline IPP Air Cargo, 

owned by luxury retailer Imex Pan 

Pacific Group, has met all necessary 

requirements for an operator license 

and is now being lobbied by Vietnam’s 

transport ministry for the prime 

minister’s approval. 

The move comes as air cargo volumes 

climb steadily in the Southeast Asian 

manufacturing hub. Vietnam’s air 

cargo transport is currently handled 

by five existing airlines, with overall 

volume this year expected to rise 

to 1.52 million tonnes, up from 1.3 

million tonnes last year, the ministry 

statement read. 

# Seoul-based T’Way Air taps Jettainer to 

# manage unit load devices 

Seoul-based T’Way Air taps Jettainer to 

manage unit load devices 

South Korean low-cost airline T’way 

Air has chosen Jettainer to provide 

unit load device (ULD) management 

services under a 5-year contract. 

Unit load devices provided and 

managed by Jettainer will initially fly on 

routes between Gimpo International 

IPP Air Cargo was established in March 

2021 with an initial investment of 

300 billion dong (US$13.14 million). 

If approved, Vietnam will see its first 

all-cargo airline initially operate five 

aircraft, including Boeing 737, Boeing 

777 and Airbus A330 planes, with 

plans to double in size after five years. 

Airport and Jeju International Airport 

with international flights to Singapore 

and Vietnam on the pipeline. 

T’way plans to add three leased A330-

300 aircraft to its current fleet of Boeing 

737-800s by May. The airline is looking 

to grow its Airbus widebody fleet to 

seven by 2025 and begin medium-haul 

and long-haul flights to destinations 

like Sydney, Croatia and Honolulu. 6APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - AIRPORTS 

# Hong Kong 

# airport assumes 

# ownership of 

# AsiaWorld Expo 

# German airport 

# group Fraport 

# divests stake in 

# China 

Airport Authority Hong Kong (AAHK) 

has become the sole shareholder 

of AsiaWorld-Expo (AWE) after the 

government transferred its entire 

interests in the conference facility. 

The airport group said it is moving 

forward with phase 2 development 

of the AsiaWorld-Expo which will see 

Hong Kong’s largest indoor arena 

for events and conferences upon 

completion. The Phase 2 expansion 

will increase the total exhibition 

space to 100,000 square metres, 

with over 20,000 seats and state-of-

the-art facilities. 

Fraport AG is selling its stake in Xi’an 

Airport (XIY) in central China after 

14 years, the group announced in 

April. Under an agreement signed 

on March 31, Fraport is letting go 

of its entire 24.5 percent stake in 

Xi’an Xianyang International Airport 

AsiaWorld-Expo is considered a

prime venue in Hong Kong for 

business conferences, live events 

and industry summits. Before the 

transfer of interests, the Hong Kong 

(the airport’s operating company) 

to Chang’an Huitong for RMB1.11 

billion or around US$174.4 million. 

Fraport chief Dr. Stefan Schulte 

expressed satisfaction on the good 

work done with the airport but also 

some disappointment at the move 

to cease its operations in China. 

“We always regarded our minority 

stake in Xi’an as a starting point for 

expanding our business in China – the 

most populous country in the world. 

However, this never materialized in 

government and AAHK jointly owned 

AWE. The latter acquired ownership 

of the company that manages 

and operates the well-renowned 

convention centre in 2018. 

# Incheon Airport 

# moves up to 

# second busiest 

# cargo air hub 

Incheon International Airport moved 

up a notch to become the second 

busiest cargo airport in 2021, according 

to airport trade body Airports Council 

International (ACI) World. 

The airport, located some 40 

kilometres west of Seoul, handled 3.23 

million tonnes of international cargo 

last year, up 18.6 percent from 2020. 

It previously ranked third in the world 

for international cargo in 2019 and 

2020. 

Hong Kong International Airport on 

Chek Lap Kok Island retained the 

top spot as it processed 4.98 million 

tonnes of international freight in 2021, 

up 12.8 percent from the previous 

year. Shanghai Pudong (CVG) airport 

dropped one spot to third over the 

same period, followed by Taiwan’s 

Taoyuan airport (TPE) and Narita 

airport (NRT) in Japan. Rounding up the 

top 10 were Doha (DOH), Anchorage 

(ANC), Dubai (DXB), Frankfurt (FRA) 

and Miami (MIA). 

Xi’an or at any other Chinese airport. 

Consequently, we have now decided 

to cease our activities in the Chinese 

market,” Shultze noted. 7APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# Budapest Airport 

# eyes cargo boost 

# with TIACA 

# membership 

Budapest Airport is looking to become 

a key cargo player within central and 

eastern Europe and has joined The 

International Air Cargo Association 

(TIACA) as a trustee member. 

József Kossuth, head of cargo at the 

Hungarian air hub, said the new 

cooperation will allow them to do 

great things in cargo digitization, 

cargo processes and organisation, 

technology upgrades, regulatory 

environment and other cargo 

developments. 

The airport invested €50 million 

and opened its cargo terminal BUD 

Cargo City in 2020. Since 2015, the 

airport’s cargo traffic has more than 

doubled its cargo volume. It handled 

183,000 tonnes in 2021,up 36 percent 

compared to the volume seen in 2020. 

# GMR Hyderabad 

# Air Cargo unveils 

# new express 

# facility 

Indian cargo handler GMR Hyderabad 

Air Cargo (GHAC) has inaugurated a 

new facility to handle international 

courier and express cargo 

consignments at Hyderabad Airport. 

Located within the company’s cargo 

terminal, the new facility is connected 

with the Express Cargo Clearance 

System (ECCS) of Indian Customs 

for quick consignment processing 

and clearance at the terminal. It is 

also well equipped with supporting 

infrastructure and equipment 

including, advanced security screening 

and cargo handling systems. 

GHAC said the new facility for 

international courier shipments 

opens up a whole new segment for 

Hyderabad’s air cargo trade, becoming 

# Emirates 

# reactivates DWC to 

# handle freighter 

# aircraft 

Emirates is reactivating its cargo hub 

at Dubai South (DWC) for dedicated 

freighter operations starting 26 March 

2022. Cargo arriving or departing on 

passenger aircraft will be handled at 

DXB, whilst cargo on freighter aircraft 

will be delegated to DWC. 

The move marks a return to the 

airline’s dual hub cargo operations 

a new gateway for import and export 

of courier cargo shipments from the 

region. This will enable international 

courier shipments from/to Hyderabad 

to be handled locally rather than being 

processed through designated facilities 

in other metro cities, the group noted. 

# NEWS  - AIRPORTS 

in Dubai after a period of nearly two 

years when the airline consolidated its 

freighter (main deck) and passenger 

(bellyhold) cargo operations at DXB 

during the onset of the pandemic 

back in April 2020. 

Emirates SkyCentral DWC, which can 

accomodate more than 1 million 

tonnes per annum, features extensive 

cool chain handling facilities and a

dedicated pharma handling zone 

certified for EU GDP standards.. 8APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - CARGO HANDLING 

# WFS handles 

# Hainan’s cargo-

# only Dreamliner 

# flights at SEA 

# Swissport adds 

# capacity in 

# Belgium with 

# Liege handler 

# acquisition 

# dnata to purchase 

# Cologne Bonn 

# cargo handler as 

# it expands into 

# Germany 

Hainan Airlines and long-standing 

cargo handling partner Worldwide 

Flight Services have inked a new 

ramp handling contract at Seattle-

Tacoma International Airport (SEA). 

Swissport International is adding 

more capacity at top air cargo hubs 

in Europe with the acquisition of 

Belgium Airport Services (BAS) and 

an additional facility at Schiphol 

Airport. 

dnata is set to expand its European 

footprint with the planned acquisition 

of Germany-based cargo terminal 

operator Wisskirchen Handling 

Services. The Dubai-based airside 

services provider said it has executed 

agreements with the owner of 

Wisskirchen, Oliver Hellwig, to acquire 

100 percent of the shares in the 

company. 

Wisskirchen is the exclusive operator 

of the 12,000-sqm cargo centre 

With the acquisition, the Swiss 

cargo handler has increased its total 

warehouse and handling capacity 

by more than 40 percent with a

combined space of 76,000 square 

metres in Belgium, including the 

38,000-sqm air cargo facility at 

Brussels Airport. 

Swissport Belgium recorded 5.1 

million metric tonnes, across 119 

facilities with 14 certified pharma 

centres, up 10 percent over its 2019 

volume. The company said it will 

continue to invest in developing its 

cargo business with plans to add 

an additional air cargo center at 

Schiphol Airport. 

at Cologne/Bonn Airport (CGN). It 

handles more than 85,000 tonnes 

of cargo annually, including general 

cargo, perishables, pharmaceuticals, 

dangerous goods, electronics and fast 

moving consumer goods. 

Across Europe, dnata has made 

significant investments in advanced 

The Chinese airline, which has been 

a customer of WFS at SEA since 

2013, has now appointed WFS to 

provide loading and unloading of 

the 3-5 passenger freighter services 

for its Boeing 787 aircraft connecting 

Seattle to Shanghai. 

The cargo-only flights using 

passenger aircraft were introduced 

during the pandemic and can 

carry up to 20 tonnes of cargo on 

the lower deck each way. WFS will 

provide other ramp services for 

the airline, including crew shuttle, 

infrastructure to enhance its cargo 

offering, which include state-of-the-

art cargo facilities in Manchester 

and additional cargo capacity and 

infrastructure in Brussels. It also said 

it would invest over €200 million in its 

operations in Amsterdam and operate 

one of the world’s largest and most 

advanced cargo facilities at Schiphol. 

lavatory, water and GPU services. It 

also holds handling contracts with 

Hainan Airlines at JFK and CDG. 9APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - CARGO HANDLING 

# Vietnam Airlines 

# taps BFS as 

# cargo handler in 

# Bangkok 

# Agility’s airport 

# services unit 

# confirms Menzies 

# takeover 

Vietnam Airlines has appointed WFS 

subsidiary Bangkok Flight Services 

(BFS) as its new cargo handler at 

Suvarnabhumi Airport (BKK). 

The joint venture, established in 2004 

between WFS and Bangkok Airways, 

will handle around 12,000 tonnes of 

cargo per annum for the airline, which 

operates Airbus A321, A350 and Boeing 

787 flights ex Bangkok to Hanoi and Ho 

Chi Minh City. 

Executives at British aviation services 

company John Menzies have accepted 

a £571 million (US$741 million) takeover 

bid from Kuwaiti rival National Aviation 

Services, owned by logistics giant Agility. 

Analysts say the Menzies and Agility 

merger would create the world’s largest 

airport services firm, according to the 

number of countries it operates in. 

The Kuwait-based company had earlier 

secured a 19 percent stake in its British 

rival, after the latter rebuffed three 

previous offers. At 608 pence a share, 

Philipp Joeinig, chairman and chief 

executive at John Menzies, said that 

‘directors believe the offer represents 

a fair and recommendable price 

for shareholders which recognises 

Menzies’ future prospects’. 

The combined revenues of Menzies and 

NAS were in excess of US$1.5 billion in 

2021. The merged group is estimated 

to count around 35,000 employees at 

more than 250 airports in 57 countries, 

handling more than 600,000 aircraft 

turns per year. 

Menzies, which offers services ranging 

from cargo and baggage-handling to 

Bangkok Flight Services, which also 

offers full passenger and ramp services 

at BKK, will handle cargo for the airline’s’ 

passenger check-in and plane de-icing 

and refuelling, will be combined with 

National Aviation Services. The Agility 

subsidiary counts British Airways, 

Air France, KLM, Emirates and Qatar 

Airways amongst its airline customers. 

five and seven passenger freighter 

flights each week between Thailand and 

Vietnam. 10 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - CHARTERS 

# Boeing secures 

# widebody 

# freighter orders 

# from top players 

Boeing and long-standing customer 

Ethiopian Airlines have signed a

memorandum of understanding 

(MoU) with the intent to purchase 

five 777-8 freighters. Meanwhile, 

DHL Express has placed an order for 

six additional 777 freighters which 

the integrator will deploy to connect 

Cincinnati, Leipzig and Hong Kong as 

well as other key markets. 

The 777 freighter is Boeing’s best 

seller with more than 300 cargo jets 

delivered since the programme began 

# EFW to convert 29 

# Airbus widebody 

# A330s for ATSG 

Aircraft lessor Air Transport Services 

Group (ATSG) wants more next-

generation widebody freighters 

in its 117-aircraft fleet and has 

committed a total of 29 slots for the 

Airbus A330 passenger-to-freighter 

(P2F) conversion with Airbus-ST 

# New air cargo 

# route links 

# Shenzhen to 

# Leipzig 

A new air freight route has been 

launched that will link the southern 

Chinese city of Shenzhen with Leipzig 

(LEJ) in Germany, Shenzhen Bao’an 

International Airport (SZX) announced 

in a press statement. 

The route will be operated by German 

cargo airline AeroLogic, a joint venture 

between DHL and Lufthansa Cargo, 

with six round trips each week using a 

Boeing 777 freighter. 

Shenzhen airport said it has been 

coordinating with airlines since the 

start of the year to expand routes and 

increase capacity to ensure the stability 

of the supply and industry chain amidst 

the resurgence in COVID-19 cases 

across China. The airport has so far 

opened international air freight lines 

reaching 35 destinations. 

in 2005. The new 777-8 freighter, 

launched in January 2022, has secured 

34 firm orders as of writing. 

Engineering joint venture Elbe 

Flugzeugwerke (EFW) in March. 

The conversions will be performed 

from mid-2023 through 2027 

mainly at EFW’s German facility in 

Dresden, and at a future conversion 

site in Shanghai. EFW said multiple 

conversions will be carried out in 

parallel. 

Mike Berger, chief commercial 

officer at ATSG, said the availability 

of feedstock combined with its 

cargo capacity make the A330 a

very attractive option to meet the 

demands for full-capacity freighters 

long into the future. Customer 

response has been exceptionally 

strong, Berger noted, with secured 

deposits towards future leases for 

half of the 29 freighters. 11 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# Embraer offers ‘right-sized’ cargo jets 

# for e-commerce 

# Asia Cargo 

# Network launches 

# new airline in 

# Indonesia 

Embraer is offering more options 

for cargo operators with the launch 

of its E190F and E195F passenger to 

freighter conversions (P2F), which 

will be available for all pre-owned 

Asia Cargo Network launched RGA-

Black Stone Airlines after it received 

the Air Operator Certificate (AOC) 

in Indonesia on 28 March. The 

inaugural flight flew two days later 

from Soekarno-Hatta International 

Airport (CGK) in Jakarta to El Tari 

E190 and E195 aircraft, with entry 

into service expected by 2024. 

These right-sized jets, as Embraer 

describes, will fill the gap in 

International Airport (KOE) and then 

Komodo International Airport (LBJ). 

Asia Cargo Network offers freighter 

services, aircraft leasing, aviation-

related and logistics services with 

operations throughout Indonesia, 

Malaysia and Singapore. The group 

said this is the second AOC handed 

to Asia Cargo Network in Indonesia 

and its third airline AOC in the region. 

Earlier this year it invested US$10 

million to build an MRO facility at 

Kertajati International Airport in 

West Java.. 

# ASL Aviations tops up orders for Boeing’s 737-800BCF 

Aircraft lessor and ACMI airline 

operator ASL Aviation Holdings has 

ordered up to 20 additional 737-

800BCFs (Boeing converted freighters), 

bringing up its total order to 40 for the 

Boeing narrowbody freighter. 

The agreement is for 10 firm orders 

and 10 purchase rights. The aircraft will 

be converted by Boeing at approved 

MRO sites, including STAECO in Jinan 

and at the company’s London Gatwick 

MRO facility in the United Kingdom. 

The 737-800BCF is considered a step-

up from the 737 Classic freighter with 

more payload (up to 23.9 tonnes) and 

a flight range of 2,025 nautical miles 

perfect for short- and medium-haul 

routes. The Dublin-headquartered 

aircraft leasing company received its 

first 737-800 freighter conversion in 

February last year under ASL Airlines 

France. 

the freighter market between 

turboprops and larger narrowbody 

jets. The E190F can handle a payload 

of 23,600 pounds or 10,700 kilos (10.7 

tonnes), whilst the E195F variant can 

carry up to 27,100 pounds or 12,300 

kilos (12.3 tonnes). 

Earlier E-Jets that entered service 

some time 10-15 years ago are now 

emerging from long-term leases and 

beginning their replacement cycle, 

continuing into the next decade. In 

Asia, Tianjin Airlines has 32 E190s 

and 20 E195s in its fleet, whilst GX 

Airlines in China (17 E190s), J-Air 

in Japan (14 E190s). Other E-Jet 

operators include Bamboo Airways 

in Vietnam and Taiwanese carrier 

Mandarin Airlines. 

# NEWS  - LEASING 12 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# NEWS  - FREIGHT FORWARDERS 

# Geodis 

# strengthens Asia 

# Pacific footprint 

# with Keppel 

# acquisition 

# Maersk’s new air freight company 

# prepares to take off 

Geodis is looking to expand its 

contract logistics footprint and 

enhance its e-commerce fulfillment 

services in Asia Pacific after it signed 

a binding agreement to acquire 

Keppel Logistics. 

With the acquisition, Geodis will 

further expand its footprint in Asia 

Pacific, adding to recent investments 

in contract logistics sites in India, 

South Korea and Australia. 

Singapore-based Keppel Logistics 

offers end-to-end B2B and B2C 

Maersk is looking to enhance its air 

freight offering as it announced the 

launch of its air freight unit, Maersk 

Air Cargo. The Danish company has 

chosen Billund Airport, considered 

Denmark’s second largest airport, 

as its main hub, and the team is 

expected to start in the second half 

of 2022. 

The shipping giant said it plans to 

increase its presence in the air cargo 

logistics solutions, including 

warehousing and last-mile 

delivery, with strong capabilities in 

e-commerce omnichannel service 

offerings thanks to its subsidiary 

UrbanFox. 

arena and will progressively deploy 

and operate five aircraft, including 

two new B777F and three leased 

B767-300 cargo aircraft. 

Maersk added that three new B767-

300 freighters will be added to its 

US-China or transpacific operations, 

which will be initially handled by a 

third-party operator. The new aircraft 

are expected to be operational by 

the second half of 2022 up to 2024. 

Ranked in the top 5 of the city 

state’s contract logistics players, the 

company owns more than 200,000 

square metres of warehouse space 

across Singapore, Malaysia and 

Australia. 

# Teleport adds 

# intra-Asia capacity 

# with cargo-only 

# A330 flights 

Teleport will deploy four widebody 

Airbus A330 on cargo-only flights to 

12 destinations within Asia Pacific as 

it looks to add more capacity in the 

region. 

The logistics venture of Capital A

(formerly AirAsia Group) is resuming 

more scheduled cargo flights through 

the use of its Airbus widebody planes 

beginning March 2022, offering more 

capacity from its hub in Kuala Lumpur. 

It plans to include its Bangkok hub in 

the second quarter. 

The list of scheduled routes 

commencing in March are Kuala 

Lumpur (KUL), Sydney (SYD), Hong 

Kong (HKG), Seoul (ICN), Tokyo (HND), 

Taipei (TPE), Bangalore (BLR), Mumbai 

(BOM), Bangkok (BKK), Manila (MNL), 

Jakarta (CGK) and Kota Kinabalu (BKI), 

with frequencies ranging from two to 

seven times per week for each routing. 

The forwarder is eyeing around one 

third of its annual air tonnage to 

be carried within its own controlled 

freight network. 13 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# DHL Express taps 

# Singapore Air’s 

# 777F to support 

# e-commerce 

DHL Express is adding more capacity 

from Asia Pacific to the Americas with 

a crew and maintenance agreement 

(CM) with long-time partner Singapore 

Airlines who will operate five Boeing 

777 freighters for the integrator. 

The initial agreement is set for more 

than four years with the opportunity 

for an extension. The first aircraft 

is scheduled to be delivered in July 

2022, with the second one expected in 

October. The remaining three aircraft 

are planned for delivery throughout 

2023. 

DHL Express said it sees good 

prospects for strong growth in trans-

Pacific trade lanes with the new 

freighter operation expected to meet 

customer demand in fast-growing 

international express shipping 

markets driven by e-commerce. 

# JD.com’s new 

# charter service 

# connects China to 

# Brazil, Germany 

Chinese e-commerce giant JD.com 

has launched new cargo charter 

services from China to Brazil and 

Germany, which will be operated by 

Angola Airlines and Capital Airlines. 

The new charter services, launched 

on March 17 and 19, respectively, 

will see Angola Airlines connect 

Hong Kong airport and Guarulhos 

International Airport in Sao Paulo 

two times each week. The inaugural 

flight carried a variety of e-commerce 

goods from China, including FMCG 

products, sports equipment and 

digital accessories, with local goods 

from Brazil shipped to China on the 

return trip. 

Meanwhile, JD.com’s Zhengzhou– 

Cologne route will set CGN as 

the company’s main air hub 

# Kerry Logistics launches new service 

# between UK and Turkey 

Kerry Logistics Network is responding 

to growing demand for multimodal 

options with a new one-stop solution 

(1S2) for imports and exports between 

the UK and Turkey. 

The new service features supply chain 

visibility through an online portal 

called KTreker and covers all modes 

as customers look for alternative 

sourcing locations outside Asia. 

Turkey is considered a key cargo hub 

covering major European cities, 

including Frankfurt, Brussels, Liege, 

Amsterdam, London and Paris. 

Capital’s first flight for JD saw the 

transport of Covid-19 rapid test kits 

manufactured in China. 

# NEWS  - LOGISTICS 

for the UK, particularly for textiles and 

fashion, automotive cargo and FMCG. 

As one of IATA’s primary cargo agents 

in Turkey, Kerry Logistics said the 

one-stop solution was developed for 

FCL and LCL fast transit services to 

all UK ports; daily FTL and LTL across 

the EU; bonded and non-bonded, 

consolidation, value-added and 

quality control warehousing solutions, 

as well as in-house customs clearance. 14 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# FEATURE 

# ACS Singapore: Moving big like the locals 

Payload Asia  interviews Jason Bird, 

head of cargo at Air Charter Service 

Singapore, to learn more about the 

company’s Asia Pacific network and 

the length it goes to, to provide reliable 

service amidst cargo and supply chain 

disruptions. 

Can you describe ACS’ network in 

Asia Pacific? 

ACS has five offices in the APAC 

region which are Hong Kong, Beijing, 

Shanghai, Sydney, and Singapore. 

Because we have native speaking 

brokers in all major centres, it allows 

us to communicate more effectively 

with both customers, and suppliers. 

The languages collectively spoken 

amongst the group include Mandarin, 

Cantonese, Korean, Japanese, Malay, 

Bahasa, Vietnamese, Thai and Tagalog. 

With such a broad scale of local 

diversity, we also have brokers who 

have relocated with ACS from other 

regions including North America &

Europe adding additional perspective 

and disparity. 

On average, our region handles 3-4 

flights a day for our customers based 

inside the APAC region. These are all 

quoted, contracted, coordinated and 

monitored through a combination 

of our brokers and our 24/7 flight 

support in both Hong Kong and at our 

London HQ. 

Last is our hand carry and time 

critical service in the region. Although 

headquartered by our team in 

Frankfurt we have an extensive 

database of couriers in the APAC 

region allowing us to offer competitive 

time-critical options to not only our 

customers in APAC, but also globally. 

Which routes and what types of 

aircraft are seeing great demand 

for charter services? Why so? 

We are still seeing a good mix of 

freighters and Passenger to Freighter 

(P2F) aircraft being utilised. It’s 

impossible to predict how long the P2F 

market will sustain for, but I think it’s 

safe to say they will play a vital role in 

the air cargo industry for at least Q2 

& Q3 of 2022. South East Asia to the 

US is always a popular lane and the 

demand has remained strong through 

the first quarter of 2022. Australia 

was another popular destination as 

the push for test kits arose following 

their COVID outbreak in December/ 

January, combined with their easing of 

restrictions in the last few weeks. 

What’s your outlook on air cargo? 

What kind of investments is ACS 

planning in Singapore? 

I would say air cargo is not quite 

at the peak it was mid-pandemic 

but still treading at very high levels. 

> Jason Bird, head of cargo at
> Air Charter Service Singapore
> Air Charter Service arranging the transport for Covid-19 test kits en route to Australia

15 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# FEATURE 

We are not reliant on 

one specific carrier at 

any time, so for us it is 

business as usual with 

continuing to produce 

creative, out-of-the-box 

thinking and solutions 

for our customers 

that cannot be found 

elsewhere 

> Air Charter Services’ team in Singapore

There are subtle signs of the industry 

normalizing again, but I would not 

expect rates or capacity to be at pre-

pandemic levels for at least another 12 

months. Very difficult to predict with 

so much uncertainty with the crisis in 

the Ukraine and COVID restrictions in 

China and Hong Kong which affect a 

lot of the capacity in the region. ACS 

Singapore is growing at a rapid pace 

as our local presence in Singapore has 

accelerated our business quicker than 

anticipated. We have plans of doubling 

our headcount in the next 12 months 

and moving to a larger long-term office 

space. 

What are the main challenges in 

conducting charter operations? 

How does the company address 

these challenges? 

Main challenges with a charter 

operation are typically delays in the 

schedule, which in turn can throw off 

pre-arranged handling, slots, pick up/ 

drop off, etc. What we do on every 

charter is keep tabs on the tail number 

at least two to three days prior to the 

flight to ensure the flights leading up 

to our charter are on time. If they are 

not, it gives us the ability to remain 

one step ahead of the possible delay 

and liaise with the affected parties. 

We also keep in close contact with 

handling agents and any other third 

parties involved to make sure ample 

notice is given to avoid future issues 

or delays. Another challenge we often 

face are operational restraints at 

remote airports or airports that don’t 

often handle cargo-only flights. I once 

had a forklift break down an hour 

prior to the aircraft’s arrival. With no 

other resources available at this small 

airport, at 3am I managed to find a 

factory 50 miles away who was willing 

to ‘lease’ a forklift to us so we were 

able to offload the urgent cargo. I also 

arranged for the truck to deliver and 

return the forklift. 

What can you say about Changi 

Airport’s modernization and air 

cargo community? 

Changi Airport is incredible. Sadly, I 

have only lived in Singapore for about 

two years, so my experience in the 

passenger terminal is minimal but 

from my few visits it’s been nothing 

short of spectacular. On the cargo side, 

the Changi Cargo Complex is also very 

state-of-the-art and extremely efficient. 

We’ve had pleasant experiences 

working with both Dnata and SATS, 

both of which operate quite a flawless 

operation. It’s been impressive 

meeting so many knowledgeable and 

experienced partners, customers and 

colleagues in the air cargo industry. 

With Singapore being such a big 

gateway for many large forwarders in 

South East Asia, the quality of staff and 

local talent is noticeable. 

Amidst disruptions and flight bans, 

how is the company looking to 

capitalise on the current business 

environment? 

With current flight bans it obviously 

means less supply in the market. We 

are not reliant on one specific carrier 

at any time, so for us it is business 

as usual with continuing to produce 

creative, out-of-the-box thinking and 

solutions for our customers that 

cannot be found elsewhere. In terms 

of capitalising on the environment, I 

think it is just an opportunity for us to 

work more with airlines we would use 

less-frequently, which is a good thing 

for us. 

What are the company’s plans for 

future growth? 

In Singapore specifically, our main 

focus is maintaining a high level of 

service for our existing customers, 

which will help us continue to grow 

our headcount as we plan to double 

our staff in the next year. We’ll do this 

by investing in recruiting to ensure we 

continue hiring top local talent, and 

then guide them through a training 

program to ensure the level of service 

& expertise we demand is at the 

forefront of every new customer we 

have on board. We would also like to 

continue adding bilingual staff so we 

can serve more customers on a local 

level. 16 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# C-SUITE 

# Jardine Aviation Services’ Vivien Lau on 

# ground handling, Hong Kong and more 

As we see more women of great stature 

grace the top ranks of what-was-once a 

male-dominated air cargo and logistics 

industry, Payload Asia listens to Vivien 

Lau, chief executive of Jardine Aviation 

Services Group, as she shares her 

thoughts for the C-suite. 

Can you share with us your work 

experience and what led you to 

pursue a career in aviation? 

I have spent over 15 years in the 

aviation industry, with the last 10 

years working at Hong Kong Air Cargo 

Terminals (HACTL). In November 2021, I 

was appointed chief executive of Jardine 

Aviation Services Group (JASG). 

I started my career as executive trainee 

in Jardine Matheson Group, and got 

the opportunity to rotate to different 

business sectors. In one of my earlier 

assignments working in the airport, I 

just loved to work with the people— 

who are all very professional and 

collaborative—in the aviation industry. 

Since then, I have never left the aviation 

industry. I had spent 6 years working 

in a joint-venture project to set up a 

passenger ground handling company in 

China, and then worked in air cargo and 

logistics business for 9 years; now I am 

responsible for a full range of ground 

handling services including passenger, 

ramp, cargo and ground support 

equipment (GSE) services. 

What’s a typical day like as chief 

executive? 

Being the chief executive during crisis 

time, I spent most of the time talking 

and meeting with people. To me, the top 

priority is to keep close communications 

with staff. People are afraid to talk to 

the senior team; therefore I reach out to 

the frontline managers to understand 

what’s happening around. I also like 

meeting up with customers because 

they can share with me the latest market 

trends, and it is the most effective way to 

know how to steer the company in the 

right direction in a highly competitive 

environment. 

I am pleased to be elected as the 

President of Hong Kong Airline Service 

Providers Association (HASPA), whose 

members are non-airline aviation 

operators representing some 24,000 

staff at Hong Kong International Airport. 

Hence, for most of the time, I am 

engaged in regular dialogues with Hong 

Kong Airport Authority and the related 

government departments to exchange 

views and lobby for wider support to 

the aviation sector particularly during 

the pandemic. 

Tell us about Jardine’s cargo 

operations. Where do you operate 

and how is the company performing? 

JASG is based in Hong Kong 

International Airport, providing ground 

services to 60 international airlines 

including freighters and belly cargoes. 

Our passenger-related business is 

Cargo visibility and 

traceability will become the 

critical success factors not 

only to e-commerce players 

but also air cargo operators. 

> Jardine’s cargo operations at HKG

17 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# C-SUITE 

badly affected by the travel restrictions 

to Hong Kong. Nevertheless, similar 

to most other ground companies, it 

gives us an opportunity to expand our 

capabilities in cargo-related services. 

During the pandemic, our cargo-related 

business has grown and expanded with 

more value-added services including 

but not limited to the freighter ramp, 

cabin-loading, operations control, air 

cargo documentation, charter flight 

handling, crew escort, and pet caring 

services. 

We set up the Integrated Operations 

Centre (IOC) just before the outbreak 

of COVID19 which then played an 

important role in coordinating the 

dynamic changes of new cargo 

requirements such as pax freighters. 

IOC is a single point of contact to 

airlines, GSA and charterers. For new 

airlines or existing airlines with new 

requests, IOC helps in facilitating the 

local coordination and operational 

matters, as well as ensuring regulatory 

compliance. 

What do you think will be the trends 

that will become part of our new 

norm across the air cargo and wider 

supply chain? 

Before the pandemic, cargo typically 

made up around 12% of airlines’ total 

revenue, but cargo contributions 

increased significantly to 49% during 

the pandemic. The pandemic also 

fueled the growth of e-commerce sales 

which traditionally relied on aircraft 

belly capacity. Airlines will continue to 

look for ways to grow cargo in an agile 

way that allows for quick adjustments. 

The industry’s use of data and analytics 

has been increasing and will accelerate 

spanning the entire supply chain. 

Airlines are using big data and AI to 

improve on-time performance and real-

time decision making. Cargo visibility 

and traceability will become the critical 

success factors not only to e-commerce 

players but also air cargo operators. 

As for implications to ground handlers 

like JASG, there will be higher demand 

for digitalization and innovation of 

ground handling operations. The use 

of technology to facilitate real-time 

visibility of flight data and operations 

performance will be the game changer 

under the new normal. 

There’s a list that says Hong Kong 

was the busiest cargo airport last 

year and there’s one report that 

claims the world city as ‘off the map’. 

What can you say about Hong Kong’s 

status as an aviation hub? 

While most countries are opening up for 

quarantine-free travelers, Hong Kong’s 

travel restrictions and quarantine 

requirements make us less competitive. 

The Hong Kong government has shared 

a roadmap to gradually relax some 

anti-pandemic measures in the coming 

three months, and it will pave the way 

for the border opening eventually. Even 

if there is no definite date yet, I have 

confidence in Hong Kong as it is a highly 

resilient place. Hong Kong International 

Airport just re-claimed the world’s 

number 1 position in 2021 given the 

unique competitive edge on air cargo. 

Taking advantage of low traffic, the 

Airport Authority managed to speed 

up the construction of a three-runway 

system, which expects the completion 

by 2024. After the expansion, the airport 

will be able to handle the targeted 

annual passenger and cargo volume of 

around 120 million and 10 million tonnes 

respectively, enabling Hong Kong to 

enhance its status as an international 

aviation hub. The development of 

Airport City, comprising retail, dining and 

entertainment facilities; as well as office 

towers, a logistics centre and a mega 

performance venue, will be completed 

in phases from 2023 to 2027. Taking full 

advantage of the Hong Kong-Zhuhai 

Macao Bridge, the new development 

will link Hong Kong with the Greater Bay 

Area to all travelers to/from other parts 

of the world. 

Any thoughts on the entry of Greater 

Bay Airlines to the Hong Kong 

market? 

The approval of Air Operator Certificate 

(AOC) and ATLA license is a big step 

forward, but the pandemic situation 

has slowed down the growth plan and 

launch date of Greater Bay Airlines. 

Given Greater Bay Airlines is a new 

startup, they have the advantage of 

launching a new travel experience 

without burden from the legacy carriers 

under new normal. 

JASG is pleased to be appointed the 

ground handler of Greater Bay Airlines 

in Hong Kong. We will provide full 

ranges of services from passenger, 

baggage, ramp and cargo operations. At 

the preparation stage, both Greater Bay 

Airlines and JASG are exploring further 

opportunities in view of the new travel 

behaviors in the new normal. Greater 

Bay Airlines had operated some cargo 

charters during the pandemic, and JASG 

supported the cargo handling as well. 

> Vivien Lau, Chief Executive, Jardine Aviation Services

18 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# TIACA covers all angles at this 

# year’s Executive Summit 

# What’s the 

# BlueSky 

# Program? 

On 22-23 March, TIACA made its 

return as industry event host with 

the 2022 edition of the trade body’s 

executive summit. The two-day 

conference programme, which was 

held in conjunction with Transport 

Logistics Americas included cluster 

sessions to discuss industry priorities 

across the whole spectrum, including 

industry staff challenges, capacity 

constraints, regulations, innovation, 

and sustainability. 

The labour force challenge seen on the 

ground at airports ran through many 

panels, TIACA noted, as well as people-

first business strategies for growing 

companies, such as diversity and 

inclusion and proper mentoring and 

training to develop positive cultures. 

Regulations also garnered much 

discussion with a call for a distinct 

regulatory regime for all-cargo 

operations. TIACA said the regulatory 

framework needs to be more results-

oriented, flexible, and fast-moving with 

a window of opportunity to influence 

policy with the ICAO Assembly this 

autumn. Members were encouraged 

to contact their national government 

to send coordinated messages in this 

regard, the group noted. 

A session on advanced air mobility, 

meanwhile, put the spotlight on the 

near-future use of drones for air cargo 

operations, with enthusiasm coming 

The BlueSky Program is a tool that the 

air cargo industry can use to track their 

sustainability progress, benchmark 

against peers and accelerate the 

industry’s transformation. 

The program aims to benefit not just 

individual companies, but future 

from the audience. The audience 

during the summit unanimously said 

that TIACA should play a central role 

to raise awareness and drive industry 

readiness to embrace cargo drones. 

On sustainability, the trade group 

received support from Pharma. 

Aero on addressing sustainability 

matters given its growing importance 

to shippers. TIACA also launched 

its BlueSky Programme which will 

serve as the air cargo industry’s first 

validation and verification programme 

partners and the air cargo industry at 

large by providing a common vision, 

transparency and a mechanism to 

demonstrate how businesses can grow 

responsibly, as well as an improved 

image of the air cargo industry. 

The BlueSky program is a multi-tier 

platform that can be renewed every 

two years, which will be launched in 

phases: 

Tier 1:  Assessment guidelines – This 

marks the start of verification and 

validation through awareness and self-

assessment. 

to track sustainability progress, 

improve transparency and drive 

industry transformation. 

The 2021 TIACA Sustainability Awards 

was also featured on the agenda with 

XFret, an innovative in-cabin cargo 

solution, winning the $10,000 cash 

prize. 

The event capped off with a unique 

tour of world-class startups and 

innovative companies in Silicon Valley 

for a glimpse of some new tech, 

including software that can automate 

warehouse inventory management 

and ground support equipment by 

AeroVect, as well as automated cargo 

planes and drones. 

Tier 2:  Desktop verification – This 

includes An online assessment 

and verification of the documents 

provided. A performance score in 

each area will be provided through a 

company dashboard. 

Tier 3:  Onsite validation –This includes 

the desktop verification and an onsite 

independent audit. A performance 

score in each area as well as an 

excellence badge, detailed report with 

recommendations on how to become 

more sustainable will be provided 

through an enhanced company 

dashboard. 

# EVENTS Drone players on the move 

# to usher in new era for air 

# freight and logistics 

> COVER STORY

20 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# COVER  STORY 

# Drone players on the move to usher in new era 

# for air freight and logistics 

The use of drones or unmanned aerial 

vehicles has certainly come a long way. 

From hot air balloons for reconnaissance 

in the late 1800s to remote-controlled 

planes for military purposes, the 

technology has greatly evolved and its 

usage has become widespread across 

different sectors, most notably logistics. 

Across the globe, leading engineers and 

companies are developing all sorts of 

drones for air cargo operations, whether 

for inspection, sorting in fulfilment 

centres, wildlife management or cargo 

transport and delivery. Meanwhile, the 

aviation industry and logistics players are 

keeping close watch on the benefits of 

the unmanned aerial technology when it 

comes to cost and sustainability. 

Some of the use cases that have taken 

off include the use of drones for medical 

missions to remote places but it doesn’t 

stop there. Drone service operator and 

infrastructure developer Skyports has 

been testing ship-to-shore drone delivery 

services in Singapore since early January 

together with major shipping companies 

to prepare for commercial operations. 

Strong investor interest 

Sanjay Suresh, head of business 

development and operations APAC 

at Skyports, said investor interest has 

grown exponentially in the last few 

years, with US$7 billion pouring into the 

industry in 2021, more than double the 

total investment secured by the industry 

in the last decade. 

In March this year, the UK-based startup 

raised US$23 million from non-European 

investors based in Japan, Australia and 

the US. Whilst Skyports is mainly an 

operator and infrastructure developer, 

the company’s vehicle partner 

Wingcopter is moving strides with its 

newest drone technology. 

The German drone developer on 12 May 

announced that the Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) has issued the 

Special Class Airworthiness Criteria 

for the company’s unmanned aircraft, 

as part of its certification process in 

the US. Its Wingcopter 198 is a fixed-

wing and vertical take-off and landing 

(eVTOL) drone, meaning it has both 

the advantages of landing without the 

need for major infrastructure and flying 

forward like an airplane. The drone can 

carry 6 kilos and is the first of its kind to 

offer a triple-drop mechanism, meaning 

it can deliver up to three parcels to three 

different locations on the same flight. 

Weighing the options 

Whilst Wingcopter’s payload would 

limit its use to delivering packages, 

spare parts, food, or groceries, other 

drone operators and developers are 

working on expanding their capabilities. 

In Malaysia, Pen Aviation is working in 

partnership with the French company 

Cavok-UAS to develop drones that can 

transport shipments weighing 3 kilos to 

a tonne. 

In October last year, the company 

signed an MoU with DHL Express to 

demonstrate the commercial viability 

of its drone product Pen55V for first-

mile to last-mile port logistics to serve 

the maritime industry. The companies, 

working alongside Raya Airways, will aim 

to certify and utilise the medium-sized 

cargo drone, which resembles a remote 

control helicopter and can carry up to 12 

> Skyports has been testing ship-to-shore drone delivery services with shipping companies in Singapore to prepare for commercial operations.

21 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

> Dronamics’ Black Swan UAV can carry up to 350 kilos with a flight range of 2,500 kilometres

kilos, to move shipments from the cargo 

ship deck to the port and vice versa 

round the clock. 

Serving the middle mile, drone developer 

Dronamics, with main hubs at Sofia 

airport in Bulgaria, is moving forward 

with the commercial deployment of its 

Black Swan product with plans to start 

commercial flights in Europe this year. 

Amongst the new technologies, Black 

Swan, which took 7 years to develop, 

offers payload up to 350 kilos and flight 

distance of 2,500 kilometres. Dronamics 

said it chose to start with a certified 

ROTAX, a widely used aviation engine 

and known to regulators, that will 

allow the company to enter the market 

now instead of waiting for electric or 

hydrogen engines to catch up. 

Getting certification 

According to Svilen Rangelov, company 

CEO, obtaining authorization for 

operations is now the main hurdle 

for any drone logistics operator. The 

company plans to operate ‘low-risk 

routes’, flying primarily over sea, and 

the ambition is to get more flight hours 

and connect regional centers across 

countries. 

“Since 2021 EASA has pioneered the 

unified drone regulations across the EU 

that is a cornerstone framework that 

sets out a clear path to authorization for 

us and other drone delivery platforms. 

We hope that once more and more 

operators start flying in Europe, civil 

aviation authorities across the world 

like the FAA in the US and CASA in 

Australia will take note and adopt a 

similar approach by establishing such 

frameworks following the European 

know-how,” Rangelov adds. 

More recently, the company expanded 

its droneport network in Europe with 

the addition of regional airports in 

Mannheim City, Germany and Odense, 

Denmark, which could fare well for the 

certification process. This network now 

covers 42 locations in 14 European 

countries to enable same-day flights. 

Within the broad applications for same-

day delivery, the company is focused 

on three specific business cases in 

e-commerce, pharmaceuticals and 

spare parts delivery. “We operate on a 

service model where we sell blocked 

space capacity on our cargo drones to 

logistics companies or directly to cargo 

owners to ship between the droneport 

networks we build,” Rangelov noted. 

For Pen Aviation, the company treats the 

drone development program similar to 

manned aircraft, with different phases 

of tests, certification, then operation, 

commercialization and industrialization. 

“This process allows us to address 

the requirements of the various 

authorities, whether in Malaysia or in 

other countries,” Laetitia Boura, head of 

special projects, told Payload Asia.. 

More interest 

With the recovery in passenger travel 

still hanging in the balance, the prospect 

of drones ushers in a new era for airlines 

that are looking for a less costly and 

more sustainable way to earn revenue 

in the future. In South Korea, flagship 

carrier Korean Air plans to develop a 

multi-purpose hybrid cargo drone in the 

next four years that can accomodate 

250 kilos for both civilian and military 

purposes. “The cargo UAV will be 

developed as a VTOL type, in a modular 

way so that it can be used in various ways 

according to its different purposes,” the 

spokesperson told Payload Asia. 

In Japan, Wingcopter secured a

partnership with ANA and drone 

orders from general trading company 

Itochu. The company said the country 

is a very important market, citing 

the government’s very progressive 

approach of integrating drones into 

everyday life, especially for those living in 

rural communities. 

Elsewhere, Wingcopter secured deals 

from Spright in the US worth $16 million, 

whilst Synerjet in Latin America has 

ordered a ‘significant’ number of drones 

to resell or lease in their markets. Most 

recent was the order of seventeen 

Wingcopter 198s from German logistics 

company Zeitfracht and its subsidiary 

German Airways with options to 

purchase another 115 until 2023. 

Collaboration 

Whilst progress is clearly evident, 

Rangelov said there is still a lot to be 

done in every location and country 

and this involves private and public 

collaboration. “We aim to operate in 

terms of collaborating with the local CAA, 

ATC operators and airport authorities in 

order to get this new set of operations as 

something normal at an airport.” 

“We are really targeting the so-called 

‘ghost’ airports that currently serve little 

to no air traffic but can act as a vital 

transportation hub for the regional 

economies, effectively offering a cost-

effective alternative to trucking and 

offering the speed and connectivity of air 

transportation. 

In such cases, he says, the company 

needs to collaborate with local 

authorities for securing the necessary 

infrastructure for transforming a runway 

into a droneport as well as sharing the 

business opportunities amongst the 

local industry. 

Skyports said constant collaboration 

within the industry will play a key part of 

scaling drone services. In March 2022, it 

announced a partnership with Australia-

based vehicle OEM Swoop Aero and 

German tech company BD Rowa to 

integrate autonomous air logistics in the 

pharmaceutical industry. 

“Progress across the industry and 

markets are at different stages of 

maturation, and we are actively engaged 

in a multitude of partnerships worldwide 

to develop plans for operations, conduct 

trials, and eventually scale up these 

operations and establish permanent 

logistics facilities and infrastructure,” the 

company said. 

# COVER  STORY 22 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# EXCLUSIVE 

# Rebranded Challenge Group shows off 

# its aviation and air cargo expertise 

With years of experience in air cargo 

and dedicated assets spanning the 

air cargo supply chain under its belt, 

Challenge Group is out to make a 

bold statement and rightfully so. 

Headed by CEO Yossi Shoukroun, 

the group is looking to contribute 

proactively and tangibly to the 

future of the industry as a member 

of TIACA. 

Challenge Group has more than 

four decades of cargo airline 

experience and almost 25 years 

in cargo handling. Operating out 

of Liege airport, it also provides 

extensive road feeder services and 

other aviation expertise, including 

aircraft and parts leasing and line 

maintenance. 

The group’s fleet includes B747-

400Fs, with four 767-300BDSF 

and four 777-300ERSF converted 

freighters expected over the next 

two years. With 65 percent of its 

business dealing with non-standard 

cargo, Challenge has its fair share 

of dedicated solutions, including a 

52-tonne high-loader at Liege for 

outsized freight. It also manages the 

Horse Inn hotel where more than 

250 horses transited on their way to 

the Tokyo Olympics last year. 

Payload Asia talks to CEO Yossi 

Shoukroun to find out more about 

Challenge Group’s recent rebranding, 

the company’s plans, as well as the 

current nuisances of handling and 

flying all kinds of commodities in a 

disrupted market. 

Can you share with us the 

story behind Challenge Group’s 

rebranding? Tell us about certain 

aviation assets that you own. 

To offer our customers tailor-

made end-to-end solutions, from 

handling to air and ground logistics, 

aviation services and a wide range 

of ancillary services, it was decided 

to create a dedicated management 

team to better overlook, harmonize 

and coordinate all the activities 

performed by different entities: this 

is how Challenge Group started. 

Currently under the Challenge Group 

umbrella you can find 3 airlines (CAL 

Cargo Airlines in Israel, Challenge 

Airlines in Belgium, and Challenge Air 

Cargo in Malta), a ground handling 

company (Challenge Handling in 

Liege, Belgium), a European road 

feeder provider (Challenge Logistics 

in Liege, Belgium), an aircraft and 

parts leasing division (Challenge 

Aviation), and a comprehensive line 

maintenance provider (Challenge 

Technic). 

What’s the market situation like 

for big widebody freighters given 

what happened in Ukraine? 

The airfreight business will 

continue to play a key role 

in supporting world trade, 

and the more extreme the 

situation becomes, the 

more the world economy 

understands its value. 23 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# EXCLUSIVE 

Obviously, any extreme situation 

forces an organization to review 

its strategy when dealing with a

disruption: a sudden gap in overall 

airfreight capacity, mainly focused 

on specific trade lanes, likewise 

high demand for urgent and special 

commodities to supply specific 

markets. 

Have you been able to secure capacity 

for outsized cargo shipments? 

Our core business is based on 

verticals and special products, 

therefore we have been able to 

secure new business to support the 

industry and mitigate some of the 

capacity shortage resulting from the 

current geopolitical situation. 

How did the company perform 

over the last 2 years? What’s the 

outlook for air cargo? 

We have experienced two 

exceptional years in terms of overall 

performance, fleet utilization, 

destinations reached, customers 

served and tonnage transported. 

When it comes to the future of air 

cargo, we deeply believe that the 

airfreight business will continue to 

play a key role in supporting world 

trade, and the more extreme the 

situation becomes, the more the 

world economy understands its 

value. Air cargo is here to stay and 

can be trusted. 

What would be the advantages 

of being part of wider industry 

groups like TIACA? 

We are driven by one principle on 

which we have based our vision: the 

shared economy in a collaborative 

environment. We therefore 

expect TIACA, as a main industry 

organization, to be the key catalyst 

in connecting stakeholders to build 

a sustainable business environment. 

How would you describe your 

network strategy? What are the 

short and long-term plans? 

At Challenge Group, we have a clear 

growth plan and roadmap that calls 

for a tripling of our fleet over the 

next 4 to 5 years. 

In the short term, we will continue to 

strengthen our presence in the US, 

Middle East and Far East markets. 

But when it comes to the long term, 

we are willing to export our success 

story of a centralized European 

hub and strategic partnerships to 

complement our network on other 

continents as well, starting with 

North America. 

Was there any challenge that you 

had to decline? 

Unfortunately, we have had to decline 

some requests due to the current 

geopolitical situation and related 

restrictions, but don’t forget that our 

motto is “challenge accepted” and 

therefore, our attitude is to never 

give up and never say no! 

Which factors do you think will add 

pressure to freight and logistics in 

the current environment? 

The key concept here is the ability of 

our community to understand the 

breadth of change in world trade and 

the capability to quickly adapt the 

business model to sudden changes 

and uncertain future. 

What are the challenges for 

forwarders and logistics players? 

For us, the real challenge for the 

logistics industry is to adopt a

multimodal approach to the supply 

chain and be able to develop 

alternative solutions from origin to 

destination based on a variety of 

different services. 

We have had to decline some 

requests due to the current 

geopolitical situation and 

related restrictions, but our 

attitude is to never give up 

and never say ‘no’. 

> Yossi Shoukroun, CEO of Challenge Group

24 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# INSIGHTS 

# Supplying 250 million 

# antigen test kits in a 

# turbulent market 

Over the past few years, the ongoing challenges 

confronted across the logistics industry have continued 

to test supply chain resilience. 

Tasks previously considered standard processes by the 

teams on the ground are now significant challenges. 

This new market environment brings more variables 

and complications than ever before in the history of 

logistics. Therefore, transparent communication with 

customers is vital when recommending how to build a 

more resilient and flexible supply chain, as it ultimately 

impacts delivery deadlines or, worst case, availability 

for consumers. This is now the critical difference in 

customer success. 

Navigating market turbulence by air 

Entrusted with undertaking a critical project during 

this period, Scan Global Logistics (SGL) was involved in 

launching the antigen test kits supplied from China into 

the Australian market. The task was to build a solution 

that could supply approximately 250 million test kits 

and personal protective equipment (PPE) to meet the 

contractual deadlines across the country. 

Jason Wilson, head of products, Asia, at SGL, described 

a solution in a complex market: “With flexibility and 

resilience as crucial factors in any solution design for 

our customers, we constructed a transparent program, 

robust yet agile enough to handle the volatile market 

environment. A control tower of key stakeholders 

supervised daily activities 24/7. It monitored the potential 

risks in China, Asia, and Australia, from the factory floor 

to the destination and across all touchpoints in the 

possible 30 operational routes designed in the mission. 

The robust communication process between our core 

teams ensured they kept ahead of the risks and made 

alternate arrangements with all critical partners in 

advance—warehouse, transport, and airlines.” 25 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# INSIGHTS 

A strict zero-Covid policy has brought 

significant disruption that has made 

the movement of aircraft, people, and 

haulage more challenging. 

Coordinating 300 charter flights 

Over 90 days, just short of 10,000 tonnes of antigen 

test kits were successfully handled from six airports in 

China to five cities in Australia, playing a part in helping 

meet the Covid-19 testing demands of the Australian 

population. The solution required coordinating 

around 300 charter flights in one of the most complex 

environments the industry has ever faced. 

Jason Wilson explains the challenges the team 

encountered in delivering on its customer’s demands. 

“To provide some perspective insight into the challenges 

we faced, you only need to focus on China. A strict zero-

Covid policy has brought significant disruption that has 

made the movement of aircraft, people, and haulage 

more challenging.” 

“As Covid-19 case numbers rose, we saw cities locked 

down at a moment’s notice which influenced factory 

production output and operational practices from all 

vendors involved. As more workers got confined to 

their homes, the restrictions on employee movement 

affected processes that would normally enable the 

export of these products. The situation heightened 

further as the project moved through the local, new 

year holidays,” Jason continues. 

Disruptions continue to appear 

With standard operations for most organisations 

involved not possible, contingency plans were regularly 

introduced. Residences and buildings were locked 

down according to the Covid risks identified. At one 

point, one of SGL’s teams had to isolate for days in the 

physical office as the building got locked from a case 

identified on a lower floor. 

Collecting goods or processing them in warehouses 

faced scrutiny as logistics parks were restricted. Drivers, 

perhaps the most impacted overall, faced many testing 

requirements and route diversions that squeezed 

transport companies’ resources and met concerns from 

staff who risked becoming isolated from their families. 

Coordinating contingency plans for cargo re-routing to 

alternate provinces became a significant challenge and 

critical function as aircraft charter flights, scheduled in 

advance, continued to arrive as planned. 

Managing with airline restrictions 

It wasn’t smooth sailing for airline partners either, as 

Australia’s restricted international border dramatically 

decreased flight schedules, and the ability to introduce 

additional capacity was more complex than it was 

perceived to be initially. As with all vendors involved, the 

forwarder’s partnership-oriented approach ensured 

airlines were part of the decision-making process. 

“Their input helped coordinate routings that generated 

the best opportunity for customer success. Together 

we were able to navigate the various Covid protocols 

on loading aircraft in China and the congestion faced 

upon arrival in Australia,” noted Jason. 

Keeping products moving 

Within SGL, resilience and flexibility are not just 

about processes; they’re about ensuring employees 

have the necessary support. Rickard Ingvarsson, CEO 

in Asia, comments: “Our virtues and culture, built 

on empowerment, well-being, and a human-first 

entrepreneurial approach, set the scene to help the 

entire team overcome the seemingly endless supply 

of challenges to keep the products moving. Our front 

line employees, empowered to make instant decisions, 

helped navigate the potential threats in real-time 

without delay. In contrast, our focus on well-being 

helped ensure necessary support was in place each 

day to the front line, which continued to perform an 

exceptional job for our customers.” 

Jason continues: ”With restrictions moving by the day, 

we have had an open dialogue with our customers on 

moving schedules and making decisions to divert cargo 

as risks got identified. While this may have increased 

costs or time, it ultimately helped eliminate a potential 

hazard that may have impacted the deadlines and 

product supply to the public.” 

”Our ability to build resilience and flexibility into our 

processes ultimately allowed SGL to play an essential 

part in providing critical equipment to the Australian 

population. A potential once in a lifetime solution that 

we are proud of our teams for being able to support 

and successfully execute together,” Wilson concludes. 26 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# INSIGHTS 

# Project cargo specialist 

# deugro on securing air 

# capacity at a time of 

# disruption 

Working as a key logistics provider for the energy 

sector and related industries, freight forwarder deugro 

is no stranger to the heavy transport of outsized 

project cargo by land, sea or air. In an interview, Pavel 

Kuznetsov, head of air chartering at deugro, gives 

a rundown on the nuisances of handling and flying 

mega shipments by air amidst transport curbs and 

congestions across every mode. 

Can you give us a brief description of deugro? 

What’s your specialty and where do you operate? 

deugro is the industry-leading specialized project 

freight forwarder with a global network of offices. 

Offering complex and non-standard air freight 

solutions as well as air chartering are just two of our 

key competencies. 

Given the Russia and Shanghai situation, have 

you been able to secure capacity for transporting 

outsized cargo shipments by air? What’s the best 

way to transport project cargo right now? 

The air freight market has experienced a substantial 

impact on both scheduled as well as charter flights due 

to the situation in the Ukraine. 

Used to having a fair share of the international air 

freight market, Russian carriers are now unable to 

Interview with deugro  operate in many key regions, meaning the number 

of options available to clients is lower. Besides that, 

many cargo and passenger airlines have had to reroute 

their flights around the Russian and Ukrainian air 

space. Some flights on the EU–Asia–EU lane have been 

canceled altogether. By operating these same flights 

with longer routes, fuel consumption increases and 

When there are only a handful of 

aircraft in the whole world that can 

do the job of transporting certain 

out-of-gauge equipment, you need to 

make decisions quickly to secure the 

required aircraft. 

> Pavel Kuznetsov, head of air chartering at deugro

27 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# INSIGHTS 

When the market gets challenging like 

it is now, I see it as an opportunity 

for specialized companies like ours to 

demonstrate our expertise and ability 

to think outside of the box. 

with it, the prices in general. All of this has taken its toll. 

The niche of heavy and oversized air freight has been 

impacted the most. The pool of Antonov and Ilyushin 

aircraft still available on the market has become even 

more limited than it used to be. The iconic Antonov-225 

Mriya (which means “Dream” in Ukrainian), the biggest 

freighter aircraft ever built and literally a dream of 

everyone dealing with air freight and air chartering, 

was tragically destroyed. There will be—in the near 

future—no substitute for this aircraft with comparable 

capabilities. 

These developments make finding a suitable solution 

for heavy lift air freight even more challenging. While 

the landscape has changed fundamentally, we kept 

working closely with our partners and were able to 

identify alternative options for our clients. When there 

are only a handful of aircraft in the whole world that 

can do the job of transporting certain out-of-gauge 

equipment, you of course need to be able to make 

decisions quickly to secure the required aircraft. 

Leveraging the relationships we have built for years, 

coupled with our own in-house understanding of 

the airline business, has helped us tremendously to 

successfully navigate and stay on top of the situation to 

secure both needed capacity and favorable conditions 

for the needs of our clients. 

As for the Shanghai situation, with the lockdown there 

the shortage of flights and capacity has not been the 

only problem—trucking the cargo to and from the 

airport has also become a challenge. And the Shanghai 

lockdown is not an isolated case; we are seeing similar 

dynamics and challenges developing at other airports 

where, with the local growth in COVID-19 cases, the 

carriers are canceling flights or have stopped accepting 

new bookings. The only solution here is constantly 

keeping an eye on those developments and routing the 

shipment through alternative airports. 

When the market gets challenging like it is now, I see it 

as an opportunity for specialized companies like ours to 

demonstrate our expertise and ability to think outside 

of the box to offer reliable solutions to our clients. 

Which regions or sectors do you think will see huge 

demand for deugro’s services? 

If we talk about the demand side in the current 

situation, of course we have seen a reduction of 

activities involving air freight in the projects related 

to Russia. But at the same time, we are seeing strong 

demand in other regions, for example for projects in 

the Middle East and India. With energy resources being 

a hot topic in the world, I am sure we will continue to 

see a steady need for air freight solutions to transport 

outsized equipment for this market. 

Which factors do you think will add pressure to 

freight and logistics in the current environment? 

Do you think air cargo will sustain its momentum 

over the next 12 months? 

Despite current impacts related to the situation in 

the Ukraine as well as the lockdowns in China, which 

certainly have an influence on capacity and pricing, I 

think the air cargo market will continue to remain 

strong over the next 12 months. We will continue to see 

interest from clients in air freight, since ocean freight 

will continue to contend with its own disruptions. So, 

even with all the factors adding pressure on the supply 

side of the cargo market, it will remain competitive 

enough to be in strong demand. 28 APRIL-MAY 2022 |  www.payloadasia.com 

# Penang freight forwarders host 

# APAC general meeting in July 

For the first time in 2 years, the 

Federation of Asia Pacific Aircargo 

Associations, or FAPAA, is proud 

to announce that it will be holding 

a face-to-face general meeting in 

Penang on 15–16 July 2022 at the 

Golden Sands Hotel onBatu Ferranghi. 

The Penang Freight Forwarders 

Association (PFFA) will be the host of 

this year’s meeting, which expects to 

gather major associations across Asia 

Pacific to discuss important industry 

issues. In an interview, Paul Golland, 

chairman of FAPAA and vice chair of 

the International Freight Forwarders 

and Customs Brokers Association of 

Australia (IFCBAA), gave us a rundown 

of the comeback meeting, as well as 

his take on the air freight industry in 

Asia Pacific. 

Can you give us your outlook for 

freight and logistics across Asia 

Pacific? 

There does seem to be a slow but 

steady increase in airfreight across the 

Asia Pacific region but this has fallen 

behind where most thought it would be 

due to Omicron and the conflict in the 

Ukraine. The latest IATA figures show 

a 2.7 percent growth in January 2022 

YoY. Trade and economical growth 

continues to expand but consumer 

confidence is easing. More flights are 

being canceled which reduces the 

airfreight capacity when it should be 

growing more. 

Which countries do you think will 

see more logistics infrastructure 

developments across the region? 

Why so? 

Those countries that are relaxing their 

border controls will benefit more than 

those keeping restrictions in place. 

Australia, after having some of the 

toughest border controls, is reopening 

to the world and seeing more tourists, 

flight capacity which help to increase 

its economy. The Asia Pacific region 

must follow Europe in living with Covid 

but reducing the disruption to people, 

travel , and economies. 

What are the challenges for freight 

forwarders and logistics right now? 

Where are the opportunities? 

The biggest challenge at the minute is 

getting space on flights to move their 

customers’ cargo. Freight is moving 

from other parts of the world into the 

Asian hubs but then being held due to 

lack of available space to complete the 

last leg of its journey. This lack of space 

has also seen an increase in freight 

rates throughout the world. Lack of 

staff at airlines, terminals, warehouses 

etc are also causing challenges for 

freight forwarders often meaning 

cargo misses its connections or is 

delayed in check in and availability at 

destination. 

Finally we are seeing the introduction 

of shipping lines moving into the 

airfreight business and threatening 

what have up to now been freight 

forwarder markets. Opportunities will 

exist for those who can react quickly 

and efficiently once the effects of the 

pandemic reduce further. Freight 

forwarders have to ensure they have 

trained staff in place to meet customer 

needs in the future. 

How important are trade bodies like 

FAAPA and IFCBAA in addressing 

industry issues? 

Trade bodies are vitally important 

to industry as they allow individual 

# INDUSTRY  CORNER 

members to have a voice that reaches 

national and international bodies as 

well as governments. FAPAA does 

this one step higher in that it is made 

of country associations rather than 

individual members. It speaks as a 

single voice for the airfreight industry 

in the Asia Pacific, the biggest region 

movers of airfreight in the world. 

It looks to deal with Macro issues 

covering the whole region. 

My association IFCCBA represents the 

interests of Australians forwarders 

and brokers domestically and 

feeds international issues on to 

organisations, such as FAPAA, who 

then refer them to the likes of 

IATA. In this way, we get the best 

representation for all our members 

on international issues. 

How many associations have 

confirmed their attendance for this 

year’s AGM? What can participants 

expect at the event? 

So far we have Malaysia, Australia, 

Sri Lanka, India, Indonesia, Vietnam, 

Singapore, Pakistan and Taiwan 

attending and we are waiting to hear 

from another 5-6 countries depending 

on their government’s approach 

to Covid. We intend to offer online 

access to those unable to attend 

personally. Participants can expect to 

discuss all aspects of the international 

airfreight business, training, what 

other member countries are doing 

and their issues and hopefully hear 

from the likes of IATA and carrier staff. 

In essence we want delegates to come 

away able to go back to their members 

and advise them on the trends for 

future airfreight development. 

Why should companies attend the 

upcoming event? What are the 

benefits of being part of a wider 

trade body? 

As FAPAA is an association of 

country associations, and individual 

companies do not really attend. They 

rely on their elected representatives 

to put their issues forward at an 

international forum with access to 

senior organisations they would not 

normally get to talk with, as individuals. 

This is the biggest advantage of 

being part of a bigger trade body as 

it allows every member of a national 

organisation to have a voice at the 

international table. Annual Global Meeting 

# Neutral Air Cargo Logistics Conference 

# www.neutralairpartner.com 

Media partner 

# BALI, Indonesia 

# 19-23 September 2022 

# NETWORKING JUST GOT AN UPGRADE The 9th Edition of the Payload Asia Awards is coming in 2022 

## Interested in being a part of celebrating the Air Cargo Industry? Get in touch with us: mktg@harvest-info.com
