Title: Republicans’ Landmark Bill Gets to Work for South Dakotans

URL Source: https://www.thune.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/op-eds?ID=D5AF113F-43E1-4EBB-86D0-6749F181346B

Markdown Content:
By Sen. John Thune
------------------

#### January 9,2026

Last year, Republicans followed through on our promises to the American people by passing landmark legislation to support safer streets, put more money in hardworking Americans’ pockets, and create new opportunities to get ahead. The Working Families Tax Cuts that Republicans passed last July contains a decade of legislating in a single bill, and it will make a generational impact that the American people will begin to feel this year.

First and foremost is that the Working Families Tax Cuts delivered permanent tax relief for hardworking Americans, preventing a $2,500 tax hike on a typical South Dakota family beginning this year. As South Dakotans prepare to file their taxes, they can plan on taking advantage of a larger standard deduction, and seniors can claim an additional bonus deduction on top of that. We raised the child tax credit to $2,200 per child, which working families will be able to claim on this year’s tax return. Workers who earn tips and overtime pay won’t have to pay federal taxes on that income either. And all of that adds up to bigger tax refunds for a lot of South Dakotans in April.

Republicans’ landmark legislation also made a generational investment in rural health care. In the last two decades, more than 100 hospitals have closed across rural America. But thanks to the Working Families Tax Cuts, help is on the way. This bill created a $50 billion Rural Health Transformation Program to address the rural health care crisis. Instead of a top-down approach centered in Washington, we gave states the resources and freedom to find solutions to their unique challenges. And in South Dakota, that funding will go toward creating regional hubs for emergency services, a major investment in telehealth, and to bolster our rural health care workforce, among other priorities.

This bill also made a significant investment in public safety and national security. It included funding for state and local law enforcement agencies, including efforts to combat violent crime and drug trafficking. It made a generational investment in border security, supporting the hiring of new enforcement agents, finishing the border wall, and deploying technology and resources to the southern border. And it supported much-needed efforts to modernize our military and ensure that America’s men and women in uniform have the very best capabilities to defend our national security from whatever threats may arise.

The contents and impact of this legislation are significant, and there’s much more I could say about it. I could talk about its sizeable investment in the programs that farmers and ranchers depend on; or tax policies that help small businesses grow; or its provisions addressing waste, fraud, and abuse in federal programs. This bill is filled with wins for the American people, and I can’t wait for that story to unfold in South Dakota and in every corner of America.
