Title: Peculiar deep-sea creature with huge eyes discovered 3,628m down off Californian coast

URL Source: https://www.discoverwildlife.com/animal-facts/marine-animals/bumpy-snailfish-california

Published Time: 2025-09-08T13:00:00.000Z

Markdown Content:
**Deep-sea researchers have helped to make another amazing (and adorable) discovery in waters around 62 miles off the Californian coast.**

In 2019,MBARI sent a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) 3,268 metres deep in the Monterey Canyon and came across a cute pink snailfish with big eyes and a tadpole-shaped body with bumps all over swimming just above the seafloor.

Now, collaborators from the State University of New York at Geneseo (SUNY Geneseo), the University of Montana and the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa have described the charming fish as a bumpy snailfish (_Careproctus colliculi_). It is one of three new species.

*   Drone spots more than 1,000 "ghost-like" animals off Mexican coast
*   “Probably ate it headfirst”: the day experts discovered what was inside this deep-sea fish’s bulging belly

A bumpy snailfish (_Careproctus colliculi_) observed with MBARI’s remotely operated vehicle (ROV)_Doc Ricketts_ in Monterey Canyon at a depth of approximately 3,300 metres. This species is one of three deep-sea snailfishes newly described by SUNY Geneseo researchers and their collaborators. Credit: 2019 MBARI(Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute)

*   15 weirdest sea creatures
*   How deep is the deepest part of the ocean?

“MBARI seeks to make ocean exploration more accessible by sharing our data and technology with our peers in the science community,” says Steven Haddock, senior scientist at MBARI who led the research expedition that encountered the bumpy snailfish.

“We welcomed the opportunity to collaborate with researchers from SUNY Geneseo to expand our understanding of life in the deep ocean, especially since documenting deep-sea biodiversity is critical to detecting any changes that may be occurring in this environment.”

MBARI sampled the 9.2cm snail to find out more about it. It wasn’t like other deep-sea snailfishes that they usually find in this region so they got in touch with deep sea expert Mackenzie Gerringer, associate professor at SUNY Geneseo, to help with the analysis.

Working with a team of experts, they determined that the little snailfish as well as two others collected during different expeditions – the dark snailfish (_Careproctus yanceyi_) and the sleek snailfish (_Paraliparis em_) – were all new to science. Their findings are published in the scientific journal _Ichthyology and Herpetology_

“The deep sea is home to an incredible diversity of organisms and a truly beautiful array of adaptations,” says Gerringer. “Our discovery of not one, but three, new species of snailfishes is a reminder of how much we have yet to learn about life on Earth and of the power of curiosity and exploration.”

There are more than 400 different species of snailfishes around the world in both deep and shallow water. With the ocean under threat from climate change, pollution and deep-sea mining, researchers around the world are trying to find out more about these mesmerising creatures – and others like them – before it’s too late.

“Each discovery is a new piece of the puzzle,” says MBARI in a statement

**More amazing wildlife stories from around the world**

*   'Ghost sharks' are lurking off the coast of Washington – and they have teeth growing out of their foreheads
*   "Large, unidentified creatures" reported off Mexican coast. After long wait, the mysterious animals are finally identified
*   Deep-sea submersible films thousands of bizarre red animals 1,500m deep off coast of Argentina
*   In 2020, humans suddenly vanished from a popular bay in Hawai‘i. What happened next was remarkable
