Title: Shedding Light on the Tragic Toll of Mental Illness: The Judds Share Their Loss in a New Way

URL Source: https://www.healthcentral.com/condition/depression/naomi-judd-death-mental-illness-suicide

Published Time: 2022-05-13T14:04:15.000Z

Markdown Content:
(Image: Getty)

*   A Pain too Great
*   A Powerful Word Choice
*   The Stigma of Mental Illness
*   Myths About Suicide
*   Working Toward Healing
*   Support for Families
*   Warning Signs of Suicide

On May 2, Ashley Judd and Wynonna Judd announced the death of their mother, country singer Naomi Judd. She was 76 at the time of her death. In their joint statement, they said, “Today we sisters experienced a tragedy. We lost our beautiful mother to the disease of mental illness. We are shattered. We are navigating profound grief and know that as we loved her, she was loved by the public. We are in unknown territory.”

As a society, we are used to hearing that a person died of an illness or disease like cancer, heart disease, or a stroke. But it is less common for mental illness to be the reason given for someone’s death. Sometimes suicide is listed as the cause but given the stigma still associated with it (which can be especially challenging for family members of the deceased), suicide is sometimes left out of obituaries and other death notices.

Naomi Judd died on April 30, 2022—one day before she was to be inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. She was 76 at the time of her death. Less than two weeks later, Ashley Judd said in a May 12th interview on _Good Morning America_ that her mother’s depression was so pervasive, that even the high regard she had from her peers and countless adoring fans “couldn’t overcome the lie the disease told her.”

She also shared that her mother used a firearm to take her own life. Ashley, who discovered her mother’s body, added she is coping with “both grief and trauma,” as a result.

Death from a gunshot wound is sadly far too common in this country. Linking the cause of death to mental illness—regardless of the method used—however, is somewhat remarkable. (In 2020, CDC data revealed that 45,222 people died from gun-related injuries in the US.)

According to the CDC, 54% of people who have died by suicide did not have a known mental health condition. That means that 46% did have identified mental health issues (and probably more had mental illness but had not been diagnosed at the time of death.) Naomi was open about her long-time struggles with mental health. In her 2016 book, _River of Time; My Descent into Depression and How I Emerged with Hope_, Naomi wrote candidly about her battle with severe depression and anxiety. She also wrote about her suicidal ideation.

The choice by the Judd sisters to give the reason for Naomi’s death as mental illness and not suicide is a powerful one.

Nathaniel Wade, PhD, licensed psychologist and a Professor of Psychology as well as Director of Training at Iowa State University, explains, “In some contexts naming the cause of death ‘_suicide_’ might be used to place more blame on the victim and avoid the idea that the person was struggling with a mental illness that created the suicidal behaviors. From this perspective, some might want to highlight the cause of death as _mental illness_ to raise awareness of the illness aspect of suicidal thoughts and behavior.”

While there have been strides in mental health awareness and many more people have chosen to be open about their struggles, there is still more work to be done to eradicate the stigma. Kymberlee M. O’Brien, MEd, PhD, Assistant Professor of Physiological Psychology/Neuroscience at Rhode Island College, says, “We are in a public health crisis. Having open conversations about the comorbid disorders (such as mental illnesses) that can lead to suicide. The way to destigmatize mental illness is to stop staying silent about it.”

Another effective way to reduce the stigma of mental illness is through education. Dr. Wade explains, “For society-level change, some have used social marketing and communication strategies to help change attitudes and behaviors related to mental illness. This includes information about mental illness (i.e., psychotic people are much more likely to be the victims of aggression than perpetrators) and helpful ways to interact with loved ones who have a mental illness.”

In a 2018 letter for _People magazine_, Naomi, an active mental health advocate, wrote, “For everyone mourning the death of someone who committed suicide, an inevitable question arises: Why did this happen?

Unfortunately, we don’t have very good answers. We do know that suicidal behavior accompanies many behavioral brain disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and depression. Suicide is actually one of the leading causes of preventable death among these mental illnesses.”

But just because suicide is preventable does not mean that a person who dies by suicide is inherently weak or selfish or even that they want to end their life. In that same 2018 letter, Naomi stated, "Nobody can understand it unless you’ve been there.”

As explained by Kristen Fuller, MD in a 2020 post for the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), “Typically, people do not die by suicide because they do not want to live—people die by suicide because they want to end their suffering. These individuals are suffering so deeply that they feel helpless and hopeless. Individuals who experience suicidal ideations do not do so by choice. They are not simply _‘thinking of themselves’_, but rather they are going through a very serious mental health symptom due to either mental illness or a difficult life situation.”

When a person has an illness like cancer, there may be treatment options and testing to evaluate how a person is responding to their current protocol. Similarly, there are treatments for a mental health illness (such as talk therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and medication), and progress can be monitored. Wade explains, “There are ways to track improvement, but the tools are heavily on client/person self-report of such things as mood, thoughts, and behaviors. Therefore trust with the provider becomes very important so that people feel they can share honestly what their experiences are. There are many well-designed measures, questionnaires, and interview protocols to get at mental health progress. These can be very helpful for tracking a person’s progress.”

It is important to remember that even though treatments are available, it can be difficult for someone dealing with a mental health issue to get the help they need. O’Brien says, “A person experiencing a mental health crisis is already experiencing distress. They are in emotional pain, possible physical pain, possible disordered thinking and exhaustion – they may not have the energy to find a therapist or go to their appointments. Loved ones can help by offering their support to a person in crisis including seeking out a therapist, reminding them about appointments and offering to go with them. You also want to make sure person in distress is managing their basic life needs such as eating well and getting enough sleep.”

As the Judd sisters acknowledged in their post, losing someone you love to mental illness is devastating. More so than other illnesses, there may be intense guilt felt by those left behind who think they may have been able to do more and possibly prevent the outcome. Wade says, “Some of the better ways of dealing with it include talking openly with trusted people, seeing a mental health provider, reading experiences others have had, joining support groups, being authentic with one’s experience and letting the experience be present without having to _‘_fix it’ right away, journaling, and acknowledging the need to take care of and be patient with oneself.”

The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention lists what to say if you are worried about someone and think they might be thinking about suicide. This advice includes:

*   Talk to them in private

*   Listen to their story

*   Tell them you care about them

*   Ask directly if they are thinking about suicide (you will not be giving them the idea)

*   Encourage them to seek treatment or contact their physician

*   Avoid debating the value of life, minimizing their problems, or giving advice

*   Wade says, “It is important to speak about suicide to avoid euphemisms that can make suicide more taboo. If we openly discuss suicide, it might lower its stigma and help other people who have struggled with suicidal thoughts.”

Remember that anyone, regardless of how good their life looks on the outside, can be struggling internally. O’Brien explains, “We are all guilty of presentation bias. We can look at a friend or family member or a celebrity like Naomi and think, ‘_They have it all because of what we see on the outside_.’ But you can never assume a person’s mental health. We need to have honest, open conversations about how we are doing and be willing to listen to others without judgment.”

_If you are in crisis, call_ _800-273-TALK (8255) on text_ _TALK to 741741_ _._ _Starting July 16, 2022, callers can just dial 988 and be connected to the hotline anywhere in the US. It is staffed 24/7. There is also a chat feature available._

© 2025 HealthCentral LLC. All rights reserved.
