Title: Database Finder

URL Source: https://lib.guides.umd.edu/az.php

Markdown Content:
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
Skip to Main Content
RESEARCH GUIDES
UMD LibrariesResearch GuidesDatabase Finder
Database Finder
Find the best library databases for your research.
You are in the Right Place!  Find the best library databases for your research. 
Database Subject Filter
All Subjects
Aerospace Engineering (26)
African American and Africana Studies (80)
Agriculture (14)
American Studies (71)
Animal and Avian Sciences (8)
Anthropology (44)
Arabic Studies (33)
Architecture (52)
Art (26)
Art History and Archaeology (38)
Asian American Studies (13)
Astronomy (24)
Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences (24)
Biochemistry (23)
Bioengineering (35)
Biology (26)
Business (50)
Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics (8)
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (32)
Chemistry (26)
Chinese Language and Culture (12)
Civil and Environmental Engineering (22)
Classics (16)
Communication (18)
Computer Science (29)
Criminology and Criminal Justice (18)
Dance (20)
Economics (44)
Education (12)
Electrical & Computer Engineering (23)
English Language and Literature (114)
Entomology (10)
Environmental Sciences (29)
Epidemiology and Biostatistics (29)
Family Science (22)
Film Studies (24)
Fire Protection Engineering (21)
French Language and Literature (19)
Geography (15)
Geology (8)
German Studies (17)
Government and Politics (82)
Hearing and Speech Sciences (24)
Historic Preservation (21)
History (403)
Italian Studies (14)
Japanese Language and Culture (15)
Jewish Studies (44)
Journalism (88)
Kinesiology (24)
Korean Language and Culture (2)
Landscape Architecture (20)
Latin American Studies (50)
Law (35)
LGBT Studies (21)
Library Science and Information Studies (15)
Linguistics (11)
Materials Science and Engineering (33)
Mathematics (18)
Mechanical Engineering (22)
Music (37)
Music Education (20)
Nutrition and Food Science (16)
Persian Studies (47)
Philosophy (30)
Physics (37)
Plant Sciences (8)
Psychology (20)
Public Health and Medicine (56)
Public Policy (72)
Real Estate Development (31)
Religion (25)
Russian Languages and Literature (15)
Second Language Acquisition (13)
Sociology (43)
Spanish Language and Literature (18)
Theatre (35)
Urban Studies and Planning (30)
Women, Gender, and Sexuality Studies (54)
Database Types Filter
All Database Types
Archives and Manuscripts (41)
Audio Resources (15)
Biographies (11)
Dissertations (5)
eBooks (46)
Government Documents (49)
Images (7)
Music Scores (3)
Newspapers and Periodicals Current (1990- ) (35)
Newspapers and Periodicals Historical (pre 1990) (63)
Open Access (44)
Patents and Trademarks (2)
Primary Sources (465)
Reference Works (164)
Standards (5)
Statistical Data (56)
Video Resources (31)
Database Vendors Filter
All Vendors / Providers
ABC Clio (1)
Accessible Archives (2)
ACM Publishing (2)
Adam Matthew (92)
AIAA (1)
AIP Publishing (1)
Alexander Street (41)
Ambrose Video (1)
American Chemical Society (ACS) (3)
American Economic Association (1)
American Mathematical Society (2)
American Musicology Society (1)
American Physical Society (APS) (1)
American Society of Civil Engineers (1)
Archaeomedia Archaeomedia (1)
ASM (2)
ASME (3)
ASTM International (2)
Big Ten (1)
Brepolis (1)
Brill (4)
British Library (1)
Brown University and University of Tulsa (1)
Cambridge University Press (2)
Carnegie Mellon University (1)
Center for Research Libraries (CRL) (4)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (6)
Chadwyck Healey (1)
Clarivate Web of Science (19)
Coherent Digital (8)
Cornell University (4)
CQ - Roll Call (1)
CQ Press (7)
Department of State, Office of the Historian (DOS) (1)
Docuseek (1)
Dow Jones (1)
E&E News (3)
East View Information Services (8)
EBSCO (77)
Economic Intelligence Unit (2)
Elsevier (5)
Euromonitor (1)
European Patent Office (1)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) (1)
Gale (263)
Geographic Research (1)
Getty Research Institute (2)
Google (1)
Harvard University Press (1)
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (1)
HathiTrust (1)
Hein (23)
IBISWorld (1)
Indiana University (1)
Infobase (2)
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the Institution of Electrical Engineers (2)
Institute of Engineering and Technology (IET) (1)
Institute of Physics (IOP) (2)
Intelex (4)
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) (1)
International Atomic Engery Agency (1)
International Monetary Fund (6)
Internet Archive (1)
Internet Movie Database Inc. (1)
Japan Foundation (1)
Japan Trading Company (1)
Jewish National and University Library, Israel (1)
Johns Hopkins University Press (2)
JOVE (1)
JSTOR (4)
Keesing's (1)
Kurosawa Production Co. (1)
Les Belles Lettres (1)
LexisNexis (3)
Library of Congress (LOC) (5)
LinkedIn (1)
Michigan State University (2)
Mintel International Group Ltd. (1)
MIT Press (2)
Morgan & Claypool (1)
Morningstar (1)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (2)
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) (1)
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) (1)
National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (1)
National Gallery of Art (NGA) (1)
National Journal Group (2)
National Library of Medicine (NLM) (4)
National New Play Network (1)
Naxos (2)
NetAdvance, Inc. (1)
New York Public Library (1)
Northeastern University (2)
OCLC (9)
Office of the Federal Register (OFR) & U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO) (1)
Office of the Federal Register (OFR), National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) (2)
Office of the Law Revision Counsel of the U.S. House of Representatives (1)
On the Boards (1)
Optical Society of America (OSA) (1)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (1)
Overdrive (1)
Oxford University Press (38)
Palgrave MacMillan (1)
Paratext (1)
Pennsylvania State University (1)
Phoenix Bioinformatics Corporation (1)
PLOS (2)
PolicyMap (1)
PoliScio Analytics (1)
Politico (2)
Proquest (86)
Publisher's Weekly (1)
Readex (Newsbank) (17)
Reveal Digital (2)
RIPM (1)
Roper Center for Public Opinion Research (1)
Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) (3)
SAE International (1)
Sage (8)
Salem Press (1)
SIAM (1)
SPIE (1)
Springer Nature (8)
SRDS (1)
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) (1)
State of Maryland (3)
The Chronicle of Higher Education (1)
The Metropolitan Opera (1)
Thomson Reuters (3)
Transportation Research Board (1)
Tufts University (1)
U.S. Census Bureau (USCB) (3)
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) (2)
U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) (1)
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) (2)
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) (1)
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) (1)
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) (1)
U.S. Government Accountablity Office (GAO) (1)
U.S. Government Publication Office (GPO) (1)
U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO) (4)
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) (2)
United Nations (2)
University of Chicago (2)
University of Maryland (9)
University of Michigan (5)
University of Minnesota (1)
University of Virginia Press (1)
Urban Land Institute (1)
Valueline (1)
Vertical Flight Society (1)
Washington D.C. government (1)
Wiley (4)
World Bank (8)
World Scientific (1)
DATABASES
Search
All
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
#
1074 Databases found
A
A&AePortal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A&AePortal provides access to important art and architectural history scholarship (eBooks) Featuring scholarship from other leading university presses and museum publishers, creating a meaningful and robust educational experience. Features included Search and Browse, Image Use and Research and Course use.
AATA Online 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Art and Archaeology Technical Abstracts Online
Continuing online Art & Archaeology Technical Abstracts, indexes the technical literature on archaeological preservation, subjects include methodology, practical technique, documentation & experimentation in the study and the practice of archaeological preservation. Covers all subjects related to the field of international conservation. Covers the period 1955-present, plus Fogg Museum and Freer Gallery of Art abstracts 1932-1955.
ABC-CLIO Ebooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online full-text reference books published by ABC-CLIO
ABELL (Annual Bibliography of English Language and Literature)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ABELL lists monographs, periodical articles, critical editions of literary works, book reviews, collections of essays, and doctoral dissertations published anywhere in the world. ABELL is compiled under the auspices of the Modern Humanities Research Association by an international team of editors, contributors, and academic advisers. The database contains more than 960,000 records, from 1892 through to today with regular monthly updates of newly indexed material. Covers all aspects and periods of English literature, from Anglo-Saxon times to the present day. British, American and Commonwealth writing are all represented. Coverage is international, including material in languages other than English. Indexing back to 1920. Full-text of recent journal articles. ABELL is bundled with LION (Literature Online) and can be searched as part of the entire LION database or as a separate database.
ABSEES: American Bibliography of Slavic and East European Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers North American (U.S. and Canadian) scholarship on East-Central Europe, Russia, and the former Soviet Union. It contains bibliographic records for journal articles, books, book chapters, book reviews, dissertations, online resources, and selected government publications. Anthropology, Ethnology, and Archaeology; Culture and the Arts; Economics and Foreign Trade; Education and Scholarship; Geography and Demography; Government, Law, and Politics; History; International Relations; Language and Linguistics; Literature; Military Affairs; Philosophy, Political Theory, and Ideology; Psychology; Religion; Science and Technology; Sociology; Women's Studies. 1990-present.
Abstracts in Social Gerontology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Database that covers social gerontology, including such subject area as the psychology of aging, elder abuse, and society and the elderly.
Academic Search Ultimate Featured
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database

Multi-disciplinary database providing information for nearly every area of academic study. Includes an enormous collection of the most valuable peer-reviewed full text journals, as well as additional journals, magazines, newspapers and books. Multidisciplinary subjects including: social sciences, humanities, education, computer sciences, engineering, physics, chemistry, language & linguistics, arts & literature, medicine, ethnic studies. 1965- present.

Academic Video Online (AVON)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) AVON
Academic Video Online (AVON) contains over 85,000 titles spanning a wide range of subject areas including anthropology, business, counseling, film, health, American and world history, and education. AVON includes documentaries, interviews, feature films, performances, news programs and newsreels, tutorials and demonstrations from such producers as PBS, CNN, Bloomberg Media Distribution, Broadway Licensing, and 60 Minutes/CBS.
Access to Archival Databases 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The AAD System provides online access to material from more than 30 series of electronic records at the National Archives, including biographical, geographical, and organizational records.
Accessible Archives Open Access Content 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
There are currently three freely available books: Scenes in the Life of Harriet Tubman; Twelve Years a Slave; and, History of Woman Suffrage, Volume III. There are currently three freely …
ACM Digital Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text repository of papers from publications that have been published, co-published, or co-marketed by ACM and other publishers. Publications include journals, magazines, transactions, special interest group (SIG) newsletters, proceedings, and publications by affiliated organizations. Contains citations and full text from ACM journal and newsletter articles and conference proceedings. 1985-present.
ACS symposium series
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The ACS Symposium Series contains high-quality, peer-reviewed books developed from the ACS technical divisions' symposia. Information about this series is available at http://pubs.acs.org/series/symposium, where users can also perform searches of the volumes by citation, author, topic, or volume." Access to volumes from 1974-2011.
ACSESS Digital Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Alliance of Crop, Soil, and Environmental Science Societies (ACSESS) is composed of the American Society of Agronomy (ASA), the Crop Science Society of America (CSSA), and the Soil Science Society of America (SSSA). The ACSESS Digital Library is a complete collection of all content published by these societies. The Digital Library allows users to search and browse all the published literature of these societies simultaneously through a single platform.
Aden: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1880-1906
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Aden's strategic location long made it a strategic asset. The British captured Aden in 1839, and it served as a key port on the route from the Mediterranean to India via the Suez Canal. The documents in this collection are sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Librarian Review
Adlai E. Stevenson Papers: Correspondence and Papers, Presidential Campaigns of 1952, 1956, and 1960 and Ambassador to the United Nations, 1961-1965
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Adlai E. Stevenson (1900-1965), presidential candidate in 1952 and 1956, was the leading Democrat and a major figure in· American politics and diplomacy during the Cold War years. . This database contains selections from the subject files including correspondence, reference materials, news clippings, meeting minutes, agendas, and other materials documenting other aspects of Stevenson's professional life, particularly his government service during the New Deal and World War II, and his political activities outside his presidential campaign.

Administrative Histories of U.S. Civilian Agencies: World War II
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
U.S. civilian agencies were charged with the tasks and responsibilities of managing a nation at total war. This collection covers the civilian mobilization and management of resources during the Korean War, documenting inflationary pressures, fuel shortages, rationing, dislocations in manufacturing and in the labor force, and many other problems that offer opportunities for contrast with current events. In addition, these histories offer valuable insight into the development of agencies devoted to the regulation of the country at war, including alien property and war assets, censorship, civilian defense, scientific research for the war effort, and public health during wartime. In the case of the Korean War—undeclared and unpopular—the problems of mobilization were magnified by the competition between military priorities and civilian needs. The histories in this collection are of enormous importance to researchers of government administration, economics, political science, business, and commerce.
Afghanistan and the U.S. , 1945-1963: Records of the U.S. State Department Classified Files
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes State Department Central Classified Files and materials on Afghanistan, relating to internal and foreign affairs, 1945-1963.
Afghanistan in 1919: The Third Anglo-Afghan War
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of confidential correspondence, memoranda, orders, reports and other materials provide a broad spectrum of information on military policy and administration, including the organization, operations and equipment of the army during the war.
Africa and the New Imperialism. European Borders on the African Continent, 1870-1914
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The most extensive resource covering Africa in the age of new imperialism, drawing upon rare printed works, diaries and journals, correspondence, maps, photographs, and film footage.
Africa Commons
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A platform for searching and discovering digitized African materials from 1500 to today. Modules include African History and Culture, Black South African Magazines, Southern African Films and Documentaries, and East African Magazines, Newspapers, and Films from the Hilary Ng'weno Collection. Available resources include books, magazines, newspapers, historical journals, government documents, oral history, photographs, art, music, videos, and more.
African America, Communists, and the National Negro Congress, 1933-1947
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises the files of John P. Davis, Edward Strong, and Revels Cayton, as well as financial records. Included with the National Negro Congress records are Davis' files from the Negro Industrial League, 1933, of which he had been executive secretary; Davis' files from the Joint Committee on National Recovery, 1933-1935, an ad-hoc lobby to protect black interests in the federal government; and his subject/reference files on different aspects of the "Negro question." Also, records of the Negro Labor Victory Committee, 1942-1945, including files of Charles A. Collins, executive secretary, and M. Moran Weston, field secretary, consisting of correspondence, subject/organization files, and printed matter.
African American Communities
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary source resource containing information focusing on race relations across social, political, cultural and religious arena. Highlights include the Chicago Urban League papers c.1916-1985, material on the legal battles for the desegregation of public schools and buses from the papers of Thomas J. Pearsall, James B. McMillan and Algernon Lee Butler, the complete run of The messenger, 1925-1928, a popular civil rights magazine published by activist A . Philip Randolph, family papers of prominent African American families in Atlanta, c.1870-1965, and oral histories of individuals in the civil rights movement in Atlanta and personal accounts from members of the Weeksville community.
African American Music Reference
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
*Music Magazine Archive* is a series of digital collections focused on 20th, and 21st century genres such as Rock, Folk, and Hip-Hop & Rap. Each genre-based collection unites every page and every issue of a diverse and influential group of magazines. These publications uniquely capture the social and historical context of each genre, and together support scholarly research areas such as race, class, gender, American studies, youth culture, and more across some of the most progressive decades of the 20tand 21st centuries. Researchers will find all material represented in the original publications, preserved in its original context, fully searchable and in high-resolution full color.
African American Newspapers (Accessible Archives)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) https://history-commons.net/modules/ansc/
This collection is a mixture of issues and papers from Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, Virginia, and Alabama ranging from 1861-1865. These newspapers "recorded the real and true history of public opinion during the war. In their columns is to be found the only really correct and indicative map of busy life, its fluctuations and its vast concerns in the South, during her days of darkness and of trial."
African American Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of African-American newspapers contains information about the cultural life and history during the 1800s, and contains first-hand reports of the major events and issues of the day pertaining to African Americans.
African American Newspapers in the South 1870-1926
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
African American Newspapers in the South, 1870-1926 documents the African American press in the South from Reconstruction through the Jim Crow period. Written by African Americans for African Americans, the first-hand reporting, editorials, and features kept readers abreast of current domestic and international events, often focusing on racial issues.
African American Newspapers, 1827-1998
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized and fully searchable collections of more than 270 African American newspapers published in the 19th and 20th centuries.
African Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized and fully searchable collections of more than 40 nineteenth- and twentieth-century African newspapers. Featuring titles from Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda and Zimbabwe.
Age of Exploration
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Bringing together material from twelve archives from around the world, this collection includes documents relating to major events in European maritime history, from the voyages of James Cook to the search for John Franklin’s doomed mission to the Northwest Passage. It contains a host of additional features for teaching, such as an interactive map which presents an in-depth visualization of over 50 of these influential voyages.
AgEcon Search 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This free archive of full text articles in agricultural and applied economics includes archived copies of many important journals in the field (often with archival, not current, coverage). Most of these journals are indexed in Econlit.
AGRICOLA 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Citations to journal articles, book chapters, monographs, conference proceedings, serials, technical reports, and other materials on a range of agricultural topics.
Agricultural Statistics 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Statistics on agricultural production, supplies, consumption, facilities, costs, and returns. Agricultural Statistics is published each year to meet the diverse need for a reliable reference book on agricultural production, supplies, consumption, facilities, costs, and returns. Time Span:1994 - present
AGRIS
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
AGRIS is the international information system for the agricultural sciences and technology. It was created by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in 1974, to facilitate information exchange and to bring together world literature dealing with all aspects of agriculture.
AHS Online Store
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The AHS Online store includes nearly all Forum Proceedings from 1943 to today and papers from dozens of Technical Specialists' Meetings, plus proceedings CD-ROMs, Vertiflite pdfs, books and AHS merchandise. The pdfs in the Forum and Technical Specialists' Meetings Proceedings, as well as all the Vertiflite issues, comprise the AHS Vertical Flight Library.
more...
AIAA Aerospace Research Central
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text access to the AIAA meeting papers from 1963-present, as well as journal articles from 1963-present. Each year over 4000 papers, presented at 20 conferences is published. Database is updated quarterly. Includes full text access to all AIAA technical journals. Time Span: 1988-present.
AIP Publishing
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Scitation
Search more than 100 journals from AIP, APS, ASCE, ASME, SPIE, and a host of other prestigious science and engineering journals.
Almanac of American Politics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Profiles of every member of Congress and governor as well as in-depth and up-to-date narrative profiles of all 50 states and 435 House districts. Also included are detailed Congressional voting records, hard-to-find census data, current state district maps and a preview of the 2008 elections. Provides statistical data and brief political histories for states and Congressional districts and their elected officials. Time span: 1999-forward.
Aluminum Industry Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Abstracts from 2,300 scientific and technical journals, government reports, conference proceedings, dissertations, books, and patents. Abstracts of international technical literature on aluminum production, applications, industry, metallurgy, ores, and testing. Time span: 1972- current.
Amerasia Affair, China and Postwar Anti-Communist Fervor, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Amerasia Affair details the first great spy case of the postwar era and the bureaucratic intricacies of anti-communism Washington.
America in Protest: Records of Anti-Vietnam War organizations - Vietnam Veterans Against the War
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
FBI files on the antiwar movement, 1967-1975.
America in World War Two
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
American military and civilian involvement in all major theatres of operations is represented. Covers operations in the Pacific, the D-Day landings in Europe, and the post-war occupation of Germany, through personal letters, diaries, photographs, artifacts and military records. 300 people share their memories of military life, prisoner of war camps, and the Home Front.
America: History & Life with Full-Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Core American history database now includes unique full-text coverage of nearly 200 journals and 100 books. Information on articles, books, book reviews, and dissertations on U.S. and Canadian history from prehistory to the present. Covers more than 2000 international worldwide. All aspects of historical research. Time span: 1964-present.
America's Historical Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized and fully searchable collections of early American newspapers. Includes five databases, Early American Newspapers Series 1 - 3 and African American Newspapers which can be searched together or separately, as well as select Maryland newspapers including the Maryland Gazette (1728-1832) and Baltimore American (1861-1870, 1903-1922). Early American Newspapers includes more than 1,000 U.S. newspapers published between 1690 and 1922. African American Newspaper includes more than 270 African American newspapers published in the 19th and 20th centuries.

American Antiquarian Society (AAS) Historical Periodicals Collection: Series 1-5
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes digitized images of over 6,500 American magazines and journals published between 1691 and 1877. The collection is available in five series: Series 1 (1691-1820); Series 2 (1821-1837) Series 3 (1838-1852)' Series 4 (1853-1865) and Series 5 (1866-1877). The series can be searched separately or in combination.
American Antiquarian Society (AAS) Historical Periodicals Collection: Series 6-7
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Series 6 & 7 brings the previously published Series 1-5 more firmly into the 20th century, with titles running up to 1923. They do not represent the short date ranges seen in the previously published series, but the entirety of publishing history in the Colonies and subsequent United States. They extend coverage or fill gaps in issues for approximately 45 titles previously digitized in Series 1-5, and add more than 150 new periodical titles.
American Archive of Public Broadcasting 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Discover historic programs of publicly funded radio and television across America Watch and listen.
American Broadsides and Ephemera, Series I, 1760-1900
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Based on the American Antiquarian Society's landmark collection, this full-color digital edition offers fully searchable facsimile images of approx. 15,000 broadsides printed between 1820 and 1900 and 15,000 pieces of ephemera printed between 1760 and 1900.
American Chemical Society
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive collection of chemistry journals available through the American Chemical Society.
American Civil Liberties Union Papers (ACLU)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Drawing from the records of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), this collection focuses on civil rights, race, gender, and issues relating to the U.S. Supreme Court— topics intensely relevant to today’s curriculum and debates at both national and local levels. Part 1:Roger Baldwin years 1912-1950 and years of expansion 1950-1990.
Part 2 Southern regional office files.
American Committee on Africa: Liberation Movements, Solidarity and Activism
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Records of the American Committee on Africa (ACOA) documenting its significant involvement in African liberation struggles in the twentieth century, including a wealth of rare materials illuminating key figures in African independence movements. Primary source materials document US solidarity with liberation movements throughout Africa, the collection covers a wide range of intersecting themes, from social justice, civil rights, and decolonisation, to US anti-apartheid movements and Africa in the Cold War.
American History in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides the largest and richest collection of video available online for the study of American history, with 2,000 hours and more than 5,000 titles on completion. The collection allows students and researchers to analyze historical events, and their presentation over time, through commercial and governmental newsreels, archival footage, public affairs footage, and important documentaries.
American History: 1493-1945
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Focuses on documents of colonial history, the revolutionary era, the formation of the United States, westward expansion, and Native American relations, as well as slavery, and abolition. Additionally, focus on the Civil War told through thousands of soldiers’ letters from the time of Lincoln's election through Reconstruction, America’s nineteenth century growth, the World Wars, and the inter-war years.
American Indian Correspondence: Presbyterian Historical Society Collection of Missionaries Letters
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A collection of nearly 14,000 letters by Presbyterian missionaries to American Indians. The missionaries served among many different tribal groups and their letters describe many aspects of Native American society and culture.
American Indian Movement and Native American Radicalism
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
FBI reports of activities of the American Indian Movement and other activist Native American groups in the late 1960s and 1970s, including the occupation of Wounded Knee (1973).
American Jewess, 1895-1899 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The American Jewess (1895-1899) described itself as "the only magazine in the world devoted to the interests of Jewish women." It was the first English-language periodical targeted to American Jewish women, covering an evocative range of topics that ranged from women's place in the synagogue to whether women should ride bicycles. Founded and edited by Rosa Sonneschein (1847-1932), it offered the first sustained critique, by Jewish women, of genera inequities in Jewish worship and communcal life. Assembled and digitized by the Jewish Women's Archive, this digital reproduction of the 8 volumes of The American Jewess was assembled from the collections of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion Klau Library, Brandeis University Libraries, the Library of Congress, and the Jewish Women's Archive. Time span: 1895-1899.
American National Biography
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ANB online features thousands of illustrations, more than 80,000 hyperlinked cross-references, links to select web sites, and powerful search capabilities. American National Biography (ANB) offers portraits of more than 17,400 men and women whose lives have shaped the nation. Updated quarterly.
American Periodicals Series
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text images of over 1,100 colonial and early American magazines and periodicals spanning from colonial times to the mid 20th century. Titles range from America's first scientific journal, Medical Repository, to popular magazines like Vanity Fair and Ladies' Home Journal. Useful for the study of American history, literature, culture, sciences and social sciences. Time span: 1740-1900
American Prison Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digital collection of newspapers focusing on American prisons and the lives of people inside them, from titles produced by citizens who have been incarcerated.
American Race Relations: Global Perspectives, 1941-1996
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Derived from the archives of the Central Intelligence Agency. Searchable digital archive of primary source documents covering foreign perspectives of American racial issues in the mid-20th century. Also covers race relations in Latin America, Europe, Africa and Asia.
American Song
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
American Song is a database of songs that users can listen to over the Internet. It will ultimately contain 50,000 tracks of American roots music and pre-1960 American popular music and include country, folk, bluegrass, Western, old time, American Indian, blues, gospel, and shape note singing. The database includes repertoire such as the songs of Civil Rights, political campaigns, Prohibition, the Revolutionary War, the Civil War, anti-war protests and more. Among notable recording artists represented are Woody Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Peggy Seeger, Si Kahn, Lead Belly, Sleepy LaBeef, the New Lost City Ramblers, Otis Clay, Eddy "The Chief" Clearwater, Nanci Griffith, The Lilly Brothers, and Merle Travis.
American Urban Life and Health, 1883-1914
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection facilitates study of the crisis in urban development faced by the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Charity Organization Society was at the center of reform work, and its reports provide a detailed account of living conditions and describe investigations of health, industry, delinquency, insanity and crime.
American West
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprised of original manuscripts, rare printed books, maps, and ephemeral material from the Everett D Graff Collection of Western Americana at the Newberry Library in Chicago. Allows scholars to explore tales of frontier life, Indigenous Peoples, vigilantes, and outlaws.
Amnesty International Archives: A Global Movement for Human Rights
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The material within this collection covers the rise of the global human rights movement during the second half of the twentieth century through the International Secretariat records of Amnesty International. Outside of the organisational records, external releases, and posters of Amnesty International, the resource includes more than 50 hours of oral history content. Within these recordings individuals discuss their own experiences working for the organisation in its early years and onwards.

Annee Philologique
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index to journal articles, books, articles in collections, and conference papers on multiple aspects of ancient Greek and Roman civilization. Publications in European and other languages on multiple aspects of Greek and Roman antiquity, including literature and linguistics, history, philosophy, art, religion, music, and science, from the second millennium B.C.E. to the early Middle Ages (ca. 500-800 C.E.). Indexing from 1924-2015
Anthropological Literature
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Indexes entries at least two pages long in nearly 900 journals and monographic series held in Harvard University's Tozzer Library. These include articles, reports, commentaries, and obituaries. Comprehensive international resource for the fields of anthropology, archaeology, and related interdisciplinary research. Covers articles published from the late 19th century to the present.
AnthroSource
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Developed by the American Anthropological Association (AAA), AnthroSource brings 100 years of anthropological material online to scholars and the public. Coverage includes a complete electronic archive of all AAA journals through 2003 plus current issues for 15 of the AAA's most critical peer-reviewed publications.
AODL: Africa Online Digital Library 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
AODL benefits a wide variety of scholars, students, and institutions by producing multilingual, multimedia materials for both scholarly research and public viewing audiences. AODL serves scholars and students conducting research and teaching about West and South Africa as well as teachers and students of African languages in both the United States and Africa. It also provides a valuable model for creating and distributing a diverse array of materials in a region with very limited electronic connectivity.
Apartheid South Africa:1948-1988
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Essential resource for the study of the apartheid era in Southern Africa, sourced exclusively from The National Archives, UK. Provides analysis of South African politics, trade relations, international opinion, and humanitarian dilemmas against a backdrop of waning colonialism and mounting world condemnation.
Archaeology-Online Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A catalog of reviews of current books and Newcomers and New Media (CD-ROMs/DVDs) around the world of archaeology. Resources are by category.
Architonic
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Architonic is a leading online community for community of architects, designers, researchers, manufacturers and retailers. Showcasing over 93,000 premium design products, Architonic presents the best and finest designs the market has to offer. Architonic links architectural projects with the furnishings, materials and fittings that have been used in their execution, resulting in a completely new information resource for architects and planners, as well as for designers and manufacturers.
Archival Collections
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archival Collections is a portal to help researchers locate materials described in finding aids to archival and manuscript collections at the University of Maryland Libraries.
Archive of Latin American and Caribbean History, Sixteenth to Twentieth Century
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) World Scholar: Latin America and the Caribbean
This archive offers a range of content for the region, providing opportunities for research into issues and events in contemporary Latin American and Caribbean history, as well as historical perspective back to the colonial period.
Archive-It 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archive-It offers permanent access for researchers, historians, and scholars to historical collections that exist in digital format. Archive-It provides full text search capability for all public collections. More than 95 contributing organizations include: state archives, university libraries, federal institutions, state libraries, non government non profits, museums, historians, and independent researchers.
ArchiveGrid
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides online access to nearly a million descriptions of archival collections held by thousands of libraries, museums, historical societies and archives worldwide. ArchiveGrid includes over 7 million records describing archival materials, bringing together information about historical documents, personal papers, family histories, and more. With over 1,400 archival institutions represented, ArchiveGrid helps researchers looking for primary source materials held in archives, libraries, museums and historical societies.
Archives of Sexuality and Gender
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains over one million pages of material exploring LGBTQ history and culture from the 16th century to the 20th century. Includes materials from the British Library, Alfred C. Kinsey Institute and the New York Academy of Medicine.
Archives of the Work Projects Administration and Predecessors, 1933-1943: Final Reports of the State Program, 1943
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archives of the Work Projects Administration and Predecessors, 1933-1943: Final State Reports for the Federal Music Program, the Federal Art Program, the Federal Crafts Program, the Museum and Visual Aids Program, the Federal Theatre Program, and the Federal Writers' Program.
Argentina: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive focuses on Argentina after the era of Juan Perón. In this period civilian administrations traded power, trying, with limited success, to deal with diminished economic growth and continued social and labor demands. The documents offer insight into various aspects of the Argentine economy. Examples include: the minister of public works discussing a program in "highways, railroads, and water transport" (June 1960); a report on the newly appointed undersecretary of mines requesting that the embassy's economic counselor have the U.S. government "examine the possibilities of procurement of tungsten" (June 1961); and a resolution by the National Cinematographic Institute requiring that all films exhibited in motion picture theaters feature Spanish subtitles "accompanied by written proof that the dialogue has been has been translated and subtitled in Argentina" (April 1962)
Art Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A Comprehensive Resource for Art Information featuring indexing and abstracts from an international array of publications, this database is a comprehensive resource covering fine, decorative and commercial art, as well as photography, folk art, film, architecture and much more. Over 600 periodicals dating back to 1984, including 280 peer-reviewed journals Indexing and abstracts of over 13,000 art dissertations Indexing of almost 200,000 art reproductions. Time span: 1984-present.
Art and Architecture Complete
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides indexing, abstracting, and/or full-text of the content, including images, of hundreds of periodicals and books in the areas of art, art history, architecture and architectural history including: archaeology, interior and landscape design, painting, sculpture, printmaking, photography, graphic arts, decorative arts, costume design and antiques. Replaces Art Abstracts (1984-present).
Art Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Researchers are able to track the careers of artists and review their materials and methods, and can find books by and about artists, as well as interviews, profiles and much more. Indexing of nearly 200,000 art reproductions provides examples of styles and art movements, including works by emerging artists. It also includes indexing of over 13,000 dissertations. Full-text articles from more than 300 periodicals dating back to 1995; High-quality indexing and abstracts for over 600 periodicals dating as far back as 1984, including 280 peer-reviewed journals; Indexing and abstracts for over 13,000 art dissertations; Indexing of nearly 200,000 art reproductions; A database-specific thesaurus.
Art Index Retrospective (1929-1984)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An index to English and foreign-language periodicals, yearbooks, and museum bulletins; indexes selected book reviews and reproductions of works of art; includes citations only. Covers all styles and periods of the fine arts, archaeology, architecture, decorative arts, advertising art, city planning, design, motion pictures, museum studies, and photography. Time span: 1929-1984.
ARTbibliographies Modern (ABM)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Premier source of information on modern and contemporary arts dating from the late 19th century onwards, and including photography. Includes citations and abstracts to English and foreign-language journal articles, books, exhibition catalogs, dissertations, and reviews of books and exhibitions. Covers all aspects of modern and contemporary art from the late 19th century to the present including painting, drawing, sculpture, graphic arts, photography, performance and installation art, computer and electronic art, conservation and crafts. 1974 to the present, with some entries dating to the late 1960s.
ARTFL
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A cooperative project established in 1981 by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and the University of Chicago. 2000 texts, from classic works of French literature to non-fiction prose and technical writing: novels, poetry, theater, journalism, essays, correspondence, treatises. Subjects: literary criticism, biology, history, economics, and philosophy. A Provenal database includes texts in original languages. Time Span:13th-20th cent.; selection of 17th cent. texts; some medieval and Renaissance
ArticleFirst
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OCLC index of articles from the contents pages of over 12,000 journals. This resource does not contain ISBNs.Searches on Subjects actually search the Title and Citation fields.'Phrase' searches will find records with the words not necessarily next to each other. For example, a search on 'sunny day' might find 'the day was sunny'. If you wish to search for authors using the last name and first initial, include a question mark at the end of your search: Last, F?
ARTO: Reference Database of Finnish Articles
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An index of articles from over 500 Finnish journals, including ARK and other architectural journal article and (occasionally) references to articles in monographs. If an article is available in digital form, it is linked to the bibliographic record. RTO is maintained and developed by The National Library of Finland. 500 Finnish Journals Time Span: 1990-current
Arts and Humanities Citation Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to current and retrospective bibliographic information and cited references found in nearly 1,130 of the world's leading arts & humanities journals. Also, covers individually selected, relevant items from approximately 7,000 of the world's leading science and social sciences journals. 1975 to present; weekly updates.
arXiv 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains research papers in physics, mathematics, non-linear science, computer science, quantitative biology and statistics. ArXiv represents up-to-date research including preprints, authors prefered versions and additional material. New materials added daily.
Asahi Shimbun Cross-Search
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Asahi Shimbun Kikuzo II
Asahi Shinbun articles (1879-present), Aera & Shukan Asahi (1984-present), Chiezo (current issue), Whos Who, Historical Photo Archive (1931-1945), Asahi Graph(1923-1956), English-language News (2001-present). 19 concurrent users among 21 USMAI institutions.
ASCE Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains publications of the ASCE, including journal articles (1983 - present), conference proceedings (2001 - present), standards (1982 - present), and ebooks (1985 - present). Engineering subject areas include: Aerospace Engineering, Architectural Engineering, Bridges, Cold Regions, Computer Practices, Construction, Earthquake Engineering, Education, Engineering Mechanics, Environmental Engineering, Forensic Engineering, Geotechnical Engineering, Highways, Hydrology, Hydraulics, Irrigation and Drainage, Management, Materials Engineering, Structural Engineering, Transportation, Urban Planning, Water Resources, Waterway, Port, Coastal and Ocean Engineering. Time span: 1970-present.
Asia-Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Asia-Studies.com brings together thousands of full-text reports covering 53 countries on a multitude of business, government, economic, and social issues. Examples of specific subject coverage include finance, trade, environment, human resources development, best practices in government, fisheries, tourism, education and women's studies to name a few. The average study is 50 pages long, and contains statistics, research, analysis, and forecasts. Most contain statistical tables, charts, and/or graphs. Country coverage includes all of Asia, Australia/New Zealand, the Americas Pacific Rim countries, and Pacific islands. Users can browse by country to find country specific annual statistical overviews. Multi-country and Asia-wide comparisons are also available. Time span: 1999-present.
Asian American Drama
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Asian American Drama contains 252 plays by 42 playwrights, together with detailed, fielded information on related productions, theaters, production companies, and more. Some 50% of these plays have never been published before. The database also includes selected playbills, production photographs and other ephemera related to the plays. Asian American Drama allows in-depth browsing and searching of both the bibliographic and the full-text elements within the database.
ASM Alloy Center
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains Alloy Digest datasets and additional materials datasets from other ASM publications Also heat treating data sheets from the heat treating data sheets from the heat Tre eater's Guides time temperature curves creep curves fatigue curves stress strain curves and more Feature physical and mechanical properties and processing characteristics for nearly 7,000 ferrous and nonferrous alloys
ASME Digital Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Current literature from ASME, the premier professional organization for mechanical engineers. Our subscription includes journals and conference proceedings.
Associated Press Collection: Washington D.C. Bureau Collection 1938-2009
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to bureau records documenting the administrations of eleven U.S. presidents, including an assortment of wire copy and coverage of press conferences, travel, speeches, campaigns and messages to Congress. Reflects major events of each presidency, including the Kennedy assassination, Watergate, the Nixon and Clinton impeachment hearings and the Cold War.
Associated Press Collection: European Bureaus Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides coverage of the Vienna, Geneva, Warsaw, Bern, Berlin and Prague AP bureaus-as well as a special cross-bureau collection that covers conflicts and crises that affected the entire continent. Includes coverage of WWII and post-war reconstruction, Nazism and its aftermath, the Cold War, espionage, the arms and space races and the fall of the Soviet Union
Associated Press Collection: Middle East Bureaus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to the records fromAssociated Press bureau in Jerusalem, Ankara, Beruit, and surrounding areas. Include news stories in the form of typescript carbons or wire copy . Provides exclusive coverage between 1967 and 2008.
Associated Press Collection: News Features & Internal Communications,1848-2000
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Tells the story of the Associated Press. Contains news features, including news analysis, human interest stories and entertainment and sports reporting.
Associated Press Collection: U.S. City Bureaus Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes records from the AP's Atlanta, Austin, Birmingham, Chicago, Dallas, Miami, New Orleans, Philadelphia and Pittsburgh bureaus dating from 1931 to 2004. Contains news stories in various stages of production, covering major social movements, natural disasters, crime, disease, politics and other regional and national topics.
Associated Press Collection: Washington D.C. Bureau Collection (Library of Congress edition)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of news dispatches from the Washington, D.C., Bureau of the Associated Press (1915-1930) contain an unbroken chronology of world and national events as reported by the news agency. The news dispatches included in this archive were given to the Library of Congress by the bureau in 1944.
Association Against the Prohibition Amendment (1920-53), a selection of materials from the Pierre S. du Pont Papers, Longwood Manuscripts,
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The entire collection includes the following: correspondence, minutes, financial reports, membership lists, records of lobbying activities, and publications and press releases issued by the AAPA and WONPR.
ASTM Compass
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The ASTM Compass platform contains a collection of industry-leading standards and technical engineering information. The collection contains ASTM's 13,000 standards in more than 130 industry areas, symposia and Special Technical Publications (STPs), manuals, monographs, data series, and journals. It covers a broad range of engineering disciplines, including aerospace, biomedical, chemical, civil, environmental, geological, health and safety, industrial, materials science, mechanical, nuclear, petroleum, soil science, and solar engineering.

ASTM Compass only contains ASTM standards; it does not contain ASTM books and journals. For ASTM books and journals, please use ASTM Digital Library.
ASTM Digital Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ASTM Digital Library is the platform for ASTM's journals, books, and conference proceedings. These items cover a broad range of engineering disciplines, including aerospace, biomedical, chemical, civil, environmental, geological, health and safety, industrial, materials science, mechanical, nuclear, petroleum, soil science, and solar engineering.

ASTM standards are not available on the ASTM Digital Library platform. To access ASTM standards, please use ASTM Compass.
Astrophysics Data System
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System (ADS) is a Digital Library portal for researchers in Astronomy and Physics, operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) under a NASA grant. The ADS maintains three bibliographic databases containing more than 8.1 million records: Astronomy and Astrophysics, Physics, and arXiv e-prints"
ATLA Religion Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Catholic Periodical and Literature Index Online
Provides abstracts and indexing for articles, essays, and book reviews in over 1550 journals and multi-author works dealing with religious and theological scholarship. International in scope and language coverage. Covers all types of religions. ATLA Catholic Periodical and Literature Index online content is now included in the ATLA Religion Covers a wide range of academic areas including anthropology, philosophy, business, psychology, history, religion, law, sociology, medicine, and theology. 1949 to present. Selected records going back to 1818.
Atlanta Constitution (1868-1945) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Atlanta Constitution (1868-1945) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Atlanta Daily World (1931-2003) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ProQuest Historical Newspapers Atlanta Daily World: 1931-2003 offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Audio Drama: The L.A. Theatre Works Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides online access to more than three hundred important dramatic works in streaming audio from the curated archive of the nation's premiere radio theatre company. The plays - which include some of the most significant dramatic literature of the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries - are performed by leading actors from around the world and recorded specifically for online listening. Specialized indexing at the track level for over half of these recordings links individual segments of plays to specific academic disciplines and subject keywords. This allows researchers to find relevant scenes that touch on subjects in the humanities, social sciences, theatre, hard sciences, law, medicine, and virtually every other field of study.
Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals database offers a comprehensive listing of journal articles on architecture and design, including bibliographic descriptions on subjects such as the history and practice of architecture, landscape architecture, city planning, historic preservation, and interior design and decoration. The index contains more than 440,000 thousand entries surveying over seven hundred American and international journals. These include not only scholarly and popular periodical literature, but also publications of professional associations, American state and regional periodicals, and the major serials on architecture and design of Europe, Asia, Latin America, and Australia.
B
Baltimore Afro-American (1893-1988)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Baltimore Afro-American (1893-1988) offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Baltimore Sun (1990 to present)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides citations, abstracts and full-text articles from the newspaper. Coverage of local and state news for Baltimore and Maryland. Full-text: September, 1990--present
Baltimore Sun, the (1837-1994) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides complete issues of The Baltimore Sun from 1837-1992. Search by keyword and more....
Bar Ilan Responsa
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The world's largest electronic collection of Jewish texts in Hebrew ever recorded, which embody thousands of years of Jewish learning. 5 simultaneous users. Responsa Literature - rabbinic case-law rulings which represent the historical-sociological milieu of real-life situations; the Bible, the Talmud and their principal commentaries; works about Jewish law and customs; codes of Jewish law, such as Maimonides' Mishneh Torah and the Shulchan Aruch with its principal commentaries; midrashim, Zohar, etc.
BBC Television Shakespeare Plays
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streamed productions of all 37 Shakespearean plays, originally produced by the British Broadcasting Company. These are traditional interpretations of the plays set in either Shakespeare's time or in the period of the events depicted. These versions have been enhanced for high definition online streaming and are available to view with captioning.
Behavioral Risk Factor and Surveillance System
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides annual survey information on health conditions and risk behaviors in the U.S. since 1984. Conducted by the 50 state health departments as well as those in the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Behind the Scenes of the Civil Rights Movement 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Behind the Scenes of the Civil Rights Movements focuses on unearthing and digitizing the histories of civil rights activism by the everyday citizens of Black, Latinx, Indigenous, and Asian American/Pacific Islander communities. The collection includes unofficial letters, correspondence, demonstration plan outlines, transportation logs and plans, meeting minutes, programs from worship services, and photographs. The first collection in development will focus on the African-American experience and will draw on primary source materials from predominantly Black colleges and universities, historical societies, public libraries, community archives, and other institutions.
Benezit Dictionary of Artists
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
With nearly 170,000 entries on artists from antiquity to the present day and featuring regular updates, Benezit is one of the most comprehensive and definitive resources on artists in the English language.
BibleGateway.com 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The bible gateway is a tool for reading and researching scripture online in multiple language and translations with advanced searching capabilities which allow readers to find and compare particular passages in scripture based on keywords phrases or scripture reference. Bible gateway is a Christian, mission-centered enterprise.
Biblical Archaeology Society Online Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains the content of selected journals and books published by the Biblical Archaeology Society. Includes each issue of the magazines Biblical archaeology review, Bible review, and Archaeology odyssey, and the content of five books. The site allows users to browse the entire corpus of material and perform Boolean searches by title, author, subject, word, issue, or date range in any combination.
Bibliography of Asian Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
References Western-language books, journal articles, and conference proceedings, including citations to all articles from the 100 most-used journals in Asian Studies. Covers a wide range of subject areas in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences on all parts of Asia. Time span: 1971- present.
Bibliography of the History of Art 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Bibliography of the History of Art (BHA) contains abstracts and indexes of current publications in the history of art, including scholarly journals, conferences, book, exhibition reviews, and exhibition catalogues. The records consist of bibliographic citations, abstracts, and indexing; abstracts may be in English or in French, index terms (descriptors) are in both English and French. Major areas of coverage include European art from late antiquity (4th c. A.d.) to present, American art from European discoveries to present, traditional fine arts, decorative and applied arts, prints, drawing, and sculpture, folk and industrial art, archaeology, architecture and design, theater and festivals, painting and photography, performance art, aspects of material culture of interest to art historians, art reflecting western tradition in Asia, Africa, and Australia. 1975-2009; continued by International Bibliography of Art
Bibliotheque Nationale de France
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Site of the French National Library. Access to the BnF's collections in 17 departments through the BN-Opale Plus and Opaline catalogues and the Collective Catalog of the French libraries.
Big Ten Open Books 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Big Ten Open Books is a collaboration between the university presses and libraries of the Big Ten Academic Alliance. The first collection is on the subject of Gender and Sexuality studies and includes 100 open ebooks. Participating presses are Indiana University Press, Michigan State University Press, Northwestern University Press, Purdue University Press, University of Michigan Press, and University of Wisconsin Press.
BioMed Central 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Biomed Central is an STM (Science Technology and Medicine) publisher of peer reviewed open access journals. The portfolio of journals spans all areas of biology, biomedicine and medicine, and includes broad interest titles, such as BMC Biology and BMC Medicine alongside specialist journals, such as Retro virology and BMC Genomics. All original research articles published by BioMed Central are made freely accessible online immediately upon publication. Subjects: biochemistry, bioinformatics, biology, cell biology, developmental biology, ecology, evolutionary biology, genetics, genomics, immunology, microbiology, molecular biology, neurosciences, physiology, plant physiology, structural biology. Time span 2001- present.
BioOne
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
BioOne offers full text of high-impact research journals, focused in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences and published mostly by small societies and non-commercial publishers.
BIOSIS Citation Index, 1926-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Combines the unique BIOSIS content that is critical to life sciences research with powerful citation indexing only the Web of Science platform can provide. Includes comprehensive and relevant life sciences coverage.
BIOSIS Previews
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to the life sciences literature from more than 5,500 journals, books, conference proceedings, US patents, papers and posters, nomenclature rules, and taxonomic keys. Provides access to the traditional areas of biology, such as botany, zoology and microbiology, as well as related fields such as biomedical, agriculture, pharmacology and ecology. Interdisciplinary fields such as medicine, biochemistry, biophysics, bio-engineering and biotechnology are also included. Time span 1970-present.
Black Abolitionist papers, 1830-1865
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online full-text primary source collection is the first to comprehensively detail the extensive work of African Americans to abolish slavery in the United States prior to the Civil War.
Black Drama : Third Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Black Drama, now in its third edition, contains the full text of more than 1,700 plays written from the mid-1800s to the present by more than 200 playwrights from North America, English-speaking Africa, the Caribbean and other African diaspora countries. Many of the works are rare, hard to find, or out of print. More than 40 percent of the collection consists of previously unpublished plays by writers such as Langston Hughes, Ed Bullins, Willis Richardson, Amiri Baraka, Randolph Edmonds, Zora Neale Hurston, and many others
Black Drama: Second Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Black Drama, now in its expanded second edition, contains the full text of more than 1,200 plays written from the mid-1800s to the present by more than 200 playwrights from North America, English-speaking Africa, the Caribbean, and other African diaspora countries. Many of the works are rare, hard to find, or out of print. James Vernon Hatch, the playwright, historian, and curator of the landmark Hatch-Billops Collection, is the projects editorial advisor. More than 40 percent of the collection consists of previously unpublished plays by writers such as Langston Hughes, Ed Bullins, Willis Richardson, Amiri Baraka, Randolph Edmonds, Zora Neale Hurston, and many others.
Black Economic Empowerment: The National Negro Business League
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises the National Negro Business League files in Part III of the Booker T. Washington Papers in the possession of the Library of Congress.
Black Liberation Army and the Program of Armed Struggle 1970-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the FBI Library, this collection contains documents about the Black Liberation Army (BLA).
Black Life in America Series 1-2
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Sourced from more than 19,000 American and global news sources, including over 400 African American publications. Series 1: 1704-1877 Arrival in American through Reconstruction contains original reporting and contemporary perspectives on the lives of enslaved and newly freed people, Nat Turner’s revolt, Harriet Tubman’s heroism, the Underground Railroad, the Civil War and Reconstruction, and more. Includes editorials, obituaries, illustrations, and advertisements. Series 2:1878-1975 Jim Crow through the Civil Rights Movement provides insight into the efforts of civil rights leaders, as well as daily life during the Jim Crow era and the lasting contributions of African Americans in nearly every field imaginable. Includes reporting on the court decisions and policy changes that profoundly shaped the African American experience.Series 1-2: 1976-present.
Black Nationalism and the Revolutionary Action Movement: the papers of Muhammad Ahmad (Max Stanford)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of RAM records reproduces the writings and statements of the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM) and its leaders. It also covers organizations that evolved from or were influenced by RAM and persons that had close ties to RAM from 1962-1999.
Black Soldiers in the U.S. Armed Forces: Basic Documents, 1639-1973
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains documents that define and illustrate the status of blacks in the armed forces from colonial days until the end of the Vietnam War. Traces the development of official military policy toward Black personnel and the social and political forces influencing this policy. The documents included illustrate the roles of African Americans and the treatment they received.
Black Studies Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes current and retrospective bibliographic citations and abstracts from over 150 scholarly and popular journals, newspapers and newsletters from the U.S., Africa and the Caribbean. Indexing 1902 to present, full-text coverage of 40 core Black Studies periodicals 1998 to present. Coverage is international in scope and multidisciplinary - spanning cultural, economic, historical, religious, social, and political issues of vital importance to the Black Studies discipline.
Black Thought and Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains full text and bibliographic information about the black community and its leaders, from the 1700's to present times. Includes monographs, essays, articles, speeches, interviews, and other publications. Contains many never before published materials. Most significant, for the first time in electronic format, newspaper articles from the Black Panther Party publication is made available.
Bolivia: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The backstory to this archive revolves around the rise of the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), which emerged as a broadly based party.
Book Citation Index, 2005-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Allows users to search seamlessly across books, journals and conference proceedings to find the information most relevant to their work.
Boston Globe (1872 - 1988)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Boston Globe (1872-1988) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Brazil: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection covers the period following the resignation from the presidency of Janio Quadros in 1961 and the succession of Vice President Joao Goulart, whose years in office were marked by high inflation, economic stagnation, and the increasing influence of radical political elements. The armed forces, alarmed by these developments, staged a coup on March 31, 1964, during the administration of U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson.
Brazilian Digitization Project
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Executive branch serial documents issued by Brazil's national government during the period between 1821 and 1993, and by its provincial governments from the earliest available for each province to the end of the Empire. Collection includes: Provincial Presidential Reports (1830-1930); Almanack Laemmert (1844-1889); and Ministerial Reports (1821-1960).
Bridgeman
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An archive of images drawn from public and private collections worldwide, all of which are available for licensing. Includes all subjects, styles, periods, and media, and the extensive cataloging records may be searched by keyword. Includes lightbox display feature. Includes all subjects, styles, periods, and media. Includes all time periods.
British Campaign in Mesopotamia, 1914-1918
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This new collection provides the opportunity to review the telegrams, correspondence, minutes, memoranda, and confidential prints gathered together in the India Office Military Department on Mesopotamia.
British Library Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The British Library Newspapers collection feature London national newspapers, English regional papers, and newspapers from Scotland, Northern Ireland, and Wales. It includes the following six collections which can be searched separately or together: Part I: 47 publications from 1800-1900; Part II: 22 publications from 1800-1900; Part III: 35 publications from 1741-1950; Part IV: 23 publications from 1732-1950; Part V: 1746-1950 and Part VI: Ireland, 1783-1950..
British Mandate in Palestine, Arab-Jewish Relations, and the U.S. Consulate at Jerusalem, 1925-1941
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of correspondence and telegrams received and sent by the American consular post in Jerusalem. The topics covered by these records include the protection of the interests of American citizens, foreign trade, shipping, and immigration.
British Newsreels, 1911-1930. Culture and Society on Film
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This new video resource comprises around 6,000 early twentieth century Topical Budget newsreels drawn from the British Film Institute and Imperial War Museums. Topical Budget was one of the major British newsreels of the silent era. These silent films, which reached a weekly audience of up to five million, offer fascinating insights into British life, culture and society with subjects ranging from the First World War, the Royal Family, and domestic and international politics through to sport, leisure and fashion. The videos are accompanied by contextual and pedagogical features from experts in the fields of early film history and early twentieth century society, and fully accessible descriptive transcripts for each film
British Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
British Periodicals provides access to the searchable full text for nearly 500 British periodicals from the late seventeenth century to the early twentieth, comprising millions of high-resolution facsimile page images.
Broadcasting America: The Rise of Mass Media and Communications
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary sources covering the history of twentieth century broadcasting in America through the business decisions and innovations that led media corporations to transform radio from a one-to-one communication tool to a means of broadcasting information and ideas to the masses. Includes pamphlets from Special Collections and University Archives at UMD, covering market research into audience reception and demographics as well as discussions of ethics around depiction of violence and sex, and industry regulations. Coverage: 1920-1980
BroadwayHD
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection, available worldwide for educational streaming, includes access to 19 premium performances of plays and musicals from the New York theatre scene
Budget of the United States Government 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Federal budget publications for fiscal years 1996 to present and the Economic Report of the President for calendar years 1995 to the present.
BuildingGreen
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
BuildingGreen provides comprehensive content on sustainable design practices and green building materials. Shares expertise and lessons learned from design experts working in the field. Builds context for sustainable design strategies and what makes a building product or material green.
Built in America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) and the Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) collections, cooperatively administered since 1933 by the National Park Service and LC, document achievements in US architecture, engineering, and design through a comprehensive range of building types and engineering technologies. It is a record comprising more than 350,000 measured drawings, large-format photographs, and written histories for more than 35,000 historic structures and sites. 1933 to the present.
Bush Presidency and Development and Debate Over Civil Rights Policy and Legislation
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains materials on civil rights, the development of civil rights policy, and the debate over civil rights legislation during the administration of President George H.W. Bush and during his tenure as vice president
Business Source Complete
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Business Source Complete contains articles from thousands of newspapers, trade publications, such as the Harvard Business Review and other major key business magazines in all disciplines of business, including economics. Additional full text, non-journal content includes financial data, books, monographs, major reference works, book digests, conference proceedings, case studies, investment research reports, industry reports, market research reports, country reports, company profiles, SWOT analyses and more.
C
Cabell's Directory of Publishing Opportunities: Education
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Cabells journal directory assists authors in their publication journey by providing an interactive, searchable database which covers 18 distinct academic disciplines from more than ten thousand international scholarly journals. Our goal at Cabells is to facilitate scholarly communication by offering an independent and comprehensive platform, to help researchers evaluate and select the most appropriate outlets for their work. All content is rigorously reviewed against our journal selection policy in order to provide credible and thorough Bibliographic information and journal contact information, Manuscript submission criteria and review process guidelines, Journal quality metrics and levels of impact/influence, Powerful contextual and analysis tools and Author publication experiences.
Cambridge Histories Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Cambridge Histories Online offers online accessibility to full text titles for any type of historical research or study of a subject that has a historical element. Includes all the latest editions of the print series with automatic updates.Coverage: complete set through 2024
Carter Administration and Foreign Affairs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive treats U.S. foreign affairs during the presidency of Jimmy Carter. Notable subjects include the Arab-Israeli Conflict; the Camp David Accords; China; Panama Canal treaties; Strategic Arms Limitations Talks (SALT); the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and U.S. responses to the intervention; the Iran Hostage Crisis; human rights; among other topics.
Catalog of U.S. Government Publications (CGP)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains descriptive records for historical and current federal publications and provides direct links to those that are available online. Covers print and electronic publications created by Federal agencies and Congress. 1976 - present.
Catalog USMAI
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Catalog for the 16 libraries of the University System of Maryland and Affiliated Institutions. These are: Bowie State University; Coppin State College; Frostburg State University; Salisbury University; Towson University; University of Baltimore; University of Maryland, Baltimore including the Health Sciences and Human Services Library and Thurgood Marshall Law Library; University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC); University of Maryland, College Park; University of Maryland, Eastern Shore; University of Maryland University College; University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Morgan State University, and St. Mary's College of Maryland.
CDC Wonder
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Wide-ranging OnLine Data for Epidemiologic Research (WONDER) includes published documents on public health concerns, including reports, recommendations and guidelines, articles, and statistical research data published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and reference materials and bibliographies on health-related topics. Data sets in the areas of: chronic diseases, communicable diseases, environmental health, health practice and prevention, injury prevention, occupational health, demographic data, births and deaths.
Center for Research Libraries Catalog
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
CRL is a consortium of North American academic and independent research libraries. The consortium acquires and preserves newspapers, journals, documents, archives, and other traditional and digital resources for research and teaching and makes them available to member institutions through ILL. CRL holds over four million newspapers, journals, dissertations, archives, government publications, and other traditional and digital resources for research and teaching. Holdings include such diverse materials as 800,000 doctoral dissertations (including those of Albert Einstein, Dag Hammarskjold and other Nobel laureates); some of the earliest African-American newspapers; and the 100,000-plus-page archive of Cambodia's Khmer Rouge security force. Emphasis is on materials produced outside the United States, and the Center has special strength in publications and archives from many developing nations. These holdings are available for use by students, scholars and other researchers affiliated with CRL member institutions. For more information see https://www.crl.edu/?l1=5 All, although majority of materials emphasise early modern and modern periods.
Central Asia, Persia and Afghanistan: 1834-1922
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Correspondence and eyewitness accounts from the region’s key players documenting the Anglo-Afghan Wars. Includes the perspectives of Afghan and Persian rulers on foreign activities in the region, the interplay between China and Russia, and the expansion and fall of the Russian Empire.
Changing Men Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Changing Men Collections (CMC) comprises the largest research collection of materials about the modern men's movement in the United States and throughout the world. Over 400 vertical files document the development of the men's movement during the last 25 years. Consisting of research materials on key issues affecting contemporary men, there is information on such topics as men's consciousness raising, masculinity, initiation rites, men in therapy,
ChemSpider 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ChemSpider is a free chemical structure database providing fast access to over 58 million structures, properties, and associated information. By integrating and linking compounds from ~500 data sources, ChemSpider enables researchers to discover the most comprehensive view of freely available chemical data from a single online search. It is owned by the Royal Society of Chemistry. ChemSpider builds on the collected sources by adding additional properties, related information, and links back to original data sources. ChemSpider offers text and structure searching to find compounds of interest and provides unique services to improve this data by curation and annotation, and to integrate it with users applications. ChemSpider SyntheticPages (CS|SP) extends this model to cover reactions, providing quick publication, peer review and semantic enhancement of repeatable reactions.
Chicago Defender (1910-1975) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Chicago Defender (1910-1975) offers full page and article images with search-able full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Chicago Tribune (1849-1997) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Chicago Tribune (1849-1997) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Chicano Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An index to books and journal articles on Mexican-Americans. Records added since 1992 include the broader Latino experience, including Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, and Central American immigrants. Covers materials on Mexican-Americans. Records added since 1992 have expanded its scope to include the broader Latino experience, including Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, and Central American immigrants. The Chicano Database also includes the Spanish Speaking Mental Health Database, covering psychological, sociological, and educational literature. Art, bilingual education, education, health, labor, language, literature, mental health, politics and more. Coverage from the 1960s to the present, with selective coverage dating back to the early 1900s.
Child Trends Databank
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Continuously updated trend data with the latest national estimates for over 100 key indicators of child and youth well-being from Federal reports, Web sites, and data sets.
Children's Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Children's Core Collection provides titles chosen specifically for readers from preschool through grade five. Containing over 30,000 titles, this collection covers all genres.
Children's Literature and Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Showcases a broad range of richly illustrated primary source material that reveal the history and literature of childhood between the 1820s and 1920s. Documents chart how society evolved and how the perception of children within it changed over time.
Chile: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1930-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The records in this massive archive range from the era of the Great Depression to the height of the Cold War. The period of Radical Party dominance (1932-1952) saw the emergence of a strong middle-class party and its role as the key force in coalition governments.
China Academic Journals (CAJ) Full-text Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
CAJ is the most comprehensive full-text database of Chinese journals in the world. CAJ Series F, G, H, and J contain more than 4,400 journals. You can search the database to retrieve article titles and abstracts in English by clicking the drop-down on the top right and selecting "English," although all full text is in Chinese. The collection allows cross-searching multiple databases in the following subject areas: literature/history/philosophy (Series F), economics/politics/law (Series G), education/social sciences (Series H), and economics/management (Series J). Series F = 1994 through 4/15/2016Series G to J = 1994 through 12/31/2016
China Data Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Modules include China Statistics, China Census Data, China Geo-Explore
China, America and The Pacific
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Offers unique insights into the history of North American trade and cultural interactions with China. Coverage also includes Pacific trading centers, such as Hawaii.
China: Culture and Society
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to the entire Wason Pamphlet collection at Cornell University. Mostly in English and published between c.1750 and 1929, these rare pamphlets make up one of the most extensive collections of literature on China and the Chinese in the Western world. Addresses a wide variety of research interests and topics surrounding Chinese history, religion, culture, and everyday life.
China: Trade Politics and Culture 1793-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains documents encompassing events from the earliest English embassy to the birth and early years of the People’s Republic. Collects resources from nine archives to give insight into the changes in China during this period. Includes key documents relating to the Chinese Maritime Customs service, original reports of the Amherst and Macartney embassies, letters relating to the first Opium War, survivors’ descriptions of the Boxer War, and collected diaries and personal photographs of the Bowra family.
Christian Science Monitor
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides citations, abstracts and full-text articles from the newspaper. A source of national and international news and analysis, particularly news of developing countries. Sep 30, 1988 (Volume 80, Issue 215) - current. Not Available: Nov 7, 1990 - Mar 20, 1992. Full-text: Sep 30, 1988 (Volume 80, Issue 215) - current.
Chronicle of Higher Education
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Description: Provides news, information, advice, and job listings for college and university faculty members and administrators.
Chronicling America: Historic American Newspapers 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This site allows you to search and view newspaper pages from 1880-1922 (and eventually back to 1836) and find information about American newspapers published between 1690-present. Chronicling America is sponsored jointly by the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Library of Congress as part of the National Digital Newspaper Program (NDNP).
Church Missionary Society Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Features publications from the Church Missionary Society (CMS) and the South American Missionary Society between 1804 and 2009. The Church Missionary Gleaner, started in 1838 by Charles Hodgson, was adopted by CMS as a two-penny magazine with rich woodcut illustrations to record and inform the public of its activities; it went on to become Yes Magazine and was published until 2009. It also focuses on the publications of the Church Missionary Society medical mission auxiliaries, the work among women in Asia and the Middle East, newsletters from native churches, student missions in China and Japan, and 'home' material including periodicals aimed specifically at women and children subscribers.
CINAHL Plus with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
CINAHL Plus with Full Text is an online source for full text nursing and allied health journals, providing full text for more than 560 journals indexed in CINAHL. This database contains 600,000 full-text articles dating back to 1937, as well as searchable cited references, legal cases, clinical innovations, critical paths, drug records, research instruments and clinical trials. Covers nursing, biomedicine, health sciences librarianship, alternative complementary medicine, consumer health and allied health disciplines. Time span: 1937-present.
This database does not contain author first names. A search on 'Rice, Flora' will find records with 'Rice, F' or 'Rice, FM' in the author field. You can't type in 'Rice, Flora C'; you'll get zero hits.
CiteSeer 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
CiteSeer is a scientific literature digital library that aims to improve the dissemination and feedback of scientific literature, and to provide improvements in functionality, usability, availability, cost, comprehensiveness, efficiency, and timeliness. Indexes Postscript and PDF research articles on the Web, and uses sophisticated techniques to located documents on the world wide web. Computer Science, Technology
Civil Rights and Social Activism in Alabama: The Papers of John LeFlore, 1926-1976 AND Records of the Non-Partisan Voters League, 1956-1987
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Civil Rights and Social Activism in Alabama: The Papers of John LeFlore, 1926-1976 and Records of the Non-Partisan Voters League, 1956-1987
Civil Rights and Social Activism in the South - James A. Dombrowski and the Southern Conference Educational Fund
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of Dombrowski's correspondence and papers as leader of the Southern Conference for Human Welfare, 1941-1948, and executive director of the Southern Conference Educational Fund, 1948-1966..
Civil Rights and Social Justice
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Containing publications from the Commission on Civil Rights, legislative histories on landmark legislation, briefs from relevant U.S. Supreme Court cases, and more, this database covers civil rights in the United States as their legal protections and definitions are expanded to cover more and more Americans.
Civil War in Words and Deeds
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
First-person accounts, compiled in the postwar period and early 20th Century period, chronicle the highs and lows of army life and battles from 1861 through 1865.
Civil War Service Reports of Union Army Generals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These generals' reports of service represent an attempt by the Adjutant General’s Office (AGO) to obtain more complete records of the service of the various Union generals serving in the Civil War. In 1864, the Adjutant General requested that each such general submit ". . . a succinct account of your military history . . . since March 4th, 1861."
CLACSO
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text database of a selected number of social science journals from Latin American and the Spanish Caribbean. Coverage is from 2003 to the present. Also provides access to e-books and some theses.
Clase and Peridica
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
CLASE indexes documents published in Latin American journals specializing in the social sciences and humanities. PERIDICA covers journals specializing in science and technology.
CLASE: Citas Latinoamericanas en Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index to approximately 1,500 humanities and social sciences journals published in Latin America and the Caribbean. Includes links to some full-text articles. *Hint: The host server may be slow at times. If you get a time-out message you may have to repeat your search several times.
Classical Music in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
"Streaming video collection of performances, masterclasses, and interviews. Performances include orchestral, choral, and chamber music. For operas, take a look at the separate database Opera in Video. Or, search Opera in Video and Classical Music in Video together through the database Music Online.
Classical Music Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Classical Music Library is a large multi-label database of Classical music recordings with a particular focus on content that meets the needs of educators and students. Audio tracks are supplemented by reference materials and backed by tools allowing users to create their own Playlists or to click on Themed Playlists that group tracks in various ways: e.g., by music textbook, composer, performer, style period, genre. Provides in-depth coverage of classical music from its inception to modern recordings. Approximately 20,000 licensed recordings are included along with thousands of biographies. Middle Ages to present.
Classical Music Reference Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains the full text to such standard reference sources as Baker's Biographical Dictionary of Musicians, Nicholas Slonimsky's Music Since 1900, and Women Composers: Music Through the Ages, as well as several less ambitious, but useful works. This resource complements, and should be used in conjunction with Oxford Music Online, which is also available through ResearchPort.
Cleveland Call and Post
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Cleveland Call and Post (1934-1991) offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue. more info...
ClimateWire
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ClimateWire covers the debate over climate policy and its effects on business, the environment and society. It covers in-depth every day the key issues that surround the debate over climate change. It deliver news-breaking coverage to the people who make, influence or will be affected by climate policy. Federal agency programs, legislation, policies and funding; State program development and implementation; International agency activities; Corporate/multi- national response to climate concerns; Kyoto implementation and Post-Kyoto negotiations; and more. Time span: 2009 to the present. Updated daily at 8 am.
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of the Code of Federal Regulations. A codification of general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. 1997 to present.
Code of Federal Regulations (HEIN)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of the United States Code, 1925-1926 to the present. This is the codification by subject matter of the general and permanent laws of the United States. It can be browsed by volume and searched by title or citation.
Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online version of the Code of Maryland Regulations. Maryland State agency regulations are compiled in the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR). COMAR contains 33 Titles, with each Title usually corresponding to a department or agency. Each regulation is assigned a unique four-part codification number. For example, 09.12.01.02, represents Title 09, Subtitle 12, Chapter 01, and Regulation 02.
Cold War: Voices of Confrontation and Conciliation Hosting
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
For almost fifty years, the United States and the Soviet Union were engaged in the Cold War. This global stalemate emerged after both nations had been allies against Hitler during World War II. This collection of oral histories from the "behind-the-scenes" decision and policy makers answers a wide range of popular and academic questions surrounding this long period of political and military tension.
Colección Revolución 1910-1921
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reproduces documents from various archives, under the protection of the Archivo General de la Nación, and is divided into the following documentary series: (1) The Flores Brothers revolutionary activities MAGO: movement Comun in the Baja California region; (2) Revolution and regime Madero: correspondence, reports and military activities, reports on the political situation in some States; (3) Emiliano Zapata, the Plan of Ayala and his agrarian policy: land deals, reports of troops and mail operations; (4) Revolution and regime Constitutionalist: circulars, laws, decrees and manifestos; and, (5) Sovereign revolutionary Convention: together prior to the sessions and sessions held 1914-1915.
Collection of Biostatistics Research Archive (COBRA)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
COBRA is a repository of biostatistics technical reports and working papers submitted by researchers from around the United States. Topics covered by the COBRA database include epidemiology, genetics, bioinformatics, and much more.
Colombia: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents in this collection offer a snapshot of Colombia at the height of the Cold War. Numerous records track the impact of the Castro revolution in Cuba.
Colonial America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized records of the Board of Trade, the Secretary of State for the Southern Department, and the Secretary of State for the Colonies, who together were responsible for administering British colonies in mainland North America and the Caribbean, covering the period from the 1660s to the 1780s, with some earlier and later material. Records include letters, charters and commissions, orders to officials, court records, maps and building plans, printed pamphlets and newspapers, acts of colonial assemblies, military reports, and shipping lists, among others. They document many aspects of colonial life, including the development of colonial institutions, education, economic and industrial development, relations with Native Americans, warfare, religion, slavery, immigration, and many others.
Colonial Caribbean
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Extensive digital resource covering three centuries of Caribbean history, drawn from the archives of the British Colonial Office, National Archives, UK. Stretches from the turbulent years of early British settlement to the rise of the abolition movement, amongst the fierce rivalries with the Spanish, Danish, French, and Dutch in the Caribbean region. Documents the rise of absentee landlords, and traces the rise and decline of the slave trade .Explores a crucial shift in the fight to end slavery. The documents cover the passing of the Slavery Abolition Act and the impact this had on the government of Caribbean islands, including the introduction of apprenticeships and resistance to the changes in legislation.
Colonial Encounters: The Lower Potomac River Valley, 1500-1720 AD 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Chesapeake region was home to diverse people whose experiences form a rich and complex story. This project focuses on the Potomac Valley and synthesizes the results of decades of research by archaeologists and historians on sites occupied by Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans. Through close attention to materiality—including buildings, landscapes, and portable objects ranging from the quotidian to the exotic—the project examines the complex cultural terrain that emerged in the region. Includes detailed summaries of over 30 Potomac Valley sites, artifact and context databases, and images of important or unusual artifacts. All data, including the artifact databases, can be downloaded for the use of other scholars. Includes Maps, GIS data, catalogs, bibliographies and list of external links.
Colonial State Papers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A collection of thousands of scanned documents and bibliographic records relating to English activities in the American, Canadian, and West Indian colonies between the 16th and 18th centuries. The earliest English settlements in North America, encounters with Native Americans, piracy in the Atlantic and Caribbean, the trade in slaves and English conflicts with the Spanish and French are all covered in this database.
Communication & Mass Media Complete
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides full text and indexing for journals in communication, mass media
and other closely-related fields. Combines the resources formerly known as
CommSearch and Mass Media Articles Index. CommSearch offered bibliographic and keyword references to 26 journals in communication studies, with coverage extending to the inaugural issue of each. It also included cover-to-cover indices of NCAs six journals, and abstracts from their earliest appearance in NCA journals. Mass Media Articles Index provided citation coverage of over 40,000 articles related to mass media and published in over 60 research journals, as well as major journalism reviews, recent encyclopedias, and handbooks in the area of communications studies. EBSCO has combined and expanded the extensive coverage of these two resources to create CMMC.
Community Health Status Indicators
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides county-specific reports of community health status for local jurisdictions across the U.S.
Compact Memory: Internetarchiv Juedischer Periodika
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of selected German Jewish newspapers from the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries.
Company Nexis Dossier
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Company Nexis Dossier “allows you to get comprehensive information on a company. Nexis Dossier mines data from numerous company and financial sources for more than 240,000,000 public and private companies worldwide”. Company Nexis Dossier offers the following options: Find A Company/Create a Company List /Compare Companies.
Confederate Newspapers: A Collection from Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, Virginia and Alabama
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection is a mixture of issues and papers from Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, Virginia, and Alabama ranging from 1861-1865. These newspapers "recorded the real and true history of public opinion during the war. In their columns is to be found the only really correct and indicative 'map of busy life, its fluctuations and its vast concerns' in the South, during her days of darkness and of trial.
Conference Proceedings Citation Index, 1990-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This index helps researchers access the published literature from the most significant conferences, symposia, seminars, and more.
Confidential Print Africa 1834-1996
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Complete volumes of all British Government Confidential Print for Africa, from the Colonial, Dominion, Foreign, and War Offices. Covers the modern period of European colonization of the continent, from coastal trading in the early nineteenth century through the Conference of Berlin of 1884 and the subsequent Scramble for Africa, to the abuses of the Congo Free State, fights against tropical disease, Italy's defeat by the Abyssinians, World War II, apartheid in South Africa, and colonial moves towards independence.
Confidential Print Latin America,1833-1969
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of papers related to Latin America issued by the British Government between c. 1820 and 1970. The material ranges from single-page letters and telegrams to comprehensive dispatches, investigative reports, and texts of treaties. All items marked Confidential Print' were printed and circulated immediately to leading officials in the Foreign Office, to the Cabinet, and to heads of British missions abroad.
Confidential Print Middle East 1839-1969
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Complete volumes of all British Colonial Office and Foreign Office Confidential Print for the Middle East. Taking in the countries of the Arabian Peninsula, the Levant, Iraq, Turkey, and many of the former Ottoman lands in Europe, Iran, Afghanistan, Egypt, and Sudan. Includes materials from the various committees on Mesopotamia and Palestine, on Transjordan and the military base at Aden, on Syria and Lebanon, and on the Passfield Report of 1930 and the early phases of the Arab League after 1945.
Confidential Print North American 1824-1961
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of the Confidential Print for the United States, Canada and the English-speaking Caribbean, with some coverage of Central and South America, and covers such topics as slavery, Prohibition, the First and Second World Wars, racial segregation, territorial disputes, the League of Nations, McCarthyism, and the nuclear bomb.
Conflict in Indochina: Foreign Office Files for Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia 1959-1979
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The resource provides comprehensive coverage of the key events during the War in Vietnam, and the wider impact on Laos and Cambodia. The material is drawn from The National Archives, UK and covers the role of regional actors within Indochina, including China, the US and the Soviet Union, as they competed for influence within the context of the Cold War. Broader themes include examinations of Anglo-American relations and British foreign policy. In depth files on the internal politics of Laos, Cambodia, and North and South Vietnam further explore increasing instability across the region following French decolonisation.
Congressional Publications
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to the full text of congressional publications. Includes: hearings, legislative histories, committee prints and reports, House and Senate documents, Congressional Record, Serial Set, CRS Reports, bills, public laws, regulations...
Congressional hearings, public issues, legislation, history, and legal research.
Congressional Record
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Offical record of the proceedings and debates of the United States Congress, published daily when Congress is in session. 1995-present.
Contemporary World Music
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An online listening database featuring popular genres of world music, including worldbeat, Bollywood, reggae and more. This database complements Smithsonian Global Sound, which focuses more on traditional genres. Many excellent world music record labels, such as Lyrichord, Topic, and Budamusique, are represented.
Copper Technical Reference Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Abstracts of journal articles, technical reports, patents and more on all aspects of copper, copper alloys, and copper technology Includes abstracts of 5582 documents published between 1863 and 1964. Major areas of coverage include: extractive metallurgy, melting and casting, fabrication, surface treatment , joining, powder and physical metallurgy, properties, corrosion and oxidation, composites, copper compounds, superconductivity, competitive materials, applications, insulation, pollution control, and energy. 1965-present. Subject searches include titles and abstracts in the search.
Correspondence from German Concentration Camps and Prisons, 1936-1945
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of items, including letters; receipts for parcels; money orders and personal effects; paper currency; and realia (including Star of David Badges that Jews were forced to wear), originating from prisoners held in German concentration camps, internment and transit camps, Gestapo prisons, and POW camps, during and just prior to World War II.
Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Founded in 1969,the Council's Mission is to disseminate multi-disciplinary information on tall buildings and sustainable urban environments, to maximize the international interaction of professionals involved in creating the built environment, and to make the latest knowledge available to professionals in a useful form. The Council is an international not-for-profit organization supported by architecture, engineering, planning, and development and construction professionals. The CTBUH is the the world's leading body in the field of tall buildings and the recognized source of information on tall buildings internationally. It is the arbiter of the criteria upon which tall building height is measured.
Counseling and Therapy in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides the largest and richest online collection of video available for the study of social work, psychotherapy, psychology, and psychiatric counseling. The collection's wealth of video and multiplicity of perspectives allow students and scholars to see, experience, and study counseling in ways never before possible. This current release includes over 500 videos totaling roughly 540 hours.
Counterattack Project: The FBI Files
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains FBI documents pertaining to monitoring of the publication and publishers of Counterattack, which sought to provide the average American with "facts to combat communism." Counterattack was a weekly subscription-based, anti-communist, mimeographed newsletter, which ran from 1947 to 1955 and was published by American Business Consultants, a "private, independent organization.
Country at a Glance Tables
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Presents key indicators tracing the trends in social and economic development from the last three decades.
CQ Almanac
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Coverage and analysis of U.S. congressional legislation from 1945 to today. Provides in-depth analysis of the path legislation takes through Congress, including how bills are changed, derailed, or ultimately passed during an annual session of Congress. Updated annually.
CQ Committee Coverage
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides comprehensive coverage of every open committee and subcommittee markup, as well as some that are closed. Provides the debates and discussions that take place during markup sessions, as well as summaries of all amendments offered roll-call vote breakdowns, links to committee amendment text and voice-vote outcomes. 1989 - present.
CQ Congress Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An analytical survey of the history and development; powers; personalities; current developments; and legislation considered and passed by the U.S. Congress. Includes data on voting alignments, interest group ratings, advanced CQ key vote analysis, and advanced member analysis. The database is organized into four sections: Public Policy Legislation; Members of Congress; CQ Key Votes; and the Legislative Branch.
CQ Magazine
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) CQ Weekly
Weekly congressional news and analysis. Full text available from 1983 -- present. All the major policy issues confronting the U.S. Congress: Defense, Economy & Taxes, the Environment, Foreign Policy, Health, Education, and Welfare, Crime, etc.
CQ Politics in America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Profiles of all the current members of the U.S. Congress. Information includes biographical data, committee assignments, election results, CQ Key Votes, interest group ratings, CQ Vote Studies, and contact information; campaign finance, partisan caucuses, standing committees; detailed descriptions of each member's congressional district as drawn after the 2000 census, including updated maps and voting trends; and the vote for president in each of the House districts. 2000 to the present; updated for each new Congressional session (every 2 years).
CQ Researcher
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text database that provides comprehensive analysis of each topic, including history and background information, relevant pro & con arguments, current status, bibliographies, contact information, and outlooks on upcoming "hot topics" in current events. Covers news topics in a wide range of subject fields, from social issues to the environment, health, education, politics, and science and technology. Online access to issues dating back to 1923
CQ Voting and Elections Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text database of statistics, analyses, definitions, and historical material on the American voter, major and minor political parties, campaigns and elections, and historical and modern races for Congress, the presidency, and governorships. Users can customize data on candidate and office history, seat status and competition, party control, split districts, third parties, party switches and special elections. Also includes an encyclopedia, calendar, and chronology. Six main categories: Presidential Elections, Congressional Elections, Gubernatorial Elections, Campaigns and Elections, Political Parties, and Voters and Demographics.
Credo Reference
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online reference books from 2000-2010 covering major subject areas.

Crime in the U.S.
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
FBI statistics on crime in the United States as reported by 17,000 jurisdictions. Also provides access to the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), Hate Crime Statistics, and Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted.
Criminal Justice Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Criminal Justice Abstracts, formerly produced by Sage Publications, includes bibliographic records covering essential areas related to criminal justice and criminology. The increasing globalization of criminology is reflected in Criminal Justice Abstracts' coverage of hundreds of journals from around the world.
Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
Crisis in the Dominican Republic: Records of the U.S. State Department Central Files, February 1963-1966
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes U.S. State Department, U.S. Embassy, and Dominican Republic governmental dispatches, instructions, and miscellaneous correspondence dealing with topics such as political affairs and government; public order and safety; military affairs; social matters (including history and culture); economic conditions (including immigration and emigration); industry and agriculture; communications and transportation; and navigation. The material is in English, making the information contained in these files particularly accessible.
Cross-National Time Series-Data Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Cross-National Time Series-Data Archive provides data from 1815 onwards for over 200 countries. Domestic, political, demographic, social, and economic data are included. Domestic Conflict Events data includes: Assassinations, General Strikes, Terrorism/Guerrilla Warfare, Major Government Crises, Purges, Riots, Revolutions, and Anti-government Demonstrations.
There are now twelve years of the optional LINKS files, which consist of links to media sources for each of the above events for the years 2011- 2022


Cuartel General del Sur, 1910-1925
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection contains correspondence addressed to Emiliano Zapata; combat reports; relations with troop commanders and officers; promotion and appointment requests; allegations of abuses committed by military personnel; applications for food, uniforms and ammunition; letters and telegrams on the transfer of prisoners. Document types include: transcripts, journals, laws and draft laws on land, drafts of circulars and manifestos by General Emiliano Zapata; and documents relating to the signing and ratification of the Plan de Ayala organizations.
Current Chemical Reactions (CCR), 1986-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Delivers the latest synthetic methods reported in over 100 of the world's leading organic chemistry journals. Each reaction provides complete reaction diagrams, critical conditions, bibliographic data, and author abstracts.
Current Contents Connect (CCC), 1998-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A current awareness database that helps you quickly find, analyze, and share information in the sciences, social sciences, arts, and humanities. You get integrated access to high quality literature through a unified platform.
Cyprus Crisis/1967: Standoff Between Greece And Turkey
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises the entire contents of the Primary Source Media microfilm product entitled "The Cyprus Crisis, 1967: The State Department's Crisis Files
D
Dance Education Literature and Research descriptive index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) DELRdi
The Dance Education Literature and Research descriptive index (DELRdi) is an index of literature and research from 1926 to the present. It contains extensive descriptions of 4,500+ literary works including theses, dissertations, journal articles, conference proceedings and other reports from over 200+ different publications and organizations and 147 university dance programs. In addition to providing basic citation information, the DELRdi provides detailed descriptive information on the methodology, techniques, and characteristics of the research documented in the index. The DELRdi is the culminating product of a four-year research project supported by the United States Department of Education (2001-2005).
Dance Online: Dance in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streaming video collection of dance performances including ballet, tap, jazz, contemporary, experimental, improvisational as well as the forerunners of the forms and pioneers of modern concert dance. Browse by genre, performer, choreographer, company, role, ensemble and venue. Additional materials include interviews, documentary histories, and editorials. Features include creating playlists and video clips.
Data Citation Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A single point of access to quality research data from around the world. Through linked content and summary information, this data is displayed within the broader context of the scholarly research.
Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
National, state, and regional survey data for child and adolescent health.
Data.Census.gov 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Population, Housing, Economic, and Geographic data from the Census Bureau. Also includes maps, statistics, fact sheets and other publications. Covering data 2010 - Present.
Data.Gov 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
"The home of the U.S. Government's open data." Provides data, tools and resources to conduct research, develop web and mobile apps and design data visualizations and much more.
David Bailie Warden Papers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes David Bailler 's writings on and interest in politics, literature, medicine, chemistry, natural science, and education resulted in lively correspondence with many leaders in these fields -- among them Jefferson, Gallatin, Baron Alexander von Humboldt, Joseph Gay-Lussac, Washington Irving, and Alexander Dallas Bache. These letters and manuscripts are published here for the first time.
David Rumsey Map Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The historical map collection from the 18th to 20th centuries it has over 37,000 maps and images online. Register in order to download high resolution images.
DBpia
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
DBpia provides full text databases including more than two million articles from about 3,300 Korean scholarly journals in 8 different fields of humanities, social science, natural science, engineering, medicalscience, Agriculture & fishery, Art & Kinesiology, and other interdisciplinary studies. All the back issues of each journal title are available and title, author, keyword, journal title and publisher searchable. Coverage since 1998.
Defining Gender
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to a vast body of original British source material to enrich the teaching and research experience of those studying history, literature, sociology, and education from a gendered perspective. Covers the ideals of social conduct, power distribution within the family, consumption and leisure, education of men and women, and gendered perceptions of the body to analyse and challenge the changing views and ideas surrounding traditional gender roles.
Democracy in Turkey, 1950-1959: Records of the U.S. State Department Classified Files
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of State Department documents provides access to unique primary source materials on the political, economic and social development of Turkey during a period of democratization in the 1950s.
Derwent Innovations Index, 1963-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Facilitates precise patent searching, letting you conduct patent and citation searches of inventions in chemical, electrical, electronic, and mechanical engineering. Also merges value-added patent information with patent citation information.
Design and Applied Arts Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes citations and abstracts to articles from international design and craft journals and data on over 50,000 designers, craftspeople, studios, workshops, and firms. Includes two supplementary databases: Education Directory and Periodicals Directory. Covers all areas of design and craft including photography, graphics, advertising, architecture, interior design, ceramics, glass, textiles, metalwork, and industrial design. 1973 - present.
Detroit Free Press (1831-1922) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Detroit Free Press (1831-1922) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Development of Environmental Health Policy: Pope A. Lawrence Papers 1924-1983
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection documents the varied research and policymaking career of Pope A. Lawrence, an environmental health specialist with the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare and the Public Health Service. His papers contain a wealth of primary source research materials and scientific data related to: environmental and industrial hygiene; radon activity; use of beryllium as a rocket propellant; uranium mining; and toxicological, biological and chemical weapon systems.
Dialnet 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the Universidad de La Rioja, Logrono, Spain, Dialnet is a database of science, social science, and arts & humanities journals from Spain. Abstracts and full- text of selected articles are available.
Diaries of Henry Lewis Stimson, 1909-1945, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Henry Lewis Stimson diaries, spanning the years 1909-45, cover a long public career and offer scholars an invaluable historical source.
Diary of the Operations Division, War Department General Staff, 1942–1946
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The War Department’s Operations Division (OPD), created in March 1942, provided the strategic and logistical planning for all theaters of operation. This official division diary comprises summaries of information received from commanding generals and sent by the OPD daily between 29 March 1942 and 31 May 1946.
Diccionario de Terminos Clave de ELE 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Spanish language dictionary of linguistic terms.
Dickinson Electronic Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A website devoted to the study of Emily Dickinson, her writing practices, writings directly influencing her work, and critical and creative writings generated by her work.
Dictionnaire des Peintres Belges
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Dictionary of Belgian painters covers the life and production of some 6,300 painters, from Van Eyck, Broederlam, Magritte, and Delvaux to Rubens, Nicolie, and Boulenger; the largest to the smallest representatives of Flemish and Belgian painters.
Digger - the Archaeological Search Engine
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digger is an archaeological specialist search engine. Product of the University of Freiburg, Institute for Prehistoryand Early History and Archaeology of the Middle Ageshttp://www.ufg.uni-freiburg.de/d/inst/
It will only be considered such sites in the search, the offer actually archaeologically relevant content.
Digital Collections at UMD
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Search the digital content from University of Marylands Libraries to access material that supports your research and sparks your curiosity. These digital objects represent a small fraction of the unique material available at the University of Maryland Libraries, so contact us to learn more about related content.
Digital Loeb Classical Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The digital Loeb Classical Library extends the founding mission of James Loeb with an interconnected, fully searchable, perpetually growing virtual library of all that is important in Greek and Latin literature.
Digital National Security Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text online of previously classified primary documents central to US foreign and military policy since 1945. Comprised of more than 20 topic-specific collections, including Afghanistan, Berlin and Cuban Missile Crises, China, El Salvador, Iran and Iran-Contra, Iraqgate, Japan, Nicaragua, Phillipines, Presidential Directives on National Security, South Africa, Soviet Union, Terrorism, U.S. Espionage and Intelligence, U.S. Military Uses of Space, and U.S. Nuclear History and Non-proliferation Policy. Varies by collection; generally sometime during the Cold War period, 1945 to 1991.
Digital Sanborn Maps
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fire insurance maps are a core resource for documenting the development of neighborhoods over time. Founded in 1867, the Sanborn Map Company was the primary American publisher of fire insurance maps for nearly 100 years. They show lot numbers, square footage of lots, street addresses, which lots have buildings and their shape and materials. They indicate the type of construction, property lines, and the number of stories. They can narrow the date when a building was constructed. They can be used to track demolition, recent construction and alterations. They identify plot numbers necessary to access deed and other civil records. This digital product provides access to the maps of all United States' states. Users have the ability to easily manipulate the maps, magnify and zoom in on specific sections, and layer maps from different years. 1867-1970
Digitale Bibliothek Deutscher Klassiker
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Bibliothek deutscher Klassiker series has been in publication since 1981. It covers the works of major authors spanning eleven centuries and includes historical, philosophical, theological, political and art history texts. Collections of essays, speeches and other non-literary material add context and background material. As every individual text is edited to the same high standard, you can rely on the quality and accuracy of each edition and the collection as a whole.
Direction of Trade Statistics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the international Monetary Fund, provides data on the country and area distribution of countries' exports and imports by their partners. To download, set up a free personal account.
Directory of Open Access Books (DOAB) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
DOAB is a discovery service that indexes and provides a searchable and browsable directory of nearly 42,000 peer-reviewed E-books from more than 600 publishers worldwide.
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is an Open Access database. The Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) contains over 15,000 peer-reviewed open access journals covering all areas of science, technology, medicine, social sciences, arts and humanities. Open access journals from all countries and in all languages are included.
Disabilities in Society, 17th - 20th Century
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
DBF Description: History of Disabilities demonstrates how society has presented and treated individuals with disabilities historically. Materials in this inaugural collection in the new series include records of treatments, methods of education, forms of remediation, and more. Reports and proceedings of organizations and institutions that sought to help or heal those with disabilities are included, as well as records of policies and programs. Through this collection, researchers will grasp the many forms of institutional discrimination, political exclusion, and social control under which disabled individuals struggled. Materials chronicle how individuals were classified and treated and how some overcame physical or mental challenges to defy perceptions of being disabled.
Dissertations & Theses Global
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database is the an authoritative source for information about doctoral dissertations and master's theses. The database represents the work of authors from over 1,000 graduate schools and universities. Full text is available from 1997 to the present. It also contains a significant amount of new international dissertations and theses both in citations and in full text. It offers access to more than 90 percent of the doctoral dissertations accepted each year in North America. The database also covers thousands of dissertations and theses from around the globe. Time Span: 1861 to present.
Doctoral Dissertations in Musicology Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An international database of bibliographic records for completed dissertations and new dissertation topics in the fields of musicology, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Contains more than 13,500 records, including the corrected and updated contents of the earlier printed editions of Doctoral Dissertations in Musicology.
Documenting White Supremacy and its Opponents in the 1920s
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Formerly known as Understanding Hate in America .Collection of Klan and other white nationalist newspapers alongside newspapers published by Catholic, African-American and Jewish organizations to counter the narrative of hate and bigotry.The collection contains national Klan publications as well as regional and local Klan produced papers. The collection will also include a set of papers sympathetic to the Klan alongside anti-Klan publications.
Docuseek Complete Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Docuseek streams essential independent, social-issue and environmental films providing exclusive access to content from renowned leaders in documentary film distribution.

Docuseek2 Complete Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A collection of issues-based documentary films from leading film producers and distributors including Bullfrog Films, lcarus Films, the BBC,the National Films, Board of Canada, CBC, Television Trust for the Environment, MediaStorm, Terra Nova Films, KimStim, Scorpion TV and other independent filmmakers. Disciplines supported by this collection include environmental studies and sciences, sociology, anthropology, global studies and arts. 2019-2020
DRAM
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Database of Recorded American Music
A scholarly resource for recordings by American composers and performers. It provides CD quality streaming audio, complete and original liner notes, and essays from independent record labels and sound archives including New World Records, CRI, Albany, innova, Cedille, XI, Pogus, Deep Listening, and Mutable Music labels.
DRUM: Digital Repository at the University of Maryland
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
DRUM provides digital repository services for the University of Maryland. Currently there are three types of materials in our collections: faculty deposited documents, a Library managed collection of UM doctoral dissertations, and a collection of technical reports. New submissions to the thesis/dissertation collections are added automatically as they are received from the Graduate School. Currently, the Graduate School deposits all theses and dissertations from a given semester after the official graduation date. This means that there may be up to a 4 month delay in the appearance of a given thesis/dissertation in DRUM. 2003- present.
more...
Dutch Paintings of the Seventeenth Century
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The National Gallery of Art proudly presents its remarkable collection of Dutch seventeenth-century paintings, with entries written by curator Arthur K. Wheelock Jr. The Gallery's Dutch collection, which numbers more than 130 paintings, includes works by many of the finest masters of the golden Age, including Rembrandt van Rijn, Johannes Vermeer, Frans Hals, and Alebert Cuyp. In it are outstanding examples of portraits, genre scenes, landscapes, marine paintings, still life's, and biblical and mythological scenes that have made this school of painting one of the most beloved and admired in the history of European art.
E
E & E News PM
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
E&E News PM provides readers with late-breaking energy and environment news from Capitol Hill, across the country, and around the world
e-Library Russia 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Scientific electronic Library. Library RU-the largest Russian information portal, in Russian .of 2,500 Russian scholarly journals in all fields . including more than one 1'3000 journals in the public domain . Only public domain journals are accessible full text to UMD . In order to see full text one needs to individually register with the site which is free.
Early American Imprints, Series I (1639-1800)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This digital collection contains virtually every books, pamphlet and broadside published in America over a 160-year period. American History. Contains books, pamphlets, games, periodicals, etc. 17th and 18th Century
Early American Imprints, Series II: Shaw-Shoemaker 1801-1819
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Based on the noted American Bibliography, 1801-1819, provides a comprehensive set of American books, pamphlets and broadsides published in the early part of the 19th century.
Early American Maryland Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part of America's Historical Papers, a digitized and fully searchable collection of over 70 Maryland newspapers, including the Maryland Gazette (1728-1832), Baltimore American (1861-1870, 1903-1922), and Annapolis Gazette (1854-1874). Coverage varies by title, ranging from 1728 to 1922, with most titles covering the mid-1800's.
Early English Books Online - Text Creation Partnership
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A searchable database of accurately keyboarded and tagged editions of the full text of a significant portion of works in the EEBO collection. The Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership has proposed to create 25,000 searchable and readable editions that link immediately to the corresponding image files in EEBO. Covers all subjects. 1473-1700.
Early English Books Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) EEBO
Database of most imprints (books, pamphlets, and broadsides) published in English anywhere or published in any language in English-speaking countries, appearing from 1473 to 1700. One can search the full ASCII text of selected* documents and view both the text and the corresponding original page images. Useful for research in all subject areas during the early modern period. Also helpful to study the history of books and printing.
Early Modern English: Society, Culture and Everyday Life 1500-1700
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers an array of topics relating to England during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with a significant focus on the lives of ‘everyday’ people. Volumes of correspondence from more prominent families look at governance, politics, monarchy, relations between landowners and tenants, war, politics, and relations with England’s neighbors.
East India Company
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Tells the story of trade with the east, politics, and the rise and fall of the British Empire. Consists of the India Office Records, covering classes IOR/A, B and D, and comprises the foundational charters of the East India Company, plus the minutes and memoranda of its various central administrative organs. This is material generated by the East India Company’s London headquarters and top-level material sent back by Company servants overseas, and pertains to the governance of the Company and its territorial possessions.
EBSCO databases
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
EBSCO eBook Academic Comprehensive Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A multidisciplinary collection that includes over 200,000 e-books covering a large selection of academic subjects and features e-books from leading publishers and university presses.
EBSCO eBook Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A collection of E-texts covering topics specifically chosen by Maryland Academic Libraries. Collection strengths include computer science, business, international relations, education, environmental science, psychology, and civil rights law and history.
EBSEES: European Bibliography of the East European Studies 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The EBSEES (European Bibliography of Slavic and East European Studies) covers European scholarship on Eastern Europe, Russia, and the former Soviet Union. It contains bibliographic records for journal articles, books, book chapters, book reviews, dissertations, and selected government publications. 1991- present.
EconLit
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
EconLit is a reliable source of citations and abstracts to economic research in over 400 books, journals, dissertations, and working papers. Provides comprehensive information on accounting, capital markets, econometrics, economic forecasting, government regulations, labor economics, monetary theory, urban economics. 1969 - present.
Tip: Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First ISSNs and ISBNs are not searchable in this database.
Economist Historical Archive (1843-2020)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Economist Historical Archive delivers a complete searchable copy of every issue of the Economist from 1843 to 2020. With a global circulation of more than 1.2 million, The Economist has consistently delivered a highly intelligent and comprehensive report of international political, business, scientific, technological and cultural developments, with dispatches from all over the world. Includes mew full-color images, multiple search indexes, exportable financial tables, a gallery of front covers, supplements, special reports and surveys.
Ecuador: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archive of U.S. State Department documents and files related to diplomatic, political and economic issues in Ecuador, from 1960-1963
Editions & Adaptations of Shakespeare
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Editions and Adaptations of Shakespeare contains eleven major editions from the First Folio of 1623 to the Cambridge edition of 1863–66, twenty-eight separate contemporary printings of individual plays and poems, selected Apocrypha, and related works. In addition, it contains more than one hundred adaptations, sequels, and burlesques from the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, including the whole of Bell's Acting Edition of Shakespeare's Plays (1774).
Education in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online streaming video developed specifically for training and developing teachers. More than 1,000 video titles totaling 750+ hours of teaching demonstrations, lectures, documentaries, and primary-source footage of students and teachers in actual classrooms give education students a way to observe the intricacies of behavior, tone, facial expression, and body language that define effective teaching styles.
Education Index Retrospective
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A bibliographic database of more than half a century of indexing from an international range of English-language periodicals. Subjects Covered: Adult Education, Arts, Athletics, Comparative Education, Continuing Education, Distance Learning, Elementary Education, Government Funding, Higher Education, Language Arts, Library Science, Literacy Standards, Multicultural/Ethnic Education, Parent-Teacher Relations, Preschool Education, Religious Education, School Administration, Science & Mathematics, Secondary Education , Special Education, Student Counseling, Teacher Education, Teacher Evaluation, Teaching Methods, Vocational Education.
Education Source
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Around 1,800 journals (full-text) and over 550 books and monographs in the field of Education. Access to conference papers and indexing and abstracts from thousands of journals. Book reviews and article citations (roughly 5 million).
Egypt: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1853-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive covers Egypt from the years before the opening of the Suez Canal through the era of British domination, Egyptian nationalism, and independence. The documents are sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Eighteenth Century Collections Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) ECCO
The Eighteenth Century Collections Online (Parts I and II) is a full-text searchable digital database of over 180,00 English-language and foreign-language titles printed in the United Kingdom during the 18th century, along with thousands of works from the Americas. It includes a variety of materials, from books and directories, Bibles and sheet music to sermons and advertisements, Includes both well-known and lesser-known authors and canonical titles of the period as well as contemporary works that analyze and debate those same titles.
Eighteenth Century Drama: Censorship, Society, and the Stage
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database features the John Larpent Collection from the Huntington Library a unique archive of almost every play (about 2,500) submitted for license between 1737 and 1824. Included also are correspondence between key theatrical figures, diaries, biographical information, portraits, advertisements, playbills, historical information and the companion texts, The London Stage 1660-1800 and A Biographical Dictionary of Actors, Actresses, Musicians, Dancers, Managers & Other Stage Personnel in London, 1660-1800.
Eighteenth Century Journals Portal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Rare printed journals, periodicals and newspapers of the long Eighteenth century (1680-1820) from the Bodleian Library at Oxford, the British Library, and other prominent collections. All items are full-text searchable.
EIU ViewPoint
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
EIU ViewPoint (formerly: EIU ViewsWire) is the world's most comprehensive source of global forecasts, market trends, data and analysis, in over 200 countries. The service is relied upon by analysts and strategists across business, government, finance and academia to provide unrivaled insight into how the world's political, economic and policy landscape is changing. Covers different disciplines: Economics, Business, Political Science and Law.
EIU ViewsWire
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
EIU ViewsWire is a full-text country news daily that provides analysis and forecast information on worldwide politics, economics, business strategies & conditions and market trends in almost 200 countries.
El Mundo Digital Archive 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Founded in 1919, El Mundo (The World) was a respected, conservative newspaper from Puerto Rico and was widely considered a key source for news until it ceased in 1990. The paper strived to live up to its slogan “Verdad y Justicia” (Truth and Justice). Key topics covered by the newspaper include industrialization of Puerto Rican society, the Great Depression, territorial relations with the United States including citizenship and activities of independence movements such as the Macheteros and FALN, the rise of the Popular Democratic Party, the Ponce massacre, the Ley de la Mordaza (Gag Law) and more.
Electing the President: Proceedings of the Democratic National Conventions, 1832-1988
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes the proceedings of the 1832-1988 Democratic National Conventions, providing gavel to gavel coverage, including speeches, debates, votes, and party platforms. Also included are lists of names of convention delegates and alternates. Records of the earliest proceedings are based in part on contemporary newspaper accounts.
Electing the President: Proceedings of the Republican National Conventions, 1856-1988
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection includes the proceedings for 1856-1988 of the Republican National Conventions, providing gavel to gavel coverage of the conventions, including speeches, debates, votes, and party platforms. Also included are lists of names of convention delegates and alternates. Records of the earliest proceedings are based in part on contemporary newspaper accounts.
Election of 1948
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides documents and the perspectives of the four base camps from the 1948 United States presidential election: Democrat incumbent President and eventual victor Harry S. Truman (1884–1972; U.S. President, 1945–1953), Republican and New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey (1902–1971), Progressive and former Vice President Henry A. Wallace (1888–1965) and Dixiecrat and South Carolina Governor J. Strom Thurmond (1902–2003).
Electronic Blue Book of Building 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Since 1913, The Blue Book of Building and Construction has been the construction industry's premier information source. TheBlueBook provides easy access to continually updated information for each of The Blue Book's regional editions.
Eli Whitney Papers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Eli Whitney Papers consist of correspondence and business papers relating to Eli Whitney's invention and patenting of the cotton gin and to his subsequent development of a system to produce firearms employing interchangeable parts. The papers also include photocopies of documents relating to Eli Whitney located in other repositories, including the Connecticut Historical Society, the Harvard College Library, the Massachusetts Historical Society, the National Archives, the New Haven Colony Historical Society, and the New York Historical Society.
Emerging Sources Citation Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ESCI complements the highly selective indexes by providing earlier visibility for sources under evaluation as part of SCIE (Science Citation Index Expended), SSCI (Social Sciences Citation Index), and AHCI (Arts and Humanities Citation Index) rigorous journal selection process. Inclusion in ESCI provides greater discoverability which leads to measurable citations and more transparency in the selection process.
Emiliano Zapata, 1901-1919
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises documentation related to the activities of Emiliano Zapata and the Liberation Army of the South. It consists mainly of correspondence exchanged between the headquarters and the camps and regional commands.
Emily Dickinson's Correspondences
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive brings together seventy-four poems and letters from Emily's correspondence with her sister-in-law and primary confidante, Susan Dickinson. Each text is presented with a digitized scan of the holograph manuscript.
Empire Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fully-searchable database of full-text primary resources dating from 1492 to 1969. Includes Exploration journals and logs, correspondence, diaries; official government papers; missionary papers; travel writing; slave papers; maps; marketing posters; photographs; and Illustrations, with many in color.
Encyclopedia Iranica
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive research tool dedicated to the study of Iranian civilization in the Middle East, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Indian subcontinent.
Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos, 1933–1945 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Project MUSE, a division of Johns Hopkins University Press, in collaboration with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, announces today a new landmark in the Museum’s long standing Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos, 1933–1945 (ECG) series: ECG volumes I-IV are now fully searchable, open access digital publications freely available to everyone around the world. 4 vols are fully searchable, 3 more to be added
Energy Citations Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Scientific and Technical Information
The Energy Citations Database (ECD) contains energy and energy-related scientific and technical information from the Department of Energy (DOE) and its predecessor agencies, the Energy Research & Development Administration (ERDA) and the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). The Database provides access to DOE citations from 1948 through the present.
Energywire
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides coverage on the business and political issues surrounding the rapidly expanding unconventional energy industry in the United States and around the world.
Engineering Case Studies Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive and authoritative resource that provides in depth, impartial analysis of more than 50 key engineering failures. Includes video and text resources for each case study.
English Short Title Catalog 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Catalog of most imprints (books, pamphlets, and broadsides) published from 1473 to 1800 in English or published in any language in English-speaking countries. Many titles are available on microform in the UM Libraries; most pre-1700 titles are available online in Early English Books Online. Useful for research in all subject areas during the period. Also helpful to study the history of books and printing.
Enslaved: Peoples of the Historical Slave Trade 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Enslaved.org is an open-source growing database which contains information on hundreds of thousands of individuals involved in the historical slave trade including enslaved people, slave owners, and slave traders.
Enterprise Surveys
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides the world's most comprehensive firm-level data in emerging markets and developing economies for over 120,000 countries and expanding. Data are used to create indicators that benchmark the quality of the business and investment climate across countries. 2002- present.
Entertainment Industry Magazine Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Music Magazine Archive
Music Magazine Archive is a series of digital collections focused on 20th and 21st century genres such as Rock, Folk, and Hip-Hop & Rap. Each genre-based collection unites every page and every issue of a diverse and influential group of magazines. These publications uniquely capture the social and historical context of each genre, and together support scholarly research areas such as race, class, gender, American studies, youth culture, and more across some of the most progressive decades of the 20th and 21st centuries. Researchers will find all material represented in the original publications, preserved in its original context, fully searchable and in high-resolution full color. 1960-2016.
Environment & Energy Daily
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Tracks environmental and energy action in Congress. Include access to E&E News PM and E&E TV News. 1996 - present.
Environmental History
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The history of the environment and conservation efforts across the globe from the late 1800’s onward. In two parts: Conservation and Public Policy in America 1870-1980 and Colonial Policy and Global Development 1896-1993.
Environmental Studies In Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
At completion, Environmental Studies in Video will contain 500 hours of film covering all realms of environmental studies, particularly ethics, policy, economics, sociology, planning and environmental science. Films were produced from 1970 to the present, and address specific topics including alternative energy, pollution control, eco-design, sustainability, farming and agriculture, the food industry, LEED certification, waste issues and climate change. 2 free perpetual access titles per CIC, no charge to us. Selections should be emailed to Mary Siegel at siegel@alexanderstreet.com
ERIC
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to information from over 1000 education and education-related journals as well as a variety of non journal materials, or ERIC documents. All aspects and levels of education. 1966- present. Non-journal documents are available via microfiche; they are also online from 1993-present. The database includes an online thesaurus.
Espacenet 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
When entering the esp@cenet service you are offered a choice of several databases. These databases differ in their data coverage. When searching in "worldwide patents", you will cover the largest range of documents. By searching in "Belgian patents", you will only cover the last two publication years of Belgian patent documents.

Do not expect to cover the whole state-of-the-art by searching in national Patents only.

Databases available on esp@cenet have also some limitations in the number and the quality of fields accessible that should be considered when drawing conclusions from the result of a search.

Commercial patent databases usually offer extra value, by the number of fields you can access, and due to the content of the abstract that has been rewritten to facilitate easieraccess to the document by keyword searches.

To sum up, a patent database user should always be aware of the content of the database he is using and know the limitations of the fields.
Essential Science Indicators
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Essential Science Indicators can determine the influential individuals, institutions, papers, publications, and countries in their field of study as well as emerging research areas that can impact their work. This unique and comprehensive compilation of science performance statistics and science trends data is based on journal article publication counts and citation data from Thomson Reuters databases. It is an analytical resource for policymakers, administrators, analysts and information specialists in government agencies, universities, corporations, private laboratories, publishing companies and foundations, as well as members of the scientific press and recruiters. Essential Science Indicators (ESI) is useful tool to help answer questions about research performance. For example: Which institutions produce the most highly-cited research in a particular field? Where does our institution rank in this group? Who are the most influential researchers in this field? Is our institutions citation activity on an upward or downward trend? How did changes in funding influence the impact of research in a particular country or institute? Which are the hottest topics in research right now? How does my article's citation count compare to similar articles? ESI produces a variety of metrics and features such as Top 1% of Scientists and Institutions; Top 50% of Journals and Countries/Territories; Highly Cited Papers: Top 1% of cited papers per discipline; Hot Papers: Papers from the last two years that were cited the most (top 0.1%) in the last 2 months; Research Fronts: Creates clusters of highly cited articles, useful for identifying ground breaking discoveries
Ethnic NewsWatch
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text bilingual (English/Spanish) database of 200 publications of the ethnic, minority, and native press. 1990 to the present. Multidisciplinary - news, culture, and history.
Ethnographic Video Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive resource for the study of human culture and behavior over 750 hours and 1,000 films at completion. The collection covers every region of the world, and includes interviews, previously unreleased raw footage, field notes, study guides, and more. All videos and transcripts have been indexed and are fully searchable and browsable.
Ethnomusicology: Global Field Recordings
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Features thousands of audio field recordings and interviews, educational recordings, film footage, field notebooks, slides, correspondence, and ephemera from over 60 fields of study, including sites in West Africa, North America, South East Asia and more. Produced in collaboration with the UCLA Ethnomusicology Archive, this collection gives access to the cultural and social lives of the source communities represented within the recordings.
European Views of the Americas
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This bibliographic database is based on European Americana: A Chronological Guide to Works Printed in Europe Relating to the Americas, 1493-1750. The database contains more than 32,000 entries and is a comprehensive guide to printed records about the Americas written in Europe before 1750. It covers the history of European exploration as well as portrayals of Native American peoples. A wide range of subject areas are covered.
Evening Star (D.C.), 1852-1922
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text and fully searchable. Historians have regarded The Evening Star as the newspaper of record for the nation's capital. Published under such titles as Washington Star-News and The Washington Star, this long-running daily afternoon paper was one of the highest profile publications in the nation.
Everyday Life & Women in America, c.1800-1920
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Especially rich in conduct of life and domestic management literature, it comprises thousands of fully searchable images (alongside transcriptions) of monographs, pamphlets, periodicals and broadsides addressing political, social and gender issues, religion, race, education, employment, marriage, sexuality, home and family life, health, and pastimes.
F
Faber Poetry Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of the works of 50 poets comprising 140 volumes of poetry published by Faber and Faber. British and American poetry. 20th Century.
Factiva
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
WARNING: Data mining and excessive downloading are prohibited and such activities cause the suspension of this service. NOTE: Use of Factiva requires login with University ID and is restricted to only current UMCP staff and students. Factiva recommends using Internet Explorer 5.01 or higher. Full-text access to over 8,000 business sources including the Wall
Street Journal and many other national and international newspapers, magazines, wire services, websites, and industry (trade) sources. Covers business news articles in a wide range of topic areas: companies, industries, markets, products, brands, and general financial articles.
Family & Society Studies Worldwide
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A primary family studies resource, Family & Society Studies Worldwide provides more than one million citations and abstracts to professional journals, books, book chapters, conference papers, theses & dissertations, websites & internet documents, selected popular literature, government reports, statistical documents, working papers, and unpublished material. This database is a compilation of 4 database files: Family & Society Studies; Australian Family & Society Abstracts; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, Health Canada; and U.S. Military Family Resource Center Documents Database. Dates of coverage are 1970 to the present.
Family Studies Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Family studies database comprised of 45,000 entries, covering such areas as marriage, divorce, and family therapy.
Fannie Lou Hamer: Papers of a Civil Rights Activist/Political Activist/And Woman
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fannie Lou Hamer (1917-1977) was a voting rights activist and civil rights leader. She was instrumental in organizing Mississippi Freedom Summer for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and later became the Vice-Chair of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. The papers include correspondence, financial records, photographs, and newspaper clippings, and other records documenting her activities with a variety of organizations.
FBI File on Albert Einstein
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This release consists of several background-type investigations, an investigation of a close associate of his who was thought to be a foreign intelligence agent.
FBI File on America First Committee
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This file, which covers the group's activity from 1937 to 1941, contains newspaper accounts, America First literature, speeches, letters, reports, and press releases. The group was investigated for possible communist infiltration.
FBI File on Eleanor Roosevelt
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This file includes the usual correspondence, memos, and newspaper clippings. The letters between Hoover and Eleanor provide fascinating insight into their relationship. Also included are many letters from "ordinary" citizens protesting Roosevelt's activities and syndicated column, "My Day," pleading with Hoover that "she must be stopped
FBI File on Harry Dexter White
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This FBI file contains reports, correspondence, news clippings, and four pages of White's documents that were found in a hollow pumpkin on Chambers's Maryland.
FBI File on John L. Lewis
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This FBI file details John L. Lewis's career as a labor leader from the 1920s to the 1950s, with some material dating back to 1909. Much of the file relates to Lewis's tenure as president of the United Mine Workers.
more...
FBI File on Joseph Kennedy
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains snippets of information on Kennedy's sons: John, Robert, and Ted -- most notably of death threats made against Ted in 1968. Those interested in American social history, especially the 1940s and 50s, will find this file useful and informative.
FBI File on Nelson Rockefeller
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This file on Nelson Rockefeller contains papers relating to the background checks conducted by the FBI in advance of his appointment to various positions in the federal government.
FBI File on Robert F. Kennedy
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The materials in this file document not only many of Robert Kennedy's activities but also Hoover's enmity toward him. In addition to coverage of Kennedy's public appearances and speeches, the file includes allegations of an affair between him and Marilyn Monroe and details of his trip to Alabama to meet with Governor George C. Wallace. The second half of the file documents the infamous public feud over wiretapping, in which Hoover released to the press memorandums suggesting that Kennedy had authorized wiretaps as early as 1961.
FBI File: Alger Hiss/Whittaker Chambers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This file traces the machinations of the many figures involved in one of the era's most famous witch hunts. Trails of evidence are followed through correspondence between alleged Communist Party members and sympathizers, as well as interviews with associates of the accused.
FBI File: Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The file includes background information amassed by the FBI on Dr. King's social activism. This archive is of particular interest to students of the civil rights movement and of the continuing controversy surrounding Dr. King's murder.
FBI File: House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
HUAC was created in 1938 to investigate alleged disloyalty and rebel activities on the part of private citizens, public employees and organizations suspected of having Communist ties. Citizens suspected of having ties to the communist party would be tried in a court of law.
FBI File: Howard Hughes
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive contains FBI records on the enigmatic billionaire Howard Hughes (1905-1976). It documents Hughes's activities in various enterprises including aircraft manufacture and aviation; the motion picture business; Las Vegas real estate; and the Nevada gaming industry. Hughes's relationship with film stars, reports on his sex life, details on his disappearance in 1970, and Hughes's contested will are also covered. Of particular interest are letters written by Hughes in his own handwriting. Documents include: "Congress Probes Ownership of Airlines Which Won Routes" (July 1945); "Background into an unnamed racketeer who was employed by Howard Hughes" (June 1946); "Report of the allegation that Howard Hughes had invited Bugsy Siegel as a guest for the inaugural flight of the ‘Constellation' from Los Angeles to New York" (c. 1947); "Investigation in a forged handwritten will" (1981); among other fascinating records.
FBI File: Huey Long
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This FBI file on Huey Long details the organization's investigation of Long during the 1920s and 30s. Many of Long's activities refer to voting fraud. Also of interest are the large amount of memos produced by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover. This collection is an important resource for studies in political science and American history.
FBI File: Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of subsections of the greater case file on Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. The file deals specifically with the investigations of Julius and Ethel, with the bulk devoted to Julius. It establishes the Rosenbergs' relationships with the other key characters in the case: David and Ruth Greenglass, Morton Sobell, and Harry Gold. Also included is a case summary.
FBI File: Roy Cohn
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive covers the career of Roy Marcus Cohn (1927-1986) from the time he was the confidential assistant to the U.S. District Attorney in New York in 1952 to his indictment for participating in a possible payoff scandal involving the United Dye and Chemical Company. Materials include correspondence relating to the 1953 U.S. Army investigation by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, newspaper clippings, memos, teletypes, reports, and affidavits. News articles include: "Roy Cohn vs. Bob Kennedy:
FBI File: Watergate
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive is a valuable resource for students of the Watergate scandal and modern American political history. Included here are all of the reports and evidence acquired by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as well as data that was gathered in the campaign activities of the 1972 presidential candidates.
FBI Filing and Records Procedures
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the 1920s into the 1980s, the FBI maintained a complex system of records designed to prevent outside discovery of operations and investigative techniques. The documents reproduced here act as a guide to these filing procedures.
FBI Manuals of Instruction, Investigative Procedures, and Guidelines, 1927-1978
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reproduces four manuals of instruction, investigative procedures, and guidelines issued to FBI agents in 1927, 1936, 1941, and 1978.
FBI Surveillance of James Forman and SNCC
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of FBI reports comprises the Bureau's investigative and surveillance efforts primarily during the 1961-1976 period, when James Forman was perceived as a threat to the internal security of the United States. The collected materials also include Forman's involvement with the "Black Manifesto" and the Bureau's "COINTELPRO" investigations into "Black Nationalist - Hate Groups / Internal Security," which include information on the activities of SNCC.
FDR, New Deal and Race Relations, 1933-1945
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes essential materials for the study of the early development of the Civil Rights Movement and is concerns with the issues of Lynching Segregation
Race riots Employment discrimination.
Federal Register 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 1994 - present.
Federal Register Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text access to the Federal Register (1936 -), Federal Register Indexes (1939-1995), Compilation of Sections Affected (1949-2000), Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (1965-2004), and the Administrative Procedure Act (1944-1946). HeinOnline provides access to the complete contents of each Federal Register issue. Each Federal Register page is represented in both high quality image and OCR text formats. FR (1936-), CSA (1949-2000), Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (1965-2004).
Tip: Federal Register documents on HeinOnline are displayed and printed as high-resolution images. Once you are viewing a documents, use the Print Options link located in the toolbar just above the document to print or download the current page or the entire document in 30 page segments. Documents may be printed using the HeinOnline HPrint utility or downloaded and printed as a pdf file. HeinOnline adds citation information to the footer of each page.
Federal Response to Radicalism in the 1960s
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection supports a variety of courses in U.S. history, cultural studies, radical politics, and the study of social movements.
Federal Surveillance of African Americans, 1920-1984
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Federal Surveillance of African Americans, 1920-1984 is a collection of the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation)'s previously classified files on prominent African Americans and African-American organizations. The files include a variety of materials, such as newspaper clippings, transcripts of public meetings and speeches, reports on private meetings infiltrated by the FBI, and reports of special agents, which sometimes refer to information provided by confidential informants.
Federal Surveillance of the Partido Independentista Puertorriqueño
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection highlights the FBI's efforts to disrupt the activities of the largest of the Puerto Rican independence parties, Partido Independentista Puertorriqueño, and compromise their effectiveness. In addition, these documents provide an insightful documentary history and analysis of why independence was the second-largest political movement in the island, (after support for commonwealth status), and a real alternative. These documents provide invaluable additions to the recorded history of Puerto Rico.
Feminae: Medieval Women and Gender Index 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Feminae: Medieval Women and Gender Index covers journal articles, book reviews, and essays in books about women, sexuality, and gender during the Middle Ages. Books written by a single author are not indexed in Feminae. The project began in 1996, however some coverage goes back to 1992. Interdisciplinary topics dealing with women, sexuality, or gender during the Middle Ages. The geographic area is Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East as well as areas in which Europeans travelled. Subject coverage for gender and sexuality means that articles on masculinity and male homosexuality are included. The time period covered is 450 C.E. to 1500 C.E. with Russia extending to 1613.
Feminism in Cuba: Nineteenth through Twentieth Century Archival Documents
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection, most of which is in Spanish, has documents that fall into three categories: Works by feminists about feminists and their causes, including memoirs of feminist congresses, collections of essays by feminists, journals published by feminist organizations, and published speeches and radio broadcasts; assessments by male politicians, jurists, and legislators about the condition of women in the cities and countryside; literary works by feminist writers that illustrate or discuss the condition of women, including excerpts from novels, essays, poetry written by women about women, and literary analysis of these works.
Fiction Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fiction Core Collection features classic and contemporary works and provides titles for a general adult audience. The best authors and their most widely-read works in literary and popular fiction old and new are listed.

ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database. Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First..
Fight for Racial Justice and the Civil Rights Congress
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive, from the NYPL's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, documents the Civil Rights Congress (CRC) which was established in 1946 to, among other things, "combat all forms of discrimination against…labor, the Negro people and the Jewish people, and racial, political, religious, and national minorities." Dates of inclusion range from 1946-1955.
Film & Television Literature Index with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Subject coverage includes film & television theory, preservation & restoration, writing, production, cinematography, technical aspects, and reviews. The database will provide cover-to-cover indexing and abstracts for more than 300 publications (and selected coverage of 301), as well as full text for more than 90 journals.
Filmakers Library Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Filmakers Library Online is a multidisciplinary collection of well known documentaries already heavily used in humanities and social science classrooms. The coverage is topical, contemporary, and cross-disciplinary, specializing in studies of race and gender, human rights, globalization, multiculturalism, international relations, criminal justice, and the environment. The collection includes bioethics, health, political science and current events, psychology, arts, literature, and more. Additionally, titles in Filmakers Library Online present international points of view of both historical and current experiences from diverse cultures and traditions world-wide.
Films on Demand Master Academic Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streaming video service of almost 12,000 full length videos of high-quality educational titles. Subject sets featured are: business & economics, humanities & social sciences, science & mathematics, health & medicine. This collection also includes thousands of video clips and a collection of archival films & newsreels. Special features allow users the ability to organize and bookmark clips, create and share playlists; most videos available with closed-captioning and interactive transcripts; may be viewed through most mobile devices.
Final Accountability Rosters of Evacuees at Japanese-American Relocation Centers, 1944-1946
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Rosters of the forced interment of people of Japanese descent during World War II chart one of the darker chapters in American history.
Financial Times Historical Archive, 1888-2021
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is an important interdisciplinary, global resource that provides important knowledge and understanding of global history, business, finance and politics over the last 120 years. It provides information on world issues, activities and events from the height of the Victorian era to the dawn of the 21st century. The archive includes all articles, advertisements, photographs and market listing as shown in the context of the regular full page and issue of the day.
First World War Portal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From personal collections and rare printed material to military files, ephemera and artwork, The First World War highlights the experiences of soldiers, civilians and governments on both sides of the conflict and in multiple theatres of war. Covering an array of international perspectives, the resource showcases intimate personal narratives, wartime propaganda and recruitment material, the truly global reach of the conflict, and the role of women in war through various documentary and visual forms.
FirstSearch
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OCLC catalog of books, serial publications, media, visual materials, musical scores, and archival materials in libraries worldwide. Includes material descriptions and holdings for OCLC member libraries. prior to 1501 - present . 'Phrase' searches will find records with the words not necessarily next to each other. For example, a search on 'sunny day' might find 'the day was sunny'.
To find author names, you must enter the name as it is found in the database. Try using just the last name to find all entries: Bellack OR Bellack, Alan
FOIAengine
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
*ON CAMPUS ACCESS ONLY*
FOIAengine is an online data journalism platform and competitive intelligence/due diligence database that tracks U.S. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests in as close to real-time as their availability allows. FOIA requests are predictive, providing signals of upcoming litigation, transactions, stock and market movements, news stories, short-seller initiatives, and other legal and corporate developments.
Food and Drink in History
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The story of food and drink over five centuries. Includes the cookbook collections from the University of California San Diego and Michigan State University, with a focus on Mexican, Latin American, Pacific Rim, Chinese, early Californian, African, and Asian cuisine. Case studies of certain ingredients, meals, food and drink brands, as well as regions, help to build microhistories and provide in-depth insight and comparative context for the researcher.
Ford Administration and Foreign Affairs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This historical archive is a comprehensive research tool for those studying economic and business history and current affairs of the last 120 years.
Foreign Office Files for China 1919-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part of the Foreign Office Files series, representing a constant exchange of information between London and the British embassies and consulates. This module features Kuomintang, CCP and the Third International and includes diplomatic dispatches, letters, newspaper cuttings, political pamphlets, reports of court cases, and other materials.
Foreign Office Files for India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan 1947-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Surveys the high politics of Independence and Partition, social and cultural interchange after 1947, and the ramifications that these changes continue to have throughout South Asia today. Covers the political and social history of India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan in this period, featuring essential content on Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim, and Kashmir, as well as other frontier regions. This module focuses on independence, partition, and the Nehru Era.
Foreign Office Files for Japan 1919-1952
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides significant insight into the events between First World War victory and Second World War defeat, crucial to understanding the political journey of Japan during this period.
Foreign Office Files for Southeast Asia 1963-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers the Cobbold Commission, the end of the Malayan Emergency, and tensions between Indonesia and Malaysia, as well as rising animosity towards the perceived threat of communism at this time. The material offers insight into the challenges faced by political leaders during this time. Traces the substantial economic and industrial growth experienced by Southeast Asia during this period. This resource contains extensive coverage of authoritarian regimes in the Philippines and Indonesia under Presidents Marcos and Suharto respectively, the establishment of Singapore as a major world port, and political and racial tensions in the region.
Foreign Office Files for the Middle East 1971-1981
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains the complete runs of the Foreign Office files, providing an expansive view of key events and their global political impact.
Foreign Relations between the U.S. and Latin America and the Caribbean States, 1930-1944
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
U.S. State Department files documenting relations with the states of Latin America and the Caribbean under Roosevelts Good Neighbor policy, with the U.S. giving up direct military intervention in favor of other forms of influence on Latin American affairs.
Foreign Relations of the United States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Presents the official documentary historical record of major U.S. foreign policy decisions. and contains documents from Presidential libraries, Departments of State and Defense, National Security Council, Central Intelligence Agency, Agency for International Development, and other foreign affairs agencies as well as the private papers of individuals involved in formulating U.S. foreign policy.
Foundation Directory Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Foundation Directory online is the leading resource in the world of philanthropy. It provides everything about U.S. foundations and their millions of grants around the world. Search up to nine databases at once: grantmakers, companies, grants, 990s, RFPs, philanthropy news, foundation-sponsored publications, nonprofit literature, and jobs. Includes descriptions of more than 100,000 Community Foundations; Corporate Giving Programs, Operating Foundations, Private Grantmaking Foundations (independent and company-sponsored foundations); and Grantmaking Public Charities.
Franklin D. Roosevelt "The Great Communicator" The Master Speech Files, 1898, 1910-1945 - Series 0001: Franklin D. Roosevelt's Political
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
FranklinD. Roosevelt - "The Great Communicator"The Master Speech Files, 1898, 1910-1945 Series "The Four Freedoms" and FOR in World War II
Franklin D. Roosevelt "The Great Communicator" The Master Speech Files, 1898, 1910-1945 - Series 0002: "You have nothing to fear, but fear itself"
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Four Freedoms" and FDR in World War II (Gale Archives Unbound)
14 reels on FDR during World War II.
Franklin D. Roosevelt, “The Great Communicator”, The Master Speech Files, 1898, 1910-1945: Series 3.
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Because FDR was such a masterful communicator, he was able to use his speeches, press conferences, and radio broadcasts to shape American history. Evidence of FDR's successful use of the spoken word is widespread.
Free medical journals 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Database with free medical journals in different subject fields Journals can be searched by topic, impact factor, free access to content (Immediately, after 1-6 months, after 7-12 months, later), journal title, and language.
French Mandate in The Lebanon, Christian-Muslim Relations, and the U.S. Consulate at Beirut, 1920-1941, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of correspondence and telegrams received and sent by the American consular post in Beirut. The topics covered by these records include the protection of the interests of American citizens, foreign trade, shipping, and immigration.
Frontier Life
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This multi-archive collection captures the lives, experiences, and colonial encounters of people living at the edges of the Anglophone world from 1650-1920, covering North America, Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. Includes documents on the creation of new states, trade networks, and movements of people in these regions, alongside the marginalization and decline of Indigenous peoples.
G
Gale Immigration eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online full-text reference books on the subject of U.S. immigration.
Gale Literature Criticism
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Electronic version of 12 titles in Gale's popular Literature Criticism reference series, including Contemporary Literary Criticism, Twentieth Century Literary Criticism, Nineteenth-Century Literary Criticism, Shakespearean Criticism, Literature Criticism from 1400 to 1800, Classical and Medieval Literature Criticism, Poetry Criticism, Short Story Criticism, and Drama Criticism.
Gale Primary Sources
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Gale Primary Sources is a research platform that allows for cross searching amongst multiple Gale collections. It provides a seamless research experience that enables scholars to search across millions of pages of primary sources in the humanities from the 15th to the 20th centuries. Databases in Artemis include: 17th and 18th Century Burney Collection, 19th Century British Newspapers, 19th Century UK Periodicals, The Economist Historical Archive, 1843-2011, Eighteenth Century Collections Online, The Financial Times Historical Archive, 1888-2010, The Illustrated London News Historical Archive, 1842-2003, The Making of Modern Law: Legal Treatises, 1800-1926, The Making of the Modern World, Nineteenth Century Collections Online, Sabin Americana, 1500-1926, and The Times Digital Archive
Gale Virtual Reference Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Gale Virtual Reference Library offers more than 85 reference sources including encyclopedias, almanacs, series, and more.
Offering access to more than 300 encyclopedias and selected industry-standard reference series. Including content from SAGE Reference, John Wiley & Sons, Cambridge University Press, Berkshire Publishing Group, Cartographica, Linworth and Gale imprints.

Gallica 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to digitized holdings of the French National Library's collections, from the Middle Ages to 1914. Gallica will soon have over 10 million pages made accessible -- including all classical works of French literature -- as text, images and sounds. Full text available in PDF format.
GAO Reports 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains reports on audits, surveys, investigations, and evaluations of federal programs conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO) from fiscal year 1995 through the present.
Garden, Landscape & Horticulture Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to articles in the subject areas of Horticulture, Botany, Garden and Landscape Design, Ecology, Plant and Garden Conservation, Horticultural Therapy, and Sustainable Horticultural Design Practices.
Gender: Identity and Social Change
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Essential primary sources documenting the changing representations and lived experiences of gender roles and relations from the nineteenth century to the present. This expansive collection offers sources for the study of women's suffrage, the feminist movement, the men’s movement, employment, education, the body, the family, and government and politics.
GenderWatch
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text database comprised of 175 titles, primarily of the many ongoing periodicals that deal with gender issues, including academic and scholarly journals, regional publications, magazines, newspapers, newsletters, booklets and reports. Subject areas covered include: government, history and politics, lesbian and gay studies, women's studies, and other humanities and social sciences disciplines. Dates of coverage of some publications are 1970 to the present.
GeoNames
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The GeoNames geographical database covers all countries and contains over 27 million geographical names and consists of over 12 million unique features whereof 4.8 million populated places and 15 million alternate names. GeoNames integrates geographical data such as names of places in various languages, elevation, population, and others from various sources. All lat/long coordinates are in WGS84 (World Geodetic System 1984). Users download free of charge.
GeoRef
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Guide to materials in geology and earth sciences. Worldwide coverage. Abstracts journal articles, books, maps, conference papers, reports, and theses.Over 25,145 sources. Over 2.1 million records. Over 60,000 records added annually. Geology and the Earth Sciences. Major subjects include: crystallography, hydrogeology, economic geology, hydrology and water resources, environmental geology, marine geology, engineering geology, mineralogy, geochemistry, oceanography, geophysics, and paleontology. From 1785 to the present for North American geologyFrom 1933 to the present for international geo.
George H. W. Bush and Foreign Affairs: The Middle East Peace Conference in Madrid
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of comprehensive materials related to the former Yugoslavia, particularly Bosnia, and U.S. presidential decision-making.
George W. Ball Papers, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection documents the private and public life of American lawyer and diplomat George W. Ball. Ball served as counsel in the Lend-Lease Administration and the Foreign Economic Administration from 1942 to 1944.
German Anti-Semitic Propaganda, 1909-1941
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises 170 German-language titles of books and pamphlets. The collection presents anti-Semitism as an issue in politics, economics, religion, and education. Most of the writings date from the 1920s and 1930s and many are directly connected with Nazi groups. The works are principally anti-Semitic, but include writings on other groups as well, including Jehovah's Witnesses, the Jesuits, and the Freemasons. Also included are history, pseudo-history, and fiction.
German Folklore and Popular Culture: Das Kloster. Scheible
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides insight into German folklore on literature and popular culture through a collection of texts,chapbooks, folklore, popular superstition and fairy tales of the German Renaissance.
Global Commodities
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Focuses on the history of fifteen significant global commodities: chocolate, coffee, cotton, fur, oil, opium, porcelain, silver and gold, spices, sugar, tea, timber, tobacco, wheat, and wine and spirits.
Global Development Finance
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
World Bank database provides direct access to more than 200 debt and financial flows indicators for the 129 countries that report public and publicly-guaranteed debt to the World Bank Debtor Reporting System. These data begin in 1970.
Global Economic Monitor (GEM)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides daily and monthly commentary on global economic conditions along with direct access to high frequency data that is refreshed daily. It provides analysis of current economic trends, economic, financial and commodity data indicators, an extensive database including growth and commodity forecasts.
Global Terrorism Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Developed by the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism and START: A Center of Excellence of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, University of Maryland. "The Global Terrorism Database is an open-source database including information on terrorist events around the world from 1970 through 2008 (with annual updates planned for the future). Unlike many other event databases, the GTD includes systematic data on domestic as well as international terrorist incidents that have occurred during this time period and now includes more than 87,000 cases.
Global Think Tanks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Policy Common's Global Think Tanks provides access to working papers, policy briefs, data sources, and media from municipalities, IGOs, NGOs, think tanks, and research
centers.
Google Scholar 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Google Scholar searches academic publishers, professional societies, pre-print archives, and university institutional repositories.
Government Finance Statistics 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the International Monetary Fund, provides detailed annual statistical data on revenue, expenses, transactions in assets and liabilities, and stocks and assets and liabilities of general governments and subsectors as reported by member countries. To download, set up a free personal account.
Government Manual 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Official handbook of the Federal Government with comprehensive information on agencies of the legislative, judicial, and executive branches. Also includes information on quasi-official agencies, international organizations in which the United States participates, boards, commissions, and committees. 1995-present.
GovInfo 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Disseminates official information from all three branches of the US Federal Government.(Formerly GPO Access). Access to full text government publications and databases. Includes the US Budget, Commerce BusinessDaily, GAO Reports, the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, and the Catalog of US Government Publications.
GPO Monthly Catalog 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index to all types of government documents printed by the US Government Printing Office. Bibliographic citations for all types of US government documents, including Congressional reports, hearings, debates, and records; judiciary materials; and document issues by executive department. 1976-present. You can sort by Author or Title, however, sorting by Year will not work. 'Phrase' searches will find the words, but they may not be next to each other. For example, a search on 'sunny day' may find records with 'The day was sunny'. If you wish to search for authors using the last name and first initial, include a question mark at the end of your search: Last, F?
Grand Tour
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digital collection of manuscript, visual, and printed works exploring the history of travel. Includes the travel writings and works of some of Britain’s greatest artists, writers, and thinkers. Also includes many writings by forgotten or anonymous travelers, including many women, whose daily experiences offer a vivid insight into the experience and practicalities of travel across the centuries.
Graphic Novels Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Graphic Novels Core Collection highlights more than 3,000 titles for all age levels in the increasingly popular genre of graphic novels. This collection includes descriptive and evaluative annotations, cover art, review excerpts and awards the title has won.
more...
Grassroots Civil Rights & Social Activism: FBI Files on Benjamin J. Davis, Jr
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The FBI files on Benjamin J. Davis, Jr. that make up this collection were assembled by Dr. Gerald Horne, author of Black Liberation/Red Scare: Ben Davis and the Communist Party, and the breadth of issues addressed by these records is astounding. Davis served as a leader in local, district, and national leadership bodies of the Communist Party USA and thus concerned himself with a broad range of organizational, political, and theoretical questions. There is news of grassroots organizing successes and failures, minutes from meetings held on all the levels on which Davis engaged, and reports from member-informers on all the major political and theoretical debates.
Grassroots Civil Rights and Social Action: Council for Social Action
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The records in this collection trace the Council's active participation in social action, its engagement in race relations, Indian relations, opposition to the persecution of Jews in Nazi Germany, and the protection of the civil rights of war victims and Japanese-Americans during the Second World War. The collection is sourced from the Congregational Library in Boston, Massachusetts.
Great corpus of French and Francophone literature
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
(Content and interface in French)The Great Corpus of French and Francophone literature (from the Middle Ages to the 20th century) provides full-text access to over 14,000 texts and about 300 authors complete works. Four full-text literature databases published by Classiques Garnier Numrique are included:
- Corpus of medieval literature from the origins to the end of the 15th century
narrative prose fiction, chanson de geste, poetry and theatre (religious and profane)
- Corpus of narrative literature, from the Middle Ages to the 20th century
novels, tales, and short stories from Chrtien de Troyes to Alain-Fournier and Marcel Proust
- Corpus of Francophone literature from Black Africa, from the origins to Independence
oral and written French-speaking literature from sub-Saharan Africa from the origins (end of the 18th century) to Independence (1960, as date of authors death)
- Corpus of literature from the Indian Ocean, from the origins to Independence
Francophone written and oral literature from the Indian Ocean, from the origins (18th century) to Independence (1960, or death of authors)
GreenFile
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of scholarly, government and general-interest titles includes content on the environmental effects of individuals, corporations and local/national governments, and what can be done at each level to minimize these effects. Topics covered include global climate change, green building, pollution, sustainable agriculture, renewable energy, recycling, and more.
Greensboro Massacre, 1979: Confrontation between the Ku Klux Klan and the Communist Workers Party, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of FBI, local and state police, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, and the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department, shed new light on the motivations of the Communist organizers, the shootings, subsequent investigations, and efforts to heal the Greensboro community following the massacre.
Greenwire
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive, daily coverage of environmental and energy politics and policy, includes summaries of important energy and environmental policy coverage from hundreds of print, broadcast and online sources, including editorials. Greenwire's archive of key documents provides direct links to reports, analyses, memos, court cases and over 30,000 Greenwire stories. Includes new video and transcripts. State, national, and international coverage of environmental and energy-related politics, news, policy, and markets. 1996 to the present. Updated daily.
H
Hartford Courant (1764 - 1922) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Hartford Courant (1764 - 1985) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue
HathiTrust Digital Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
NOTE: Download of full book PDF files may require login with University ID. A shared, growing digital repository of millions of books and periodical volumes scanned from major research libraries, including those digitized by institutional effort and by both Google and the Internet Archive. Offers full-text searching and advanced bibliographic search capabilities (such as author, title, publisher, language, etc.), and full PDF downloading of works in the public domain. One feature includes the ability to select and place items from the database into a tailor made collection that may be kept private to the user or shared publicly with others. Items that are saved to collections can be searched independently of the rest of the repository, allowing users to perform focused searches on subsets of HathiTrust materials.
Health Poll Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Heath Poll Database is an archive of exclusively health-oriented survey questions. It is designed to support research on topics like the social determinants of health, access to care, individual health status, health policy, and health politics. Searchable questions and results, demographic crosstabs, and trends are available on every topic related to health, from social determinants and influences on health to insurance, costs, and health-care utilization.
Health Source: Consumer Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Large range of consumer health information/topics. Full text of nearly 300 periodicals such as: Harvard Health Letter, Prevention, Tufts, Johns Hopkins, Vegetarian Times, Women's health Weekly. Also includes a wide range of full text health related pamphlets and reference books, patient education fact sheets from sources such as: People's Medical Society, A.D.A.M., A.A.R.P and Society Publications. This full-text database covers a wide variety of subjects, including information on specific diseases as well as overall health topics. Subjects include fitness, nutrition, diabetes, aging, women's health, children's health and more.
Health Source: Nursing/Academic Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Nearly 600 Scholarly full text titles covering nursing and allied health, 450 of these are peer-reviewed titles about 400 more titles are indexed and abstracted. Includes full text from titles such as: Ceative Nursing, Issues in :Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing; Community Health Nursing; Jouranl of Nursing Management; Patient Care for the Nurse Practitions; Clinical Pharmacology Most articles within 5 years, some titles do NOT include current year. ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database. Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
Hebrewbooks.org 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
15,000 classical Hebrew books. Hebrewbooks.org was founded in order to preserve all old American seforim. Currently mission expanded to all Torah Seforim ever printed. View and print the entire Sefer online.
HeinOnline
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
All HeinOnline Databases



HeinOnline Covid-19: Pandemics Past and Present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Covid-19: Pandemics Past and Present
Compiling together publications on the various ways COVID-19 has impacted every aspect of life, from testing issues to stimulus payments, to the quest for a vaccine, this database organizes content on COVID-19 into the following areas of focus: Economic Impact, Global Impact, Health Care Impact, and Societal Impact, with an expanding selection of scholarly articles and links to take your learning beyond HeinOnline. Importantly, this collection also features a subcollection dedicated to Past Pandemics, allowing researchers access to ways the federal government has responded to medical disasters of the past and how these previous pandemics inform today’s response. This database, much like our understanding of COVID-19, will continue to evolve over the coming months and years as new content is published and integrated with regular updates.
HeinOnline Foreign and International Law Resources
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
In-depth coverage of publications from the American Society of International Law and the prominent Yearbooks from around the world, as well as the Hague Permanent Court of International Justice series and the publications of dozens of other highly-respected publishers. Part 1 includes international yearbooks and serials, Part 2 contains U.S. Law Digests, Part 3 consists of international tribunals and judicial decisions and Part 4 includes other significant works relating to foreign and international law.
HeinOnline Gun Regulation and Legislation in America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Gun Regulation and Legislation in America
This HeinOnline collection brings together more than 500 titles dealing with this difficult and important topic. Included are periodicals, key compiled federal legislative histories, relevant congressional hearings, CRS Reports, Supreme Court briefs, and more. Links to nearly 500 scholarly articles, an extensive bibliography, and a balanced selection of external resources to further research this subject are also provided. Research the National Firearms Act, the Miller and Heller decisions, and other key aspects of this subject.
HeinOnline Law Journal Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text images of over 1,100 journals back to issue 1 of volume 1 of the each title. The goal of the Hein company is eventually to scan every law review title ever published. To see the current holdings of HeinOnline, click the "Collection Index" link on the top left-hand side of the screen.
HeinOnline Legal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text access to over 1100 law journals; U.S. treaties; the Federal Register and Code of Federal Regulations; U.S. Reports; U.S. Code; U.S. Statutes at Large; U.S. Attorney General Opinions; Public Papers of the President and Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents; and hundred of books considered to be legal classics.
HeinOnline Legal Classics Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
"A digital collection of many of the most highly regarded works written on the law, it is based on titles listed in the /Bibliography of Early American Law/ by Morris L. Cohen, titles selected from the AALS /Law Books Recommended for Libraries/, and a number of early British and Commonwealth titles.
HeinOnline LGBTQ+ Rights
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) LGBTQ+ Rights
This collection charts the gay rights movement in America, showing the civil rights codified into law in the 20th and 21st centuries, as well as the inequalities that still exist today. All titles in this collection have been assigned one or more title-level subjects relating to their scope, and are further divided into six subcollections, whose areas of focus constitute Marriage and Family, Employment Discrimination, Military Service, AIDS and Health Care*,* and Public Spaces and Accommodations. A separate subcollection, Historical Attitudes and Analysis, presents books, pamphlets, reports, and more from the 18th century through the mid-20th century. An interactive timeline is also included.

HeinOnline National Survey of State Laws
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) National Survey of State Laws
Provides an overall view of some of the most asked about and controversial legal topics in the United States. This database is derived from Richard Leiter’s *National Survey of State Laws* print editions. Presented in chart format, NSSL allows users to make basic state-by-state comparisons of current state laws. The database is updated regularly as new laws are passed or as legislation changes.
HeinOnline Session Laws Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Session Laws Library
Provides exact replications of the official bound session laws of all 50 states Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. The session laws current within 60 days of the print.
HeinOnline Slavery in America and the World: History, Culture & Law 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Slavery in America and the World: History, Culture & Law
This HeinOnline collection brings together a multitude of essential legal materials on slavery in the United States and the English-speaking world. This includes every statute passed by every colony and state on slavery, every federal statute dealing with slavery, and all reported state and federal cases on slavery. Our cases go into the 20th century because long after slavery was ended, there were still court cases based on issues emanating from slavery. The collection has hundreds of pamphlets and books written about slavery—defending it, attacking it, or simply analyzing it. Includes English-language legal commentary on slavery published before 1920, which includes many essays and articles in obscure, hard-to-find journals in the United States and elsewhere. Includes more than a thousand pamphlets and books on slavery from the 19th century, word-searchable access to all Congressional debates from the Continental Congress to 1880, and modern law reviews.
HeinOnline State Constitutions Illustrated
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) State Constitutions Illustrated
Collection of the constitutions of the 50 states of the United States, together with related documents and resources. Containing the text of every constitution that has been in force for every state with the original, consolidated and current texts and an extensive collection of documents from before statehood, State Constitutions Illustrated provides comprehensive coverage and allows researchers to compare multiple editions from multiple sources.
HeinOnline Treaties and Agreements Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of all published treaties & agreements to which the US has been a party. Includes: US Treaties & Other International Agreements (UST); Treaties & Other International Acts Series (TIAS); Treaties in Force (TIF) and Guide to Treaties in Force; International Legal Materials (ILM); KAV Agreements; Bevans; Malloy; and Miller. In addition to including the actual page-images of all published and in-force treaties and agreements to which the United States has been a party, HeinOnline includes thousands of unpublished treaties and agreements, and treaties and agreements that are no longer in-force. 1776 - present. Coverage varies, but for each journal usually includes the first volume up through the past two years of content. Coverage of the Federal Register up to 1980.
HeinOnline U.S. Code
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of the United States Code, 1925-1926 to the present. This is the codification by subject matter of the general and permanent laws of the United States. It can be browsed by volume and searched by title or citation.
HeinOnline U.S. Federal Legislative Histories Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Sources of Compiled Legislative Histories Database (1789 -2002) is derived from the looseleaf publication /Sources of Compiled Legislative Histories: A Bibliography of Government Documents, Periodical Articles, and Books/. All compilations for major laws are included in the database with the following exceptions: appropriations measures; ceremonial matters; laws that extend the life of an agency or authority; and laws that affect small numbers of persons or specific regions of the country. The sources for these compilations include congressional documents, legal periodicals, treatises and looseleaf services. The Legislative History Title Collection is a collection of full-text legislative histories on some of the most important and historically significant legislation of our time.
Notes: PDF printing requires Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or later.
more...
HeinOnline U.S. Presidential Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text access to a wide variety of Presidential documents, including: /Messages and Papers of the Presidents/ (Washington to McKinley); /Compilation of Messages and Papers of the Presidents/ (Washington to Hoover); /Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States/ (Hoover to George W. Bush); /Inaugural Addresses of Presidents of the United States /(various U.S. Presidents); /Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents/ (1965-2006); /Economic Reports of the President/ (1947-2006); /List and Index of Presidential Executive Orders, 1789 to 1941/; and /Presidential Executive Orders/ (1862-1938).
PDF printing requires Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or later.
HeinOnline U.S. Statutes at Large Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of /U.S. Statutes at Large/, volumes 1 to 116 (1789 to 2002), the official source for laws and resolutions passed by the U.S. Congress. It can be browsed by volume or popular name or searched by citation. Includes the text of Indian Treaties, and some other historic treaties ratified by the U.S. Senate before 1948. PDF printing requires Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or later.
HeinOnline U.S. Supreme Court Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text access to cases published in /U.S. Reports/ volumes 1 to 540 (1754 to 2003), as well as more recent slip opinions. Includes /U.S. Reports Preliminary Prints/ volumes 535 to 543 (2002-2005), /U.S. Reports Slip Opinions /(2002 - ), several historical texts on the Supreme Court, plus the periodicals /Supreme Court Economic Review /(1982-2000) and /Supreme Court Review /(1960-2000) PDF printing requires Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or later.
HeinOnline Women and the Law
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Women and the Law
Contains a unique collection of materials bringing together more than 3,600 books, biographies, and periodicals dedicated to women’s roles in society and the law over the past 200 years. Also included are titles from Emory University Law School’s Feminism and Legal Theory Project which provide a platform to view the effect of law and culture on the female gender.


HeinOnline World Constitutions Illustrated
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) World Constitutions Illustrated
Contains thousands of contemporary and historical documents, as well as many features to enable browsing and searching across the constitutional law of more than 190 countries. For every constitutional document, researchers can find the original text, amending laws, consolidated text,, and important related texts. It also contains constitutional periodicals, thousands of classic books, other related works such as the World Factbook,

links to scholarly articles and online resources, and bibliographic references.

Hindi Cinema: Histories of Film-making
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource features unedited interviews with leading Indian film personalities who contributed to the shaping of the ‘Golden Age’ of Hindi cinema and beyond. Interviews originate from the 1980s TV series on Hindi Cinema, Movie Mahal, and subsequent TV programs produced by Nasreen Munni Kabir. Other collection highlights include behind-the-scenes photographs from film sets and popular Indian film posters from the British Film Institute (BFI). Contextual essays situate the interviews within their historical context and highlight their importance, while demonstrating how the material can be used for the study of Hindi Cinema and Indian history
Hindu Conspiracy Cases: Activities of the Indian Independence Movement in the U.S., 1908-1933, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection documents trials following Indian nationalists' attempts to foment revolution during World War I to overthrow British rule.
Historic Government Publications from World War II: A digital library 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A digital collection of more than 300 U.S. Government publications distributed during the course of the war. Government Printing Office publications, like pamphlets, reports, etc.
Historical Abstracts with Full-Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Core international history database now includes unique full-text coverage of nearly 200 journals and 100 books. It also provides indexing for over 1700 journals from 1964 to the present.
Historical Black Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Once in ProQuest click on Databases link at top; click on Select all to de-select the entire list of databases; scroll down to ProQquest Historical Newspapers and select the titles of interest; return to top and click on Use selected databases.

Online full-text of: Chicago Defender (1909-1975); New York Amsterdam News (1922-1993); Pittsburgh Courier (1911-2002); Los Angeles Sentinel (1934-2005); Atlanta Daily World (1931-2003); Cleveland Call and Post (1934-1991); Norfolk Journal & Guide (1921-2003); Philadelphia Tribune (1912-2001).
Historical newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Searchable full-text of the Los Angeles Times (1881-1986); Atlanta Daily World (1931-2003); Atlanta Constitution (1868-1945); Chicago Tribune (1849-1986); Chicago Defender (1909-1975); Boston Globe (1872-1979); Christian Science Monitor (1908-2001); Cleveland Call and Post (1934-1991); Detroit Free Press (1831-1922); St. Louis Post-Dispatch (1874-1922); Los Angeles Sentinel (1934-2005); Philadelphia Tribune (1912-2001); Pittsburgh Courier (1911-2002); San Francisco Chronicle (1865-1922); New York Tribune (1841-1922); New York Amsterdam News (1922-1993); Hartford Courant (1764-1984); Norfolk Journal and Guide (1916-2003); Baltimore Afro-American (1893-1988); Baltimore Sun (1837-1989); San Francisco Chronicle (1865-1922); Wall Street Journal (1889-1997); Washington Post (1877-1998)
Historical Statistics of the United States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Historical Statistics of the United States has long been the standard source for quantitative indicators of American history. Includes statistics from over 1000 sources.
History of Science, Technology, and Medicine
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
. The definitive international bibliography for the history of science, technology, and medicine and their influence on culture, this database now integrates four separately created bibliographies. Expanded at the end of 1999 to include records from an internationally renowned medical collection. Covers pre-history to the present. Describes journal articles, conference proceedings, books, book reviews, and dissertations in all scientific disciplines and related fields. Citations reflect the contents of nearly 9,500 journals. 1975 to the present. There are no ISSNs in this database. Searching on ISBNs in not supported.Searches on YEAR are only supported in the second search box, as a 'limit' to another search. 'Phrase' searches will find the terms in the same field, however they may not be adjacent to each other. Truncation is not supported in author searches. Try to 'AND' variations of an author's name together..
History of the American Cinema
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This ten-volume set covers the film industry from its early roots in the 19th century up to 1990. It examines the development of film and the film industry, analyzing both the genres, themes and technology that defined each decade and the political and economic background that gave rise to them. Each volume focuses on a separate decade, providing a narrative on the evolution of both the business and the art of film in America.
History Vault: Immigration: Records of the INS, 1880-1930
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers the investigations made by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) during the immigration wave of 1880-1930. The files cover Asian immigration, especially Japanese and Chinese migration, to California, Hawaii, and other states; Mexican immigration to the U.S. from 1906-1930, and European immigration. Also includes files on the INS’s regulation of prostitution and white slavery and on suppression of radical aliens.
History Vault: Labor Unions in the U.S., 1862-1974: Knights of Labor, AFL, CIO, and AFL-CIO
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A module in the ProQuest History Vault - this resource provides documentation on the growth and transformation of four major labor organizations. It includes the papers of Terence V. Powderly and John W. Hayes (Knights of Labor), American Federation of Labor (AFL) records on strikes and boycotts, antitrust laws and AFL membership, and Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) Minutes of the Executive Board of the CIO and the papers of Adolph Germer, a longtime member of the United Mine Workers and a leader in the formation of the CIO. Records that document the AFL-CIO in this module also include State Labor Proceedings for 1885-1974 with the 1955-1974 portion of the records pertaining to the AFL-CIO.
Hoji Shinbun Digital Collection 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Hoji Shinbun Digital Collection is currently the world's largest online archive of open-access; full image Japanese American and other overseas Japanese newspapers in Asia and South America. It is administered by the Japanese Diaspora initiative. Hoover institution Library & Archives, Stanford University.
Holocaust and the Concentration Camp Trials: Prosecution of Nazi War Crimes
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides unique documents on the investigation and prosecution of war crimes committed by Nazi concentration camp commandants and camp personnel. Documents include: correspondence; trial records and transcripts; investigatory material, such as interrogation reports and trial exhibits; clemency petitions and reviews; photographs of atrocities; newspaper clippings; and pamphlets.
Homeland Security Digital Library 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents (full text)related to homeland security policy, strategy, and organizational management from a wide variety of sources including federal, state and local governments; international governments and institutions; nonprofit organizations and private entities.
Homophile Movement: Papers of Donald Stewart Lucas, 1941-1976
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Homophile Movement is the name given to organizations and political strategies employed by the LGBT community prior to the era of confrontational activism of the 1970s. Donald Stewart Lucas was a gay rights pioneer and antipoverty activist. His papers document a variety of homophile organizations, particularly the Mattachine Foundation, the Mattachine Society, Pan-Graphic Press, the Council on Religion and the Homosexual, the Society for Individual Rights, and the Economic Opportunity Council of San Francisco.
https://online.munzinger.de/publikation/klg
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A bio-bibliographical database of contemporary German-speaking authors (since 1945) Each author entry includes a brief biography, a critical essay, and bibliographies of primary works, as well as other information. The KLG is part of Nachslage.net, which includes several other resources (KLfG, LDL, and KDG) to which we do not have access.
Human and Civil Rights: Essential Primary Sources
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These volumes of primary source documents focus on leading social issues of the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries. International in scope, each title is devoted to one topic.
I
Indigenous North Americans 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part of the Big Ten Open Books Project. This collection explores Indigenous North American history, culture, and literature, from the 15th century to today. It includes historical encounters, the interplay between Native spirituality and culture, colonial religion, land dispossession, and the evolution of Indigenous law, diplomacy, and education. The voices of Indigenous poets and authors illuminate literary traditions, while themes of resistance and adaptation are also showcased through treaty negotiations and verbal arts. Please note: The books in this collection were published a number of years ago. They may include outdated representations of Indigenous culture and society
IBISWorld
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides Industry market research reports on U.S. industries, US Specialized Industries, China Industries, Global Industries, U.S. Risk Ratings, and U.S. Business Environment Profiles. Includes the IBISWorld State Industry Report Collection with over 30,000+ Industry Reports across 700+ NAICS codes for all 50 States, and a Tariff Exposure Tool that analyzes evolving trade tensions between the US and trading partners
IEEE Xplore
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides full-text access to IEEE transactions, journals, magazines and conference proceedings published since 1988 and all current IEEE Standards. Includes access to Bell Labs Technical journal Archive (BLTJA) 1922-2015
IEEE/MIT Press eBooks-Computing and Engineering Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
MIT Press has partnered with IEEE to make available almost 600 titles in fields such as computer science & intelligent systems, cognitive science, engineering, environmental science, information science, new media and STS. We own the complete library through 2024.
IEEE/Wiley eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection of titles includes practical handbooks, introductory and advanced texts, reference works and professional books with an emphasis on leading areas of research, such as Aerospace; Bioengineering; Communication, Networking & Broadcasting; Components, Circuits, Devices & Systems; Computing & Processing (Includes Hardware & Software); Engineered Materials, Dielectrics & Plasmas; Fields, Waves & Electromagnetics; General Topics for Engineers (Math, Science & Engineering); Geoscience; Photonics & Electro-Optics; Power, Energy & Industry Applications; Robotics & Control Systems; Signal Processing & Analysis.
All books through 2023
IET eBook Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
IET eBook Collection contains engineering and technology titles, in a broad range of specialty including: Computing; Control, Robotics & Sensors; Electromagnetic Waves; Energy Engineering; Healthcare Technologies; History of Technology; Management of Technology; Materials, Circuits & Devices; Radar, Sonar & Navigation; Sector Publications; Security; Telecommunications; and Transport. Browse by title, author, or topic available. Coverage: 2010-2024 IET ebooks and 2010-2012 SciTech ebooks

Illustrated London News Historical Archive, 1842-2003
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Illustrated London News Historical Archive, 1842-2003 provides access to the entire run of the world's first fully illustrated weekly newspaper. High-quality color facsimile images bring to life more than 150 years of social, political and cultural history for researchers. Areas covered include politics, social history, fashion, theatre, media, literature, advertising and graphic design, as well as genealogy.
IMDb The Internet Movie Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes reviews, plot summaries, release dates, cast and crew information, and much more about thousands of films.
IMF Economic and Financial Data
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Balance of Payment Statistics
From the International Monetary Fund, includes full-text statistical data from 1996 present on total goods, services, factor income, and current transfers an economy receives from or provides to the rest of the world, capital transfers and changes in each economy's external financial claims and liabilities and world totals of balance of payments components and aggregates. To download data, authorized users are required to create a free personal account.
Immigrations, Migrations and Refugees: Global Perspectives, 1941-1996
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary source documents derived from reports gathered between the early 1940s and 1996 by a U.S. government organization that became part of the CIA, including translated and English-language radio and television broadcasts, newspapers, periodicals and government documents. Provides local perspectives and global insight on immigration in the mid-to-late 20th century. Covers issues such as ethnic friction and xenophobia, religious movements, border issues, the treatment of refugees and more.
Independent Voices
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Independent Voices is a digital collection of alternative press newspapers, magazines and journals, drawn from the special collections of participating libraries. These periodicals were produced by feminists, dissident GIs, campus radicals, Native Americans, anti-war activists, Black Power advocates, Hispanics, LGBT activists, the extreme right-wing press and alternative literary magazines during the latter half of the 20th century.
Index Chemicus (IC), 1993-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides researchers with quick, powerful access to the chemical compound information they need to find research data, analyze trends, journals and researchers, and share their findings.
Index Islamicus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An international bibliography of publications in European languages on all aspects of Islam and the Muslim world. It covers their history, beliefs, societies, cultures, languages and literatures. It includes material published by Western orientalists, social scientists and Muslims writing in European languages. The file contains indexing for 3,470 titles with coverage dating back to 1906. ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database. Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
Index to Jewish Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index to Jewish Periodicals is the definitive index on Jewish history, activity and thought. This database provides a comprehensive guide to English-language articles, book reviews, and feature stories in more than 160 journals devoted to Jewish affairs.
Index Translationum 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The database contains cumulative bibliographical information on books translated and published in about one hundred of the UNESCO Member States since 1979 and totals more than 2.000.000 entries in all disciplines: literature, social and human sciences, natural and exact sciences, art, history and so forth. The database is updated regularly.
India, Raj and Empire
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Explores the history of South Asia between the foundation of the East India Company in 1615 and the granting of independence to India and Pakistan in 1947, with an emphasis on the British Indian Empire.
Indian Trade in the Southeastern Spanish Borderlands: Papers of Panton, Leslie and Company, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprising the papers of the Panton, Leslie & Co., a trading firm, this collection is the most complete ethnographic collection available for the study of the American Indians of the Southeast. More than 8,000 legal, political and diplomatic documents recording the company's operations for over half a century have been selected and organized for this collection.
Indigenous Histories and Cultures in North America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) American Indian Histories and Cultures
This collection of digitized manuscripts, works of art, recent American Indian newspapers, rare books, photographs, and maps, drawn from the Edward E. Ayer Collection at the Newberry Library, Chicago, documents American Indian life over four centuries.
Indigenous Newspapers in North America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) American Indian Newspapers
Publications of a range of Native American communities including titles produced in the United States and Canada from 1828 to 2016. Includes national periodicals as well as local community news and student publications. Topics covered include the civil rights era and American Indian Movement (AIM), education, environmentalism, land rights and cultural representation.
Indigenous Peoples of North America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Two-part resource of digital primary sources reflecting the political, social, and cultural history of Indigenous peoples in North America from the 16th century into the 20th century. Part I: Indigenous Peoples of North America - fortifies general secondary historical resources with content sourced from American and Canadian institutions, digitized newspapers from various tribes and organizations, and Indigenous language materials. Part II: The Indian Rights Association, 1882-1986 - provides the complete papers of the first organization to address Native American interests and rights, including correspondence, organizational records, printed material, annual reports, draft legislation, and the papers of Indian Rights Association founder Herbert Welsh.
Indigenous Peoples of the Americas: History, Culture & Law
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An expansive archive of materials related to indigenous American life and law which consolidates the wealth of material available on indigenous American life and law, with more than 4,200 titles and 2.4 million total pages. Included in the database are hundreds of treaties, treaty-related publications, tribal codes, constitutions, federal case law, government reports, scholarly works, and the entirety of Title 25 of the U.S. Code and Code of Federal Regulations.

INIS
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The International Nuclear Information System provides an online bibliographic retrieval service to over 3 millions references to commercial journals, grey/non-conventional literature and Internet web documents relevant to nuclear science and technology. The subject scope covers the areas of reactors, safety, fusion, medicine, agriculture and pest control, nuclear chemistry, nuclear physics and materials science, nuclear knowledge management, industry, and legal/social aspects. The full-text of most of the cited grey literature can be retrieved online or by free electronic document delivery. 1942-present.
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) is the world's largest database of fully determined inorganic crystal structures, from elements to quintenary compounds. It contains about 281,000 structures with 6,000 added annually. Each record includes crystallographic data as well as chemical/physical property data and bibliographic information for the journal article referencing the structure.
Inspec Archive - Science Abstracts 1868-1968
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Produced by the Institution of Engineering and Technology, Inspec Archive - Science Abstracts 1890-1968 is a leading bibliographic archive covering 70 years of international scientific and technical literature Abstracts cover physics, electrical engineering, electronics, computing and control engineering.
INSPIRE
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
High-energy physics related articles, including journal papers, preprints, e-prints, technical reports, conference papers, and theses. The SPIRES-HEP database has been run by the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center(SLAC) since the late 1960's.
Integration of Alabama Schools and the U.S. Military, 1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive details Operation Oak Tree, the codename for the Army's plans to intervene in Alabama in the event of civil disturbances related to school integration in May 1963. Operation Palm Tree extended the operation over a wider area. The documents in this collection are sourced from the Records of the Department of the Army, in the custody of the National Archives of the United States.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ICPSR is the world's largest collection of digital social science data and cover topics from sociology, political science, economics, demography, education, child care, health care, crime,minority populations, aging, terrorism, substance abuse, mental health, public policy, and international relations. More information about accessing data in ICPSR can be found here: https://www.lib.umd.edu/data/icpsr.
Interarchiv Judischer Periodika
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of selected German Jewish newspapers
Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees: The West's Response to Jewish Emigration Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Committee's purpose was to facilitate involuntary emigration from Germany and Austria of persons who must emigrate on account of their political opinions, religious beliefs, or racial origin, and persons who already have left their country of origin and who have not yet established themselves permanently elsewhere. The discussions represented a historic first on behalf of would-be refugees and are divided into four sections, each containing primary source correspondence, memoranda, reports and government documents. Meeting records, 1943-1947; Country files , 1938-1941; Subject files, 1938-1944; Administration files, 1943-1948.
International Bibliography of Art (IBA)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An index to core journals, monographs, exhibition catalogs, conference proceedings, and other materials covering European Art from late antiquity to the present, American art from the colonial era to the present, and global art since 1945; includes visual arts in all media, decorative and applied arts, architecture, archaeology and many related fields. Continues Bibliography of the History of Art. 2009-presnet.
International Bibliography of Theatre and Dance
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive database for research on all aspects of theatre, performance and dance. Indexes articles, books, book articles, dissertations, and newspapers published worldwide. A fully indexed, cross-referenced and annotated databank of over 60,000 journal articles, books, book articles and dissertation abstracts on all aspects of theatre and performance in 126 countries.
International Climatic Changes and Global Warming
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection documents the U.S. response to the threat posed by climatic change and global warming. The research behind the studies, reports, and analyses represents an exhaustive review of the facts, causes, and economic and political implications of a phenomenon that threatens every region of the world.
International Comparison Program
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides a collection of comparative price data and detailed expenditure values of countries' gross domestic products (GDP), and purchasing power parities (PPPs) estimates of the world's economies.
International Financial Statistics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the International Monetary Fund, includes full-text statistical data from 1996-present on exchange rates, international liquidity, international interest rates, prices, national accounts, and international transactions (including balance of payments and international investment positions. To download data, authorized users are required to create a free personal account
International Medieval Bibliography
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The International Medieval Bibliography (IMB) is one of three databases that is bundled together in the Brepolis Medieval and Early Modern Bibliographies database. The Library subscribes only to the IMB, which includes information about articles, conference proceedings, and Festschriften on all aspects of medieval studies in the period of 450 to 1500 for Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa.
International Monetary Fund eLibrary
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to IMF publications including periodicals, books, working papers, studies, data and statistical tools. Please NOTE: we do not subscribe to all IMF publications, limiting results to only our subscribed content is a search option within the eLibrary. Items not owned by UMD, can be requested thru UBorrow, or Inter Library Loan, or via Google search.
International Political Science Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database produced by the International Political Science Association, provides coverage of articles from the world's leading journals in political science. Only 4 simultaneous users allowed. This database contains over 110,000 records from nearly 900 journals published from 1989 to the present. Approximately 8,000 new records are added to the database every year.
International War on Drugs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Topics covered include terrorism and drug trafficking; money laundering and financial crimes; individual country reports and actions against drugs; U.S. policy initiatives and programs; U.S. bilateral and regional counterdrug initiatives.
International Women's Movement: Pan Pacific and Southeast Asia Women's Association of the USA, 1950-1980
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection follows the history of The Pan Pacific and Southeast Asia Women's Association from 1950-1985.
International Women's Periodicals, 1786-1933: Social and Political Issues
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
More than 50 womens periodicals mostly published in American and Britain with a few German and French titles. Subjects include housekeeping and family, fashion, religion, sex and birth control, eugenics, suffrage, and business
International Year Book and Statemen's Who's Who
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Information on all countries of the world including territories and federal states. Details of significant international and national organizations and biographical profiles of the most important people in the world today.
Internet Archive 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Internet Archive is a non-profit digital library offering free universal access to books, movies & music, as well as 351 billion archived web pages.
Internet sacred text archive 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Internet sacred text archive is the largest freely available archive of online books about religion, mythology, folklore and the esoteric on the internet. The site is dedicated to t=religious tolerance and scholarship. The texts presented here are either original scans from books and articles clearly in the public domain material which has been presented elsewhere on the internet or material under fair use conditions in printed analogies.
Internet Shakespeare Edition 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Scholarly, fully annotated texts of Shakespeare's plays, multimedia explorations of the context of Shakespeare's life and works, and records of his plays in performance.
Intertek Inform
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Intertek Inform (i2i) provides electronic full-text access and PDF downloads for selected technical and industry standards. The Libraries' subscription provides users with full access to ASHRAE and partial access to selected NSAI standards, including the Irish adaptations of ISO standards. Standards from NSAI and other Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs) are acquired by UMD Libraries, as needed, on a case-by-case basis. Contact Sarah Weiss (srweiss@umd.edu) with questions.
Interwar Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Showcases popular and lesser-known periodicals published during this time period with articles covering arts and culture, fashion, home and family life, travel, world current affairs, class, social and welfare issues as well as a wealth of writing from some of the most prominent literary figures of the era. Module I contents reflect the social, artistic and culture dynamism that characterized the Roaring Twenties in fashion, music, literature, dance and entertainment, as well as post-war intellectual thought and modernism.
IOPScience eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
IOP ebooks is a brand new book program that brings together innovative digital publishing with leading voices from across physics to create the essential collection of physics books for a digital world. Created through collaboration with leading researchers in their field, IOP ebooks feature must-read content for the physics community. ( available: 2013-2019,2024)
IOPScience Journals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Database of articles covering different areas of science and engineering from over 60 journals published by the Institute of Physics from 1874 to the present. Not all journals are available in full-text.
Iran (Persia): Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1883-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
By tracing events in the nineteenth century this archive places more recent events, such as the coup that toppled the Mossadegh government in 1953, in vital historical context.
Iraq: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1888-1944
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Iraq, from Ottoman rule through British colonial occupation and independence, is treated here from the perspective of the United States. The documents are sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
J
J Walter Thompson: Advertising America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents 100 years of advertising, consumer and cultural history chronicled in the J Walter Thompson Company Archives. Covers the research and creative processes behind the creation of advertisements, including many of the world’s biggest and best-known brands. Provides an insider account of life within an advertising agency throughout the twentieth century, documenting changes such as the growing role of women in the industry.
J-STAGE 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
J-STAGE is an electronic journal platform for science and technology information in Japan, developed and managed by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). J-Stage offers index as well as full-text access to many journal articles, conference, proceedings and other publications.
James Meredith, J. Edgar Hoover, and the Integration of the University of Mississippi
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains extensive FBI documentation on Meredith's battle to enroll at The University of Mississippi in 1962 and white political and social backlash, including his correspondence with the NAACP and positive and negative letters he received from around the world during his ordeal.
Japanese American Internment: Records of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This publication consists of the documents from The Papers of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Small Collections, "Japanese American Internment Collections," in the custody of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.
Japanese Literature in Translation Search Database 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The database covers Japanese literary works translated into other languages from 1945 to 1990s. It is searchable by author, title of work, translator or other key words in Japanese or roman letters. Short stories are listed individually by their own title rather than in the anthology.
Japanese-American Relocation Camp Newspapers: Perspectives on Day-to-Day Life
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The 25 titles in this collection document the experiences of interned Japanese-Americans from 1942-1945. Many articles are in Japanese but most are in English or appear in both languages.
JapanKnowledge Plus NRK
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes JITSU (Chinese character dictionary), NIKKOKU (Shogakkan Japanese language dictionary online), NIHON REKISHI CHIMEI TAIKEI Encyclopedia of Japanese historical and geographical names), KOKUSHI DAIJITEN WEB (Encyclopedia of Japanese history), WEB NIHON KINDAI BUNGAKKAN (WEB apanese modern literature), along with all the contents of the Japan Knowledge Classic, and can be searched with a single click making research easy.
Jazz Music Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Jazz Music Library is a streaming audio database featuring a variety of jazz styles and artists. The collection is particularly strong in the music of the 1950s and 1960s, as well as in music of later periods that grew out of the bebop/hardbop tradition; other periods and more experimental styles are represented more schematically. Notable represented record labels include: Audiophile, Concord Jazz, Contemporary Records, Fantasy, Jazzology, Milestone, Nessa Records, Original Jazz Classics, Pablo, and Prestige. Content is updated monthly.
Jerusalem Institute for Israel Studies 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
JIIS is an independent, non-profit organization. It provides a constant flow of relevant, essential and accurate data, in-depth background material, policy papers and professional analysis for use by decision makers and the general public.
Jerusalem Post (1932-2008) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Jerusalem Post is a broadsheet newspaper based in Israel, publishing only English and French editions. It is one of the main newspapers of Israel. It is published from Sunday to Friday, with no edition appearing on Saturday (the Jewish Sabbath) and Jewish religious holidays. Regular opinion columnists write on subjects such as religion, foreign affairs and economics. In its earlier form, 1932-1950, it was called The Palestine Post, and was founded in 1932 by Gershon Agron. In 1950, two years after the State of Israel was declared, the paper was renamed The Jerusalem Post.
Jewish Life in America, c1654-1954
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An Indispensable resource for all those interested in understanding and exploring the history of Jewish communities in America from their first arrival in New York in 1654 to the integral part that they pay today It makes available to scholars some of the American Jewish Historical Society's most important and valuable archival collections.
Jewish National and University Library (JNUL) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
JNUL is the National Library of the State of Israel, the National Library of the Jewish People, and the Central Library of the Hebrew University.
Jewish Question: Records from the Berlin Document Center, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises documents from a wide variety of sources, including the Gestapo, local police and government offices, Reich ministries, businesses, etc., pertaining to Jewish communities. These records are organized into various sub-collections, i.e., Archiv Schumacher, Streicher, Hans Frank, Hauptarchiv der NSDAP, Geschaedigte Juden, etc., and Ordner, or folders, and include newspaper clippings, letters, manuscripts, pamphlets, reports and other documents originating with the Sturmabteilung (SA), Schutzstaffel (SS), Gestapo, Reich Ministry of Justice, and Reichskulturkammer (RKK, Reich Chamber of Culture) from 1920- 1945.
Jewish Underground Resistance: The David Diamant Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of original documents, including leaflets and handbill, printed proclamations and resolutions, circular letters and more, collected over a period of approximately 30 years dealing primarily with the Jewish segment of the French underground resistance; many of the documents originate from communist groups, and some deal with Polish groups. Most of the documents are in French, while some are in Yiddish.
Jewish Women: a Comprehensive Historical Encyclopedia 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This encyclopedia seeks to make available to all who are interested in Jewish history and culture the varied accomplishments of Jewish women and their many contributions to the Jewish historical experience over the course of the past three millennia.
JFK's Foreign Affairs and International Crises, 1961-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides insights into President Kennedy's views on foreign affairs, U.S. leadership of the "West," and various worldwide crises. There are more than just documents on the Bay of Pigs, Berlin, and Cuba. There are documents that highlight American efforts to support Third World countries, balance of payments and foreign trade, Alliance for Progress and relations with Latin America, nuclear weapons and testing, NATO and the Multilateral Force in Europe, Southeast Asia and regional security, foreign aid and military assistance, and the international space race.
Johnson Administration and Foreign Affairs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection offers online access to the microfilm series, "Lyndon B. Johnson and Foreign Affairs, 1963-1969." Included here are White House Central Files which consist of the Foreign Affairs Subject Files and the National Defense Subject File on the Vietnam War. The collection enumerates policies, responses, and recommendations from the president's advisers and cabinet members on handling the growing conflict in South Vietnam, its effects on domestic policies, and the public's reaction to the war.
Johnson Presidency Administrative Histories: Economy, Finance and Trade
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides extensive documentation on a variety of presidential programs and initiatives. Agency and departmental records include: Bureau of the Budget; Council of Economic Advisers; Department of Commerce; Department of Treasury; Federal Deposit Corporation; Federal Home Loan Bank Board; Federal Reserve System; Federal Trade Commission; Interstate Commerce Commission; and Securities Exchange Commission. The archive is based on the film title Administrative Histories of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidency, The Economy, Finance and Trade.
Johnson Presidency Administrative Histories: Foreign Affairs and National Security
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides extensive documentation on a variety of presidential programs and initiatives. Agency and departmental records include: Administrative History of the Department of State; Agency for International Development; Panama Canal Company and the Canal Zone Government; U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; and U.S. Information Agency. The archive is based on the film title Administrative Histories of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidency, Foreign Affairs and National Security.
Johnson Presidency Administrative Histories: Health, Education and Welfare
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides extensive documentation on a variety of presidential programs and initiatives. Agency and departmental records include: Department of Agriculture; Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Department of Housing and Urban Development; Endowment for the Arts; National Endowment for the Humanities; Office of Economic Opportunity; Office of Education; and Veteran's Administration. The archive is based on the film title Administrative Histories of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidency, Health, Education and Welfare.
Johnson Presidency Administrative Histories: Labor and Employment
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides extensive documentation on a variety of presidential programs and
initiatives. Agency and departmental records include: Civil Service Commission; Department of Labor; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service; General Services Administration; Post Office Department; and National Labor Relations Board.
Johnson Presidency Administrative Histories: Science and Technology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides extensive documentation on a variety of presidential programs and initiatives. Agency and departmental records include Atomic Energy Commission; Federal Power Commission; National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA); and the Office of Science and Technology. The archive is based on the film title Administrative Histories of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidency, Science and Technology.
Joint External Debt Hub (JEDH)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides external debt data and selected foreign assets from international creditor/market and national debtor sources.
Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS) Reports, 1957-1995
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
JPRS was a translation and publishing service created in the U.S. Commerce Department's Office of Technical Services in March 1957 to provide government agencies with translations of unclassified foreign source documents, including scientific and technical publications, periodical and newspaper articles, scholarly journals, trade and commercial statistics reports, defense-related and other special reports. The documents were selected by area and subject specialists while translations were prepared by linguists and researchers. Today, JPRS reports are considered an important source of primary and secondary material from around the world. Subjects covered in the JPRS Reports include economics, international relations, national politics, military affairs, and science and technology.
Journal Citation Reports
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Journal Citation Reports (JCR)
A unique resource for journal evaluation. Journal Citation Reports (JCR) uses citation data drawn from scholarly and technical journals worldwide. The Science Edition contains data from roughly 5,000 journals in the areas of science and technology. The Social Sciences Edition contains data from roughly 1,500 journals in the social sciences. 1997-2016. Coverage is both multidisciplinary and international. Some of the disciplines covered in the Science edition include agriculture, astronomy, behavioral sciences, biochemistry, biology, chemistry, computer science, criminology, ecology, science education, engineering, environmental studies, ethnic studies, family studies, geography, geology, materials science, mathematics, medicine, meteorology, neurosciences, nutrition & dietetics, physics, plant sciences, sport sciences, toxicology, veterinary sciences, and zoology.Some of the disciplines covered in the Social Sciences Edition includeanthropology, business, communication, criminology, economics, education, engineering, environmental studies, ethnic studies, family studies, geography, history, information & library science, international relations, law, management, political science, public administration, psychology, social work, sociology, and women’s studies.
JoVE
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Journal of Visualized Experiments
A peer-reviewed multi-disciplinary scientific video journal indexed in PubMed and Web of Science enables users to quickly and systematically learn new research methods and technologies developed at top science laboratories. Includes material related to Behavior, Biochemistry, Bioengineering, Biology, Cancer Research, Chemistry, Developmental Biology, Engineering, Environment, Genetics, Immunology and Infection, Medicine, and Neuroscience.
JSTOR
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) ArtSTOR
Electronic archive of core journals in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences. Includes complete runs of journals with full-text of all articles published from volume 1, issue 1. Please note, most journals have a “moving wall” (time lag) of three to five years between the most current issue published and content available on JSTOR. Coverage spans the humanities, sciences, and social sciences.
K
Kanopy
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Kanopy is an on-demand streaming video platform that offers films, TV shows, educational videos, and documentaries.
KCI-Korean Journal Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The KCI Korean Journal Database provides a comprehensive snapshot of the most influential regional content from researchers in South Korea.Using citation connections from the Web of Science, regional work is framed within the broader context of global research.
Keesing's World News Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Precise, detailed reports on political, economic, and social events. 1931 to the present.
King and the People in Morocco, 1950-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Essential and unique documentation on a wide variety of topics relating to Moroccan internal affairs including: U.S. support for Nationalists, Istiqlal Party terrorism, Arab League's anti-French attitude, French settler concerns of spread of Algerian civil war, Pan-Arabism, installation of French-puppet Sultan, economic and financial reforms, Islamic society and Berberism, decolonization, and more.
Kiryat sefer
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Bibliographical quarterly of the Jewish National and University Library, Jerusalem. Bibliography of all the publications in Israel and of Judaica from all over the World.
Knovel
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Knovel's collection includes over 2,000 leading reference works and databases from over 70 leading technical publishers and professional societies including AIAA, AIChE, ASME and NACE. Content collection includes material properties, process and design information, best practices, equations and formulations for specific industries and engineering disciplines.
Kritisches Lexikon zur deutschsprachigen Gegenwartsliteratur (KLG)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A bio-bibliographical database of contemporary German-speaking authors (since 1945). Each author entry includes a brief biography, a critical essay, and bibliographies of primary and secondary works, as well as other information.
KRpia
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Krpia provides broad coverage of primary resources on Korean Studies. Currently 127 full-text databases are available.
Kurosawa Digital Archive 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Legendary movie director, Kurosawa Akira's materials can now be seen for the first time in the Kurosawa Digital Archive. Totaling 27,431 items, the archive contains scripts, production notes and photos, scenes of which are from masterpieces such as "The Seven Samurai." Ryukoku University helped to digitize the materials. /[in Japanese]
L
LandScan Global Population Dataset
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
LandScan is a global population database that shows geographical distribution of population at one-kilometer resolution over an average 24 hour period. Notes: GIS software users can also access LandScan datasets are compiled annually using different information sources and analytical techniques and should ideally not be compared across years.
Late Qing and Republican-era Chinese newspapers 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Late Qing and Republican-era Chinese newspapers collection provides invaluable perspective on this critical period. The press of more than twenty cities is represented, spanning the Chinese mainland and the entire half century.
Latin American Newspapers Series 1
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Latin American Newspapers Series 1 collection provides more than 35 fully searchable newspapers published in the 19th and 20th centuries from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela, and elsewhere. It offers unprecedented coverage of the people, issues, and events that shaped this vital region between 1805 and 1922.
Latin American Newspapers Series 2
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Latin American Newspapers Series 2 collection, which is still in development, will add to the newspaper coverage of important countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, and Mexico; and extend the reach into countries not represented in Latin American Newspapers I such as Bolivia, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Belize.
Latin Americanist Research Resources Project (LARRP)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Tables of contents of more than 800 journals, primarily in the humanities and social sciences, published in Latin America. Also includes information on Latin American social sciences grey literature and a database of presidential speeches since the early 19th century from Argentina and Mexico.
Latino Literature: Poetry, Drama, and Fiction
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Latino Literature brings together more than 100,000 pages pages of poetry, fiction, and over 450 plays written in English and Spanish by hundreds of Chicano, Cuban, Puerto Rican, Dominican, and other Latino authors working in the United States. Among the gems of the collection are nearly 800 items (poems, novels, and plays) that have never been published before. Researchers will also find numerous Chicano folk tales and audio files of selected poems and plays. It contains over 133,465 pages.
Law Street
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
News and analysis about all aspects of law and policy in the United States and the world. Includes an Issues section that provides in-depth analysis and pro/con positions on important issues of the day.
LC Prints and Photographs 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to the online catalog of the Prints and Photographs Division of the Library of Congress. The searchable database includes 650,000+ bibliographic records and digital images cataloged since 1984. Rights and reproduction information is also included. Represents a portion of the holdings of the Prints and Photographs Division of the Library of Congress.
Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Trans-Jordan: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1836-1944
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This timely collection covers U.S. perspectives on Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, and Trans-Jordan, from Ottoman rule to the era of British and French mandates following the First World War. The archive is sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Established as a medium for the publication of new developments in computer science and information technology research and teaching. Selected volumes available from 1973-1996,2005-2011,2014
Lecture Notes in Mathematics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This series reports on new developments in all areas of mathematics and their applications - quickly, informally and at a high level. Mathematical texts analysing new developments in modelling and numerical simulation are welcome. The type of material considered for publication includes: 1. Research monographs. 2. Lectures on a new field or presentations of a new angle in a classical field. 3. Summer schools and intensive courses on topics of current research.
Legal Battle for Civil Rights in Alabama: Vernon Z. Crawford Records, 1958-1978 Civil Rights Cases and Selections from the Blacksher, Menefee & Stein Records
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of selected portions of the records of attorney Vernon Z. Crawford (1919–1986) and the Blacksher, Menefee and Stein law firm whose work represents a significant contribution to the shape of the civil rights movement in 20th century Alabama
Leisure, Travel and Mass Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents 100 years of advertising, consumer and cultural history chronicled in the J Walter Thompson Company Archives. Covers the research and creative processes behind the creation of advertisements, including many of the world’s biggest and best-known brands. Provides an insider account of life within an advertising agency throughout the twentieth century, documenting changes such as the growing role of women in the industry.
LGBT Studies in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
"This growing collection in LGBT Studies features text and video resources exploring the social, cultural, and political evolution of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present day. The immense text holdings in this collection include materials ranging from texts, letters, periodicals, speeches, interviews, and to memoirs, biographies, poetry, and works of fiction. The latter category includes winners of the Stonewall Book Awards and Lambda Literary Awards. The video holdings include documentaries, interview, and archival films that look at all aspects of the LGBT community: LGBT history, gay culture and subcultures, civil rights, marriage equality, LGBT families, AIDS, transgender issues, religious perspectives on homosexuality, global comparative experiences, and other topics. The collection has an international and multidisciplinary focus (inclu. lgbt studies, sociology, anthropology, psychology, counseling, history, political science, cultural studies, and religious studies)."
LGBT Thought and Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides full-text access to key works and archival documents of LGBT political and social movements throughout the 20th century and into the present day. This immense collection includes materials ranging from texts, letters, periodicals, speeches, interviews, and to memoirs, biographies, poetry, and works of fiction. The latter category includes winners of the Stonewall Book Awards and Lambda Literary Awards. Has an international focus. Is cross-searchable with the LGBT Studies in Video database.
LGBTQ+ Source
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text for hundreds of the most important and historically significant LGBT journals, magazines and regional newspapers including The Advocate, Gay Parent Magazine, Girlfriends, GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian & Gay Studies, James White Review, ISNA News, Ladder, Lesbian Tide, New York Blade, ONE, Tangents, and many more. LGBT Life with Full Text also contains many full-text monographs and books including Classics in Lesbian Studies, Gay Science: The Ethics of Sexual Orientation Research, Handbook of Research with Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual & Transgender Populations, Queer Theory & Social Change, and more. Additionally, all relevant bibliographic data from NISC's Sexual Diversity Studies is also included. Indexes and abstracts data from more than 80 GLBT-specific core periodicals, over 70 priority periodicals, and over 5,000 select titles. Very multi-disciplinary, with subject areas in social sciences, humanities, and science and medicine. Current coverage of most sources, as well as deep backfiles for key publications.
Liberation Movement in Africa and African America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Composed of FBI surveillance files on the activities of the African Liberation Support Committee and All African People's Revolutionary Party; this collection provides two unique views on African American support for liberation struggles in Africa, the issue of Pan-Africanism, and the role of African independence movements as political leverage for domestic Black struggles.
more...
Liberia and the U.S.: Nation-Building in Africa, 1864-1918
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This series consists of correspondence and telegrams received and sent by the United States' diplomatic post in Liberia. The topics covered by these records include all aspects of relations with Liberia, and interactions of American citizens with the Liberian government and people.
Library & Information Science Source
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The definitive resource in the field of library and information science with more than 460 high-impact journals, nearly 30 full-text monographs and thesauri, and indexing for hundreds of journals as well as books, research reports, and proceedings. Subject coverage encompasses librarianship, classification, cataloging, bibliometrics, online information retrieval, information management, and more.
Libya: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1796-1885
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive documents the American consulate in Tripoli. Included here are correspondences of Secretary of State James Madison during the Tripolitan War, 1801-1805, between the United States and the piratical North African Barbary States. Handwritten correspondences from Secretary of State William H. Seward in the Lincoln Administration, relating to the opening of the port of New Orleans in 1862, and exchanges from Secretary of State James G. Blaine, in the Garfield Administration, make this a rich resource in U.S. diplomatic history. The collection is sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Life at Sea
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A broad range of sources, from journals and memoirs to ships’ logs and court records, offers a unique opportunity to research the lives of seafarers. From ordinary seamen and ships’ captains serving on merchant and naval vessels, to whalers and pirates, this resource offers new insights into the Anglo-American maritime world 1600-1900.
Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts (LLBA)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Indexes and summarizes journal articles, books, book chapters, dissertations, selected conference proceedings, and book reviews on linguistics and its sub-disciplines. Covers all aspects of the study of language including phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics. Complete coverage is also given to various fields of linguistics including descriptive, historical, comparative, theoretical and geographical linguistics.
LinkedIn Learning
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Lynda.com
An online learning service designed to help UMD faculty, staff, and students learn software, design, and business skills to achieve their personal and professional goals. To view the minimum requirements for using the full site and mobile devices, visit lynda.com system requirements (http://www.lynda.com/support/SystemRequirements.aspx). For help with UMD's lynda.com training, contact the IT Help Desk (https://helpdesk.umd.edu/). To log in, click on the link above. Then enter your UMD e-mail address. This will send you to the campus login system. Enter your directory ID and password. For usage questions, refer to LinkedIn Learning Frequently Asked Questions (https://umd.service-now.com/itsupport?id=kb_article&article=KB0010438) and system requirements (https://www.lynda.com/support/SystemRequirements.aspx).
Literary Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An index to biographies of more than 138,000 authors and to literary criticism of more than 176,000 literary works. Much of the material indexed here can be found full text in the Literature Resource Center or in print in your library.
Literary Manuscripts Berg
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of Victorian Manuscripts from the Henry W and Albert A Berg Collection, New York Public Library. Traces the genesis of some of the period’s greatest literary masterpieces through the unique manuscripts of their authors, supplemented by rare printed materials. Includes early editions annotated by the authors. Each author collection is included in its entirety.
Literary Manuscripts Leeds
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains manuscripts of 17th and 18th century verse from the Brotherton Collection. Includes copied verses, translations, songs and riddles, poetry, medicinal recipes, household accounts, draft letters, musical scores, and plays. There are also several printed works, with handwritten verse additions.
Literary Print Culture: The Stationer's Company Archives
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Explores the history of printing, publishing, and bookselling from 1554 to the 21st century from the archives of the Stationers’ Company, covering the history of the book, publishing, and copyright. Focuses on English literature, Renaissance theatre, and print culture from the early modern period to the twentieth century.
Literature Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) LION
LION contains 500,000 primary literary texts spanning the eighth century to the present day. It also contains up-to-date, fully searchable criticism and reference resources. Contemporary criticism is available through the full text of over 425 literature journals. The literary index, the Annual Bibliography of English Language and Literature (ABELL), is fully integrated and provides researchers one of the most important bibliographic sources for literature studies. Helpful companions and reference resources from key publishers such as Routledge, Oxford University Press, and Cambridge University Press help provide context to authors and works. Works of English and American literature, literary criticism and biographies. 8th century to the present. Only 25 simultaneous users allowed.
Literature, Culture and Society in Depression Era America: Archives of the Federal Writers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Federal Writers Project (FWP) was part of the New Deal Work Projects Administration. This collection reproduces some 450 plays, works of poetry, and reports published by FWP writers 1933-1943. The collection is strong in local history and description, though the well-known state guides are not included. Some of the works were reproduced for limited circulation by mimeograph. Overall, the works offer a wide-ranging view of Depression America.
London Low Life
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Drawn from the holdings of the Lilly Library, this collection focuses on issues facing 19th century Victorian London, includng working-class culture, street literature, popular music, urban topography, ‘slumming’, prostitution, the Contagious Diseases Act, the Temperance Movement, social reform, Toynbee Hall, police, and criminality. Includes Tallis' Street views and Swell's Guides.
Los Angeles Sentinel (1934-2005) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Los Angeles Times (1881-1996) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Los Angeles Times (1881-1996) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
M
Macmillan Cabinet Papers 1957-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides complete coverage of the Cabinet conclusions (minutes) and memoranda of Harold Macmillan’s government, plus selected minutes and memoranda of policy committees. Includes Macmillan's correspondence with Khrushchev (1957-63), Eisenhower (1957-60), and Kennedy (1961-63).
MADCAD
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Cross-searchable collection of building, plumbing, fire and maintenance codes and standards from BOCA, SBCC, ICBO, ILL, ISEA, and NFPA. Access limit is 1 simultaneous users
Mafia in Florida and Cuba: FBI Surveillance of Meyer Lansky and Santo Trafficante, Jr., The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection comprises materials on Santo Trafficante, Jr., Meyer Lansky, and Lucky Luciano, including FBI surveillance and informant reports and correspondence from a variety of offices including, Miami, Tampa, Jacksonville, New York City, New Orleans, Atlanta, New Haven, New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago; Justice Department memoranda, correspondence, and analyses; Newsclippings and articles; Domestic Intelligence Section reports; Transcriptions of wiretaps, typewriter tapes, and coded messages; Memoranda of conversations.
MagazinePlus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Most comprehensive online index to Japanese articles, includes "Zasshi Kiji Sakuin (1948- )," annual reports of academic institutions and research associations, festschriften, collections of scholarly papers, general magazines, business magazines, popular magazines, etc. from over 20,000 journals. Updated weekly.
Making of America 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Making of America (MoA) is a digital library of primary sources in American social history from the antebellum period through reconstruction.
more...
Making of Modern Law
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text online archive of historical legal treatises from the United States and Great Britain. The collection covers nearly every aspect of law, encompassing a range of analytical, theoretical, and practical literature. Gift of Louis M. Riehl, University of Maryland School of Law Class of 1938.
Making of Modern Law: U.S. Supreme Court Records and Briefs, 1832-1978
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive online collection of records and briefs brought before the nation's highest court by leading legal practitioners. Includes transcripts, applications for review, motions, petitions, supplements and other official papers of the most-studied and talked-about cases.
Making of the Modern World
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Making of the Modern World covers the history of European political economy from the 1450s onward. It traces the development of nations, capital, global trade, empire, industrialization, and corporations. It also covers the rise of the modern labor movement, slavery and abolition, colonization, the Atlantic world, Latin American/Caribbean studies, social history, and gender. It features rare books, monographs, reports, correspondence, speeches, surveys, and other primary source materials. The collection also captures non-mainstream materials including pamphlets, flyers, broadsheets, and other ephemera that are rarely preserved in libraries.
more...
MARG Magazine Archive Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An encyclopedia of the arts of India related civilizations.
Market Research and American Business, 1935-1965
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) American Consumer Culture
This collection of market reports produced by the Institute for Motivational Research, Inc. along with a selection of advertisements document American consumer culture between 1935 and 1965. The reports and ads cover a wide range of consumer industries, including clothing and accessories, food and drink, and sport and leisure.
Maryland Attorney General Opinions
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online access to the text of Attorney General Opinions. 1993 to present.
Maryland General Assembly
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Information about the General Assembly's activity, including bills and proceedings (1996-2002 sessions) and budget information (2002 session).
Maryland History and Culture Bibliography
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Maryland History and Culture Bibliography consists of citations to articles books and doctoral dissertations about various aspects of Marylands history and culture, divided into a set standard subject categories. The citations are gathered from scholarly journals, local and state history-related newsletters and magazines.
Maryland Map Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Maryland Map Collection is a comprehensive collection of more than 2,500 maps depicting Maryland, the Chesapeake Bay, and the surrounding region from 1590 to the present. The collection contains many rare early maps of Maryland as well as more modern maps produced by state, and local governments.
MAS Ultra School Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database contians full text for nearly 500 popular high school magazines. MAS Ultra also provides more than 350 full text reference books, 84,774 biographies, 100, 544 primary source documents and an image collection of 235, 186 photos, maps and flags. Updated daily. ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database. Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
Mass Observation Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to the archives of Mass Observation, a pioneering social research organization, founded in 1937 by anthropologist Tom Harrisson, film-maker Humphrey Jennings, and poet Charles Madge, who studied the everyday lives of ordinary people in Britain in order to create an "anthropology of ourselves."
Mass Observation Project
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes the questionnaires and responses from the Mass Observation Project at the University of Sussex, providing a primary source perspective of historical events and their perceptions among British people.
MasterFILE Premier
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides abstracts and indexing for 2,650 general periodicals. Full text of articles for nearly 2,000 periodicals, and 5,000 full text Magill Book Reviews. Multidisciplinary subjects including general reference, business, education, health, general science, multi-cultural issues, biography, and travel. 1975- present.
Masterplots
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
Material ConneXion's Materials Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Material ConneXion database provides unlimited access to images, detailed material descriptions, usage characteristics, and manufacturer/distributor contact information written by a expert material specialists. It is a resource for all design development disciplines, including: Architecture, Landscape Architecture, Materials Science, as well as Exhibition, Fashion, Industrial, Interior, Packaging, Retail, Textile and Transportation Design. This library contains over 6,500 cutting-edge materials in these categories: Polymers, Ceramics, Glass, Metals, Cement-based, Natural, Carbon-based, and Processes.
Materials Platform for Data Science (MPDS)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) ASM Alloy Phase Diagrams Center
The ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Center is a fully searchable database containing over 43,000 binary and ternary alloy phase diagrams, each with their associated crystal and reaction data. Also included all inorganic systems. The APD Center places the full breadth and scope of available data on binary and ternary phase diagrams right on your desktop to assist with troubleshooting, manufacturing control, and the development of new materials.
Materials Science & Engineering Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Materials Science & Engineering Database covers topics such as metals, polymers, ceramics, composites, and biomaterials and deals with areas such as corrosion, molding and casting, treatment, recycling, testing, finishing, welding, and forming. In addition to scholarly publications, this resource includes patents, conference proceedings, government reports, and more.
MathSciNet: Mathematical Reviews on the Web
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covering mathematical literature since 1940 this international database provides bibliographic data and reviews of mathematical research literature from 1700 current journals, books and other original documents. Books, journals, and proceedings in the field of mathematics. ISSN and ISBN searches are not available in this resource.
Some of the citations are linked to the full text in online journals.
Mechanical and Transportation Engineering Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers all mechanical engineering and transportation engineering aspects from aerospace to automotive. Includes periodicals, conference papers, trade journals, magazines, books, patents, and technical reports. More than 6.2 million records related to aerospace, automotive, energy, railway, naval and marine, industrial and manufacturing processes, forensics, design principles, and mathematics.Time Span:1960-present.
Medical Services and Warfare
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Gathers material from multiple conflicts to build a picture of the experience and development of medical practice as influenced by the wars of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Covers developments with a focus on rehabilitation, nursing, and the psychological toll of war. This module covers military, scientific, professional, and personal perspectives on medicine, ranging from the Civil War through World War I.
Medici.tv
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Medici.tv broadcasts over 100 live events a year from the most prestigious venues: Carnegie Hall, Walt Disney Concert Hall, Concertgebouw, Teatro alla Scala, Berliner Philharmonie, Salle Pleyel, Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, Verbier Festival, Salzburger Festspiele, and more. Medici.tv also provides access to a large collection of classical music videos, with 1,500 original programs available on demand and with unlimited access, plus hundreds of new films each year.
Medieval Family Life
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains full color images of the original medieval manuscripts that comprise the Paston, Cely, Plumpton, Stonor, and Armburgh letter collections, along with full text searchable transcripts from the printed editions. They are Britain’s first surviving records of private correspondence, describing everyday life in East Anglia during the Wars of the Roses.
Medieval Travel Writing
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of medieval manuscripts from libraries around the world, dating from the 13th to the 16th centuries, with a focus on accounts of journeys to the Holy Land, India and China. Provides insights into the attitudes and preconceptions of people across Europe in the medieval period, shedding light on issues of race, economics, trade, militarism, politics, literature, and science.
MEDLINE
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides abstracts and indexing using Medical Subject Headings (MESH) for about 4,600 biomedical journals published in the U.S. and 70 foreign countries. Created by the United States National Library of Medicine, MEDLINE is an authoritative bibliographic database containing citations and abstracts for biomedical and health journals. Users can effectively search and retrieve information with Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). Covers the fields of medicine, nursing, dentistry, veterinary medicine, psychiatry, pre-clinical sciences, medical education and health care planning and administration of services. 1966- present.
Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
There are no ISBNs in this database.
MedlinePlus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
MedlinePlus, is a goldmine of good health information from the world's largest medical library, the National Library of Medicine. Health professionals and consumers alike can depend on it for information that is authoritative and up to date. MedlinePlus has extensive information from the National Institutes of Health and other trusted sources on over 650 diseases and conditions.
Meiji Japan :The Edward Sylvester Morse Collection from the Peabody Essex Museum, Salem
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Manuscripts for the study of Meiji society, culture, ethnology and education from the papers of Edward Sylvester Morse (1838-1925). Edward S Morse was a great polymath notable for his work in natural history, ethnography and art history but, perhaps most famous for his work in bringing Japan and the West closer together.
Morse was one of the first Americans to live in Japan teaching science at the Imperial University of Tokyo and he devoted much of his life to the task of documenting life in Japan before it was transformed by Western modernization. In addition to preserving the household records of a samurai family and many accounts of the tea ceremony, Morse made notes on subjects as diverse as shop signs, fireworks, hairpins, agricultural tools, artists studios, music, games, printing, carpentry, the Ainu, gardens, household construction, art and architecture.
These papers document the numerous and valuable contributions made by Morse to the areas of malacology, zoology, ethnology, archaeology and art history.
Original Japan diaries, which run to over 3,000 pages and contain over 1,300 sketches.
Journals of visits to England, France and Germany in the 1880s showing the interest of Europeans in gaining authentic insights into ordinary life in Japan and China.
Correspondence including exchanges with Alexander and Louis Agassiz, William Sturgis Bigelow, Charles Darwin, Ernest Fenollosa, Yukichi Fukuzawa, Isabella Stewart Gardner, John M Gould, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Ernest Ingersoll, Hiroyuki Kato, Percival Lowell, The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, Charles Eliot Norton, Frederick Putnam, Hideo Takamine, Seiichi Tejima, Charles Townsend, Charles Weld and Yu Kil-chun.
Scrapbooks with a wealth of rare and ephemeral material on a myriad of subjects.
Records of his publications and lectures reveal his interests in archaeology, art, astronomy, ethnology, religion and zoology, as well as his desire to encourage an American audience to appreciate Asian society and culture.
Mental Measurements Yearbook with Tests in Print
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource is essential for evaluating contemporary testing instruments. It includes educational, psychological, and vocational tests and measurements commercially published in the English language. It consists of full-text descriptive entries, references, and full-text critical reviews of assessment tools. A useful tool in the fields of education, psychology, psychiatry, behavioral science, and speech, language, and hearing. 1938-present. This electronic version of Mental Measurements Yearbook provides information on tests that are described in volumes 1 -(1938-current) of this series.
Merck index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Merck Index is a major reference work for scientists and professionals looking for authoritative information on chemicals, drugs and biologicals. The Merck index Online is an online platform featuring text and structure search functionality and a user-friendly interface.
Meriam Report on Indian Administration and the Survey of Conditions of the Indians in the U.S
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Meriam Report [The Problem of Indian Administration] was a survey of conditions on Native American reservations in twenty-six states sponsored by the Rockefeller Foundation and published in 1928. Following the report, the U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs conducted extensive hearings that were published in 41 parts totaling nearly 20,000 pages and collectively titled Survey of the Conditions of the Indians in the United States.
Met Opera on Demand Student Access
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Met Opera on Demand delivers instant access to more than 500 Met performances, including more than 75 past performances from the Met's award-winning Live in HD series as well as more than 400 classic full-length video and audio performances. 5 simultaneous users
Mexico in History: Colonialism to Revolution
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Mexico in History is an essential resource illuminating the country’s past, from Spanish contact with Indigenous communities, through colonial rule, Independence, and the National and Reforma periods, and the onset of the Revolution. These unique and highly significant archival materials from Mexico are predominantly Spanish as well as including Indigenous languages, with translated metadata. Drawn from The Bancroft Library's Latina Americana Collection, one of the world’s foremost repositories for historical and contemporary research on Mexico and Central America, the collection includes rare manuscripts and visual materials, including maps, photographs, illustrations, and graphic art.
Middle and Junior High Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Middle and Junior High Core Collection is ideal for libraries serving readers in grades five through nine. This collection contains over 19,000 entries for nonfiction and fiction works recommended for children and adolescents.
more...
Middle East Online: Iraq 1914-1974
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Iraq 1914-1974, offers a broad range of original source material from the British Foreign Office, Colonial Office, War Office and Cabinet Papers covering the period from the Anglo-Indian landing in Basra in 1914 through the British Mandate in Iraq of 1920-32 to the rise of Saddam Hussein in 1974, including photographs, colour maps and contemporary film.
Middle Eastern & Central Asian Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Middle Eastern & Central Asian Studies (MECAS) is a systematic and non-evaluative bibliographic index of research, policy and scholarly discourse on the countries and peoples of the Middle East, Central Asia and North Africa. This database contains more than 475,000 records. Over 15,000 records of recently published and grey literature are added annually. Subject coverage includes: political affairs & law, international relations, economic affairs - business & industry, cultural heritage, arts & humanities, society & social welfare, ethnic diversity & anthropology, significant religious events & movements and recent history (1900 - present) & archaeology. MECAS includes the following: Middle East Bibliography (1946 - 2001), Middle East Book Bibliographies, Theses & Dissertations, MECAS Citations Database and School of Oriental & African Studies (SOAS) Library Catalogue (1900 - present). Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First.
Middle English Compendium
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Offers access to and interconnectivity between three major Middle English electronic resources: an electronic version of the Middle English Dictionary, a HyperBibliography of Middle English prose and verse, based on the MED bibliographies, and a Corpus of Middle English Prose and Verse, as well as links to an associated network of electronic resources.
Mideastwire.com
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Mideastwire.com is an Internet-based news service. It offers a daily email newsletter of concise. Translated briefs covering some of the key political, cultural, economic and opinion pieces appearing via the print, radio and television media of the 22 Arab countries.
Migration to New Worlds
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers all aspects of the migration experience, from motives and departures to arrival and permanent settlement. The collection also includes early material such as the first emigration ‘round robin’ from 1621 and letters from late eighteenth century merchants and travellers in the United States.
Further covers activities of the New Zealand Company during the 1840s and includes resources focusing on the growth of colonization companies during the nineteenth century, the activities of immigration and welfare societies, and the plight of refugees and displaced persons throughout the twentieth century as migrants fled their homelands to escape global conflict.

Military & Government Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Designed to offer current news pertaining to all branches of the military, this database offers full text for nearly 300 journals, periodicals, and U.S. government documents. The database also includes full text for 245 pamphlets and offers indexing and abstracts for nearly 400 titles. Many full text titles are available in native (searchable) PDF, or scanned-in-color. Coverage includes defense, military technology, global security, and foreign affairs. 1990-present.
Military Activities and Civil Rights: The Military Response to the March on Washington, 1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reveals details of the Federal Government's plans to militarily intervene in the 1963 March on Washington (codenamed Operation "Steep Hill") in the event the march became disorderly. Army staff communications and memos tracked the plans of the March organizers throughout the summer, and the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations prepared contingency plans for cooperation with District of Columbia police for controlling the march.
Minority Health and Health Equity Archive 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Archive promotes trans-disciplinary scholarship on race, ethnicity and disparities research designed to achieve health equity. It helps facilitate the rapid dissemination of new work in the professional literature as well as the gray literature including, but not limited to, historical documents, government resources, teaching tools and commentary.
Minority Voter, Election of 1936 and the Good Neighbor League
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection is designed as a case study of minority involvement in a presidential election campaign, using the 1936 Democratic Campaign as a model. The 1936 election provides an excellent example partly because of the availability of manuscript material on the Good Neighbor League, a vital force in helping make minorities part of the Roosevelt coalition in 1936
Mintel Consumer Intelligence Reports
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
To download reports, authorized users are required to create a personal account. Mintel provides full-text reports on a wide range of market research studies, analyzing market sizes and trends, market segmentation, consumer attitudes and purchasing habits, opportunities, weaknesses and the future of the market. The reports cover the United States and feature such industries as: food service, food, drink, pursuits/hobbies, travel, clothing/fashion, health/medical, beauty/personal, household, services, publishing, automotive, and e-commerce. 1994-present.
Minutemen, 1961-1969: Evolution of the Militia Movement in America, Part I
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection follows the evolution of The Minutemen, an anti-Communist organization formed in the 1960s.
Librarian Review
MIT Press Direct 2 Open 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A multidisciplinary collection of open-access e-books covering a large selection of academic subjects.
MIT Press open architecture and urban studies 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is an open access collection of architecture and urban studies books, published between 1964 and 2000. They also include landscape architecture and industrial design topics.
MLA Directory of Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Information about magazines & journals worldwide that publish literary criticism, creative writing, film & drama criticism, folklore & linguistics studies, and related topics. Entries includes submission guidelines, addresses, phone numbers, URL's, e-mail addresses, names of editors, and more.
MLA International Bibliography with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Indexes journals, books, essay collections, proceedings, dissertations, and bibliographies published worldwide in the areas of literary criticism, language, linguistics, rhetoric, and folklore of all countries. Produced by the Modern Language Association (MLA) the database contains millions of citations as well as full text for over 1,000 journals.
Modern Arab Renaissance Collection - Kotobarabia Arabic eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This exclusive electronic archive consists of over 3,000 books published from 1820-1914 across the Islamic World, with special focus on Egypt and Syria. Subject coverage includes sciences and humanities: philosophy, theology, literature, arts, history and politics. Content is in Arabic. Search interface can be switched between English and Arabic, and both include a virtual Arabic keyboard for easy text input.
Modern Egyptian Collection - Kotobarabia Arabic eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Over 4,500 titles of publications including banned literature, fiction, non-fiction, scholarly and popular, written by Arab authors and in particular leading authors from Egypt. Over 80% of the titles are unavailable or very hard to acquire even in print form. The e-library is arranged into 31 categories. Content is in Arabic. Search interface can be switched between English and Arabic, and both include a virtual Arabic keyboard for easy text input.
Modernist Journals Project
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digital editions of culturally significant magazines from 1890 to 1922 with magazines at its core the MJP also offers a range of genres that extends to the digital publication of books directly connected to modernist periodicals and other supporting materials for periodical study.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Series based on weekly reports to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) by state health departments. Data on specific diseases as reported by state and territorial health departments and reports on infectious and chronic diseases, environmental hazards, natural or human-generated disasters, occupational diseases and injuries, and intentional and unintentional injuries. Also included are reports on topics of international interest and notices of events of interest to the public health community.
Morningstar Investing Center
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Investing Center
Find a stock or fund to meet your needs, research current or prospective holdings or see how your investments work together. Morningstar's data reports cover more than 20,000 securities. Licensing restrictions apply. Subscription databases have licensing restrictions on the number of simultaneous users. This database has 4 users. If you are unable to access this database, please try again. Historical data back to 1996.
Morocco: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1797-1929
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive reveals more than a century of U.S.-Morocco relations and includes, among various documents, correspondences from U.S. ministers in Tangier and Tetuan. It is sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Librarian Review
Mountain People: Life and Culture in Appalachia
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of the diaries, journals, and narratives of explorers, emigrants, military men, Native Americans, and travelers. In addition, there are accounts on the development of farming and mining communities, family histories, and folklore. These accounts provide a view of the of the vast region between Lexington, Kentucky and Winchester, Virginia, from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to Birmingham, Alabama, and provides information on the social, political, economic, scientific, religious and agricultural characteristics of the region.
MRQE: Movie Review Query Engine 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Links to full text reviews on thousands of films.
Music Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Music Index, produced by Harmonie Park Press, is the single most comprehensive subject-author guide to music periodical literature. The Music Index has been available in print since 1949. The Music Index online coverage spans from 1976 to the present and contains surveyed data from 775 international music periodicals from over 40 countries, with English translations from 22 languages. ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database.
Music Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive database featuring streaming audio and video, reference, and scores. Music Online allows users cross search all of the music databases published by Alexander Street Press.
Music Online: Classical Scores Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains over 1,816 musical scores in PDF format, with that number expected to grow to 8,000. Volume 1 is especially strong in 18th and 19th century music, but includes works from the 15th century through the 21st century. Notably, the entire Boosey and Hawkes catalog will be contained within the resource. Many items have associated audio tracks in Classical Music Library (also available in Database Finder) and the two resources work in tandem to provide simultaneous access to print and recorded music. Volume 4 contains in PDF format and places an emphasis on 20th and 20th century composers.
N
NACSIS Web Cat
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
National union catalog of books and serials in national university libraries and other research institutions in Japan, managed by Japan's National Institute of Informatics. Updated Weekly. This database gives holding records of institutions. Good tool for interlibrary loan. (Japanese and English)
Narcotic Addiction and Mental Health: The Clinical Papers of Lawrence Kolb Sr
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection deals chiefly with the subjects of drug addiction, alcoholism, juvenile delinquency, and mental health. This collection consists of correspondence, reports, documents clippings, reprints and photos; and include these correspondents: Clifford W. Beers, Rupert Blue, F. A. Carmelia, Hugh S. Cumming, Robert H. Felix, Richmond P. Hobson, Adolph Meyer, W. F. Ossenfort, Thomas Parran, C. C. Pierce, Carleton Simon, Walter L. Treadway, and Lloyd H. Ziegler.
NASA Technical Reports Server
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI) Program's mission is to collect, archive, and disseminate NASA aerospace information, and locate domestic and international STI pertinent to NASA's missions and Strategic Enterprises.
Nation Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Nation is America's oldest weekly magazine and one if its premier journals of opinion since its inception in 1865. The Nation has long bee regarded as one of the country's definitive journalistic voices of writing on politics, culture, books and the arts and continues to stand as the independent voice in American journalism. This database contains indexing & abstracting and full text for the complete archive of The Nation beginning with its first issue in 1865 through to the present.
National Center for Health Statistics Data Warehouse
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Data on vital events as well as information on health status, lifestyle, and exposure to unhealthy influences, the onset and diagnosis of illness and disability, and the use of health care.
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Summaries of more than 170,000 publications including journal articles, government reports, books, research reports, and unpublished research plus links to over 1,500 full-text publications. Criminal justice and criminology issues including corrections, courts, drugs and substance abuse, juvenile justice, law enforcement, victims of crime, statistics, and international crime topics. 1970 - present.
National Criminal Justice Reference Service Abstracts (EBSCO)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides summaries of more than 190,000 resources in criminal justice, juvenile justice and substance abuse. Includes journal articles, government reports, books, research reports and unpublished research.
National Diet Library of Japan Digital Collections 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Kindai Digital Library
The National Diet Library of Japan's Digital Collections enables a user to search and view a variety of resources, collected and stored by the National Diet Library of Japan. The Kindai Digital Library of the National Diet Library of Japan presently provides digital images of 97,000 titles (143,000 volumes) published in the Meiji and Taisho eras (1868-1926) and is continuously adding new titles to this database. Whenever titles being searched in the NDL OPAC are present in the Kindai Digiital Library, there is a hot link in the bibliographic records that takes you from the OPAC to the full text of the titles in the Kindai Digital Library where you can view images of the contents and full texts of those titles.
National Farm Worker Ministry: Mobilizing Support for Migrant Workers, 1939-1985
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The National Farm Worker Ministry dates from 1920 and began as a charity aimed at helping farm workers procure food, clothing, and medical care. Under the influence of Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers, it became more overtly political in seeking more fundamental improvements for farm workers in the 1960s. This collection reproduces correspondence, reports, speeches, and minutes documenting poverty programs, Braceros, labor camps, the United Farm Workers Union, and the Delano Grape Strike (1965-1970).
National Journal Policy Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive collection of resources on U.S. politics and policy, including the National Journal, Poll Track, Ad Spotlight, CongressDaily, Technology Daily, and the Almanac of American Politics. All components may be searched at once. Covers all aspects of U.S. politics and policy. National Journal (1977 - present), Ad Spotlight (1997 - present), Almanac of American Politics (1998, 2000, 2002 editions), Campaigns (1997 - present), Markup Reports (September 9, 1999 - present), Poll Track (2001- present), Hotline (1987-present), CongressDaily (1997-present), and Technology Daily (1999- present).
National Newspapers Core
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text articles from the Wall Street Journal, Christian Science Monitor, The New York Times, The Sun (Baltimore), and The Washington Post. Covers national, international and local news. The NYT provides text of important speeches and documents; WSJ reports on international finance; and WP offers strong political reporting, editorials and columnists.
National Security and FBI Surveillance Enemy Aliens
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides insights into the recent history of the surveillance of aliens and national security during World War II and the early postwar period.
National Social Sciences Database 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database contains over 2000 core academic journal titles in social sciences issued in china from 1921 to present.
National Theatre Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This brings the stage to life through access to high definition streaming video of world-class productions and unique archival material offering significant insight into theatre and performance studies. Through a collaboration with the U.K.'s National Theatre, this collection offers a range of digital performance resources never previously seen outside of the National Theatre's archive. Contains over 1,816 musical scores in PDF format, with that number expected to grow to 8,000. Volume 1 is especially strong in 18th and 19th century music, but includes works from the 15th century through the 21st century. Notably, the entire Boosey and Hawkes catalog will be contained within the resource. Many items have associated audio tracks in Classical Music Library (also available in Database Finder) and the two resources work in tandem to provide simultaneous access to print and recorded music. Volume 4 contains in PDF format and places an emphasis on 20th and 20th century composers.
National Yiddish Book Center 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online access to the full texts of nearly 11,000 out-of-print Yiddish titles in literature, history, philosophy, art, education, biography, and many other subjects.
Nationmaster.com
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This free site compiles data from prominent international statistics sources like the CIA, UN and others and presents them graphically to allow easy comparisons of countries.
Naxos Music Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
87,000 tracks for online listening, including Naxos classical, jazz, world-music and historical releases, and Marco Polo and Da Capo catalogues. Naxos Historical, Nostalgia, and Jazz Legends recordings are not available in the United States due to the uncertain legal situation regarding pre-1972 sound recordings.
Naxos Video Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streaming video library of classical music performances, opera, ballet, live concerts, and documentaries. Currently contains over 530 full-length videos.
(5 simultaneous user limit)
Nazi Bank and Financial Institutions: U.S. Military Government Investigation Reports and Interrogations of Nazi Financiers, 1945-1949
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This publication comprises two collections related to Holocaust Era Assets. The first includes Records Regarding Bank Investigations and Records Relating to Interrogations of Nazi Financiers, from the records of the Office of the Finance Division and Finance Advisor in the Office of Military Government, U.S. Zone(Germany) (OMGUS), during the period 1945-1949. The second comprises Records Regarding Intelligence and Financial Investigations, 1945-1949, from the Records of the Financial Intelligence Group, Office of the Finance Adviser.
Nazism in Poland: The Diary of Governor-General Hans Frank
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reproduces the Tagebuch or journal of Dr. Hans Frank (1900-1946), the Governor-General of German-occupied Poland from October 1939 until early 1945. The journal is in typed format, in chronological order, covering all aspect of Generalgouvernment (GG) administration from its seat in the royal Wawel castle in Krakau (Kraków). The entries reflect administrative matters, rather than the spontaneous thoughts or feelings usually found in a diary.
NBER Working Papers Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of working papers from the National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER concentrates on four types of of empirical research: developing new statistical measurements, estimating quantitative models of economic behavior, assessing the effects of public policy on the U.S. economy, and projecting the effects of alternative policy proposals.
NCL Taiwan Periodical Literature
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This index database provides searching and browsing functions of journals, newspapers and gazettes published in Taiwan. It also includes important periodicals and newspapers published before 1945 in Mainland China, as well as academic journals published in Hong Kong and Macau.
NDL OPAC
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Needs Internet Explorer IME for Japanese. National Diet Library of Japan Online Public Access Catalog. It contains books since 1868 and journal articles since 1948.
Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations Union Catalog
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) ETD Digital Library
The Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations Union Catalog will serve as a repository of rich graduate educational material contributed by a number of member institutions worldwide. The hope is that this project will increase the availability of student research for scholars, empower students to convey a richer message through the use of multimedia and hypermedia technologies and advance digital library technology worldwide.
Neuroscience Information Framework
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource provides access to a wide range of publically available neuroscience infromation including bioinformatics data, images, grants and much more.
New Play Exchange
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The New Play Exchange is a streamlined script discovery engine for the new play sector with over 28,000 scripts. With our Higher Ed subscription we can find plays to read, direct, inquire about rights, and contact writers. Beyond that basic search function you will have to subscribe as an individual for more advanced features.
New Republic Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The New Republic, founded in 1914, presents insights from a variety of viewpoints on topics such as politics, foreign policy, culture, current events, the arts, and much more. The New Republic Archive contains more than 4,550 issues, with coverage dating back to 1914. Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First.
New York Amsterdam News (1922-1993)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ProQuest Historical Newspapers New York Amsterdam News: 1922-1993 offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
New York Public Library Dance Catalog
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Lists the holdings of the Dance Collection of the New York Public Library. The collections consists of books, periodical articles, video recordings, and other media. All forms of dance, from all cultures, in many languages are included.
New York Times (1851-2016 )
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The New York Times Historical (1851-2016 ) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
New York Times (Academic All Access Pass)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
(You are required to create an account) Instructions on how to claim your Academic All Access Pass can be found here. Students, faculty, and staff members at the University of Maryland College Park now have free access to The New York Times. Access includes the main news website, The New York Times in Higher Education site, The New York Times Cooking and Games sections, The Athletic, and Wirecutter. Access is through a subscription provided by the University of Maryland Libraries.


The New York Times website covers a variety of topics with unsurpassed quality and depth through breaking news articles, blogs, videos, and interactive features. In addition, you will be able to share content on social networks, save articles of interest, subscribe to email newsletters, and set up personalized alerts.
New York Times 1980 - (Nexis Uni)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive digital coverage back to 1980. On the Nexis Uni homepage, select "A Publication" under the What are you interested in? heading. Then enter The New York Times (or any publication title) in the Find Publication space, and click SEARCH
New York Times 1980 - (ProQuest)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprehensive digital coverage back to 1980.
New York Tribune (1841-1922)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The New York Tribune (1841-1922) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Nexis Uni Featured
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database

Nexis Uni (formerly LexisNexis Academic) provides fulltext to news, business and legal information. Newspapers date back to the 1970's. Please Note: The Washington Post is no longer included in Nexis Uni.The National Newspapers Core database includes the Washington Post.

Nicaragua: Political Instability and U.S. Intervention, 1910-1933
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The United States kept a contingent force in Nicaragua almost continually from 1912 until 1933. Although reduced to 100 in 1913, the contingent served as a reminder of the willingness of the United States to use force and its desire to keep conservative governments in power. This collection provides documentation on the almost continual political instability in Nicaragua.
Nicaragua: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents in this archive trace developments primarily during the administration of President John F. Kennedy. Reports on commerce abound, including memoranda from the embassy in Managua on total sugar production estimates that may enter the United States. Memoranda on social welfare include a survey of government-sponsored social welfare organizations as well as details on the National Social Assistance Lottery and the National Committee for the Anti-Tuberculosis Campaign. From the embassy at San José (Costa Rica) various items are included, such as: "Central America Common Market Meetings Completed"; "Pure Oil Company Not 'In' Oil Refinery Deal"; and "Tripartite Treaty of Commerce" [between Costa Rica, Panama, and Nicaragua] "Goes into Effect" (August 1962).
Nihon Shoseki Somokuroku
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Search engine for Japanese books currently available in the book market in Japan.
NINES: Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth-century Electronic Scholarship
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes various kinds of contents: traditional texts and document, editions, bibliographic entries, and critical works of all kinds, as well as 'born-digital' materials relating to all aspects of nineteenth-century culture. Some but not all of the content is open access.
Nineteenth Century Collections Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Nineteenth Century Collections Online (NCCO) is a growing collection of archives which brings together rare primary source materials monographs, newspapers, pamphlets, manuscripts, ephemera, maps, photographs and more from the long nineteenth century (1789-1914.) UMD has access to archives 1-12.
Nineteenth Century Literary Society: The John Murray Publishing Society
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archives of the company that published such titles as Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, Austen’s Emma, and Livingstone’s Missionary Travels. Includes the most complete archival collection of Lord Byron, encompassing both literary triumph and personal scandal.
Nineteenth Century U.S. Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to a collection of 400 U.S. newspapers, with over 1.7 million pages of content. Coverage includes a cross-section of publications from political party papers, illustrated papers, as well as major papers and African American, Native American, women's rights and labor group publications.
Nineteenth-Century Serials Edition (NCSE) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fully searchable online editions (both full-page facsimiles and textual transcripts) of the following nineteenth-century periodicals and newspapers: Monthly Repository (1806-1837), Unitarian Chronicle (1832-1833), Northern Star (1838-1852), Leader (1850-1860), English Woman's Journal (1858-1864), Tomahawk (1867-1870), and Publishers' Circular (1880-1890).
Nixon Administration and Foreign Affairs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The archive details the worldview of foreign policy during President Nixon's administration and chronicles the realism that both the president and his policy advisers used in mentally ordering the world and in formulating policy. It highlights the diplomacy that the administration employed to achieve "Vietnamization," détente with the Soviet Union, and other objectives.
Norfolk Journal and Guide (1916-2003) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
1916-2003
North American Immigrants Letters Diaries and Oral Histories
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of primary sources, including letters, diaries, autobiographies, and oral histories, documents the experience of immigrants to the United States from 1840 to the present, with special emphasis on the period 1890 to 1920. Immigrants from all over the world are included.
North American Indian Drama Second Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
North American Indian Drama contains 244 plays by 48 playwrights. More than half of the works are previously unpublished, and hard to find, representing groups such as Cherokee, M?tis, Creek, Choctaw, Pembina Chippewa, Ojibway, Lenape, Comanche, Cree, Navajo, Rappahannock, Hawaiian/Samoan, and others. North American Indian Drama allows in-depth browsing and searching of both the bibliographic and the full-text elements within the database.
North American Indian Thought and Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database integrates autobiographies, biographies, Indian publications, oral histories (in audio and transcript form), personal writings, photographs from the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other collections, and drawings, documenting native American peoples throughout the country.
North American Theatre Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
North American Theatre Online is a comprehensive reference work covering all aspects of the Canadian and American Theatre. It includes some 40,000 pages of major reference materials, together with records to approximately 30,000 plays, 57,000 people, 5,400 theatres, 22,000 productions, and 2,500 production companies. Each year we'll add more than 20,000 new records. The collection also includes approximately 10,500 images, playbills, postcards, scrapbooks and other resources. Through this interface, one can also search Black Drama, Twentieth Century North American Drama, Asian American Drama, North American Women's Drama, and Latino Drama.
North American Women's Drama
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
North American Women's Drama contains 1,517 plays by 330 playwrights, together with detailed, fielded information on related productions, theaters, production companies, and more. More than 30% of the plays in the collection have never been published before. The database also includes selected playbills, production photographs and other ephemera related to the plays. North American Women's Drama allows in-depth browsing and searching of both the bibliographic and the full-text elements within the database.
North American Women's Letters and Diaries
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Electronic collection of womens diaries and correspondence from Colonial times to 1950. Coverage includes: all age groups and life stages, a wide range of ethnicities, many geographical regions, the famous, and the not so famous. More than 1,500 biographies are also included.
NTRL
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) National Technical Reports Library
Covers U.S. government-sponsored research and reports from federal agencies including technical research reports, journal articles, data files, computer programs and audio-visual products. 1964 - current
Nuclear Arms and Weapons of Mass Destruction: Global Perspectives, 1945-1996
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized primary source documents from global media sources—including television and radio broadcasts, periodicals, newspapers, and government documents as collected and translated into English by a U.S. government organization that became part of the CIA. Covers every aspect of nuclear arms and weapons of mass destruction.
Numdam 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Free website contains full-text of journals articles, seminar & conference proceedings, books & monographs, doctoral theses in mathematics. Freely downloadable content after a variable moving wall.
Nuremburg Laws and Nazi Annulment of German Jewish Nationality
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of index cards listing the name, date and place of birth, occupation and last address of Jews whose German citizenship was revoked in accordance with the "Nuremberg Laws" of 1935, including Jews from Germany, Austria and Czech Bohemia. The cards are generally in alphabetical order
Nursing Reference Center plus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource provides evidence-based information for point of care, continuing education, and nursing research. It provides answers to questions quickly, includes patient education handouts and has access to continuing education modules for nurses.
O
OAIster
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OAIster is a union catalog of digital resources. It provides access to these digital resources by "harvesting" their descriptive metadata (records) using OAI-PMH (the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting). The Open Archives Initiative is not the same thing as the Open Access movement. These resources, often hidden from search engine users behind web scripts, are known as the "deep web." The owners of these resources share them with the world using OAI-PMH. OAIster reveals these digital resources in an easy-to-use, searchable interface.
Occupational Outlook Handbook
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Occupational Outlook Handbook is a nationally recognized source of career information, designed to provide valuable assistance to individuals making decisions about their future work lives. Revised every two years, the Handbook describes what workers do on the job, working conditions, the training and education needed, earnings, and expected job prospects in a wide range of occupations.
OECD iLibrary 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The online library of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development comprises 20 book collections by theme, OECD monographs and reports, OECD periodicals and the OECD statistical databases.
Official and Confidential Files of FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The 164 files reproduced here were collected and maintained in Hoover's own office during his directorship, from 1924 to 1972. This unique collection contains extensive documentation, mostly derogatory, on such figures as John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr. Several of the files also concern controversial FBI activities, such as attempts to discredit the civil rights movement.
Official Papers of Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
One of the most prominent Allied military leaders of World War II, United States Admiral Ernest J. King was appointed commander in chief of the Atlantic Fleet in 1941 and oversaw the fulfillment of lend-lease programs to Great Britain and the Soviet Union. After the Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor, he assumed operational control of all American naval forces. In 1942, President Roosevelt signed an executive order naming King both commander in chief and chief of naval operations (CNO). Official Papers of Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King primarily contains correspondence and memorandum from the 1940s as well as conference agendas and minutes, studies of the office of the CNO and the Navy, postwar studies of logistics and supply systems, and material on the postwar armed services unification controversy. These papers are essential primary sources for researchers interested in wartime grand strategy, interservice rivalries, wartime operations planning, the battle for the Atlantic, and the Pacific War.
Old Maps Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The OldMapsOnline portal is an easy-to-use gateway to historical maps in libraries around the world. It allows the user to search for online digital historical maps across numerous different collections via a geographical search. Search by typing a place name or by clicking in the map window and narrow by date. The search results provide a direct link to the map image on the website of the host institution.
Olympic Movement: Sport, Global Politics and Identity
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This multi-archive resource provides a comprehensive documentary record of the history of the Olympic Games as well as the growing prominence and influence sport had over multiple aspects of culture, society, and politics (and vice versa) around the world from 1896 to 1992.
OMIM
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Information about genetic diseases and heritable conditions. Intended for use by genetic researchers and advanced students in science and medicine. A catalog of human genes and genetic disorders containing textual information, pictures, and reference information.
On the boards TV
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OntheBoards.tv is a portal for viewing full-length, high-quality performance films. It functions as a streaming subscription service and an archive for ground-breaking artistic projects and contemporary performances.
Open Research Library 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A comprehensive collection of peer-reviewed Open Access books and other types of scholarly content from a variety of sources. Content in the language originally published.
Open Science Framework 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Open Science Framework (OSF) is a free and open-source project management tool, that supports researchers throughout the entire project lifecycle. It can be used for collaboration and to share part or all of a research project and its outputs, including registrations, preprints, open-access articles, and data. OSF provides version control, persistent URLs, and DOI registration. It also integrates with other cloud-based research, storage, and citation management tools (GitHub, Google Drive, Zotero, etc.). The University of Maryland’s institutional membership grants benefits such as Single Sign-On account access and discoverability on the UMD landing page. OSF content is fully discoverable via the provided search feature
OpenNet 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index of energy-related documents that have been declassified and made publicly available after October 1, 1994. Also includes references to historical collections of the Department of Energy.
Opera in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Currently provides streaming access to 40 full opera performances, most of which were originally released on the ArtHaus Musik label. A wide range of historical periods and styles is represented, and most of the operas included are considered standard repertoire. Opera in Video features an innovative interface that allows users to define and bookmark specific clips, which can be annotated, saved to a playlist, or linked to from a Web page or Blackboard. Opera in Video is expected to grow to include 250 operas.
Opposing Viewpoints in Context
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Fulltext database covering social issues with topic overviews and pro/con viewpoints. Sources include news, journal articles, magazines, media, maps, websites and statistics.
Optics InfoBase
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Optica InfoBase (OSA)
The Optics InfoBase is the Optical Society of America's online repository of both current and past volumes of all its journals and conference proceedings. Optics InfoBase is the largest peer-reviewed collection of optics and photonics.
Orgenes: Revista de Arte y Literatura
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes the full run of Orígenes. Revista de Arte y Literatura, from the first issue in the spring of 1944 to the 40th, and the last, which appeared in 1956. Edited by Jos Lezama Lima and Jos Rodrguez Feo, Mexican writer Octavio Paz described Orgenes as the most important Spanish-language periodical of its time. The journal focused primarily on poetry, and took its place among other key literary journals such as Contemporneos, Sur, and Revista de Occidente.
Overland Journeys: Travels In The West/1800-1880
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Comprised of selections from the microfilm collections Travels in the West and Southwest and the Plains & Rockies, this digital collection provides a unique window on Western History. Selections are based on the bibliographies, The Plains and Rockies: A Critical Bibliography of Exploration, Adventure, and Travel in the American West, 1800-1865, and The Trail West: A Bibliography-Index to Western American Trails, 1841-1869.
Oxford African American Studies Center
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A full-text database that provides comprehensive coverage of the African American experience. Updated quarterly, the online collection contains scholarly articles, biographies, commentaries, primary sources, subject entries, film clips, images, maps, charts, tables, web sites, and timelines. The core content of the electronic file consists of reference works including Africana; Encyclopedia of African American History, 1619-1895; Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present; Black Women in America, Second Edition; and African American National Biography. Additional reference titles include the Concise Oxford Companion to African American Literature; Oxford Companion to Black British History; and selected articles from other major reference titles.
Oxford Art Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
UMD has access, no need to Sign In once on the Oxford page. Accessing remotely? Follow regular remote sign in procedures for databases. Oxford Art Online provides Web access to the entire text of The Grove Dictionary of Art with quarterly additions of new material and updates to the text, plus extensive image links and all the sophisticated search advantages possible with an online reference source.
Oxford Bibliographies in American Literature
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Oxford Bibliographies in American Literature offers exclusive, authoritative research guides that combine the best features of an annotated bibliography and a high-level encyclopedia.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: African American Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within African American Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Anthropology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Anthropology.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Atlantic History
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Atlantic History.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Biblical Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Biblical Studies,
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Chinese Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Chinese Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Cinema and Media Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Cinema and Media Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Classics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Classics
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Communication
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Communication.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Criminology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Criminology.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Ecology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Ecology.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Evolutionary Biology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Evolutionary Biology.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: International Relations
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within International Relations.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Islamic Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Islamic Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Jewish Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Jewish Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Latin American Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Latin American Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Latino Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Latino Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Linguistics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Linguistics.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Literary and Critical Theory
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Literary and Critical Theory.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Medieval Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Medieval Studies.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Music
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Music.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Philosophy
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Philosophy.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Political Science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Political Science.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Psychology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Psychology.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Renaissance and Reformation
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Offers peer-reviewed annotated bibliographies on the period of the Renaissance and Reformation, which spans roughly from the 14th through 17th centuries. Bibliographies are browseable by subject area and keyword searchable.
Oxford Bibliographies Online: Sociology
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Online bibliographic guide to current scholarship, containing original commentary and annotations. Gathers together a large collection of articles addressing themes and topics within Sociology.
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Biographies of more than 50,000 noteworthy people, no longer living, who inhabited or were connected with the British Isles. Portraits included for more than 10,000 entries. Biographical essay of men and women who have shaped British history and culture, worldwide, from the Romans to the 21st century.
Oxford English Dictionary OED
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is a comprehensive dictionary of the English language which traces the development of English from approximately 1150 AD up to present day. It includes many varieties of English. This is the complete text of the 20-volume 2nd edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (1989), plus its 3-volume Additions Series (1993, 1997).
Oxford Handbooks: Linguistics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Extremely useful reference source providing coverage of major topics in linguistics and second language acquisition, written by the world's leading scholars. The Libraries have purchased the Foundation Collection and 2012-2022. Click on the unlocked availability option on the left hand side to access the available essays
Oxford Handbooks: Literature
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Extremely useful reference source providing coverage of major topics in literary studies written by the world's leading scholars. The Libraries have purchased the Foundation Collection and 2012-2022. Click on the unlocked availability option on the left hand side to access the available essays.
Oxford Handbooks: Political science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Extremely useful reference source providing coverage of major topics in political science written by the world's leading scholars. Features include abstracts and keyword searching, reference linking from bibliographies, and footnotes to available online content. The Libraries have purchased the 2012-2022. Click on the unlocked availability option on the left hand side to access the available essays.
Oxford Language Dictionaries Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These online bilingual dictionaries presently contain 1.2 million words and phrases (available in French, German, Italian, Spanish, Russian and Chinese). The dictionaries can be searched or browsed, phonetic symbols are explained, and references can be emailed or exported to bibliographical software. Other features include audible pronunciation, grammatical notes, guides to cultural events of each country, and hints for writing in a variety of situations and formats. (3 simultaneous user limit)
Oxford Music Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Grove Music Online
Full-text access to the following standard reference sources: The New Grove Dictionary of Music & Musicians, The New Grove Dictionary of Opera, The New Grove Dictionary of Jazz, The Oxford Dictionary of Music, and The Oxford Companion to Music. All of these are also available in print in the reference section of the Performing Arts Library. Oxford Music Online is an excellent complement to Classical Music Reference Library and the two resources should be used in tandem.
(11 simultaneous users.)
Oxford Scholarship Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Oxford Scholarship Online offers access to thousands of academic works from the celebrated scholarly list of Oxford University Press. Titles available in this collection are from the 2019 front list in the areas of Classical Studies, History, Linguistics, Literature, and Music.
P
PAIS Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From 1915 - Covers the world's public affairs, public and social policies, international relations, and world politics. Includes the policy oriented literature such as economics, finance, law, education, the military, political science, public administration, international law and relations, the environment, demography, public health and science and technology.
Palestine and Israel: Records of the US Department of State, 1945-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive traces the vitally important period that saw the end of the British mandate in Palestine. Documents address the role of the Security Council and General Assembly of the United Nations and that of the United States in the creation of the state of Israel
Palestine Post (1932-1950)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Jerusalem Post was founded on December 1, 1932 as the Palestine Post. In 1950 it change its name to Jerusalem Post.
Palestine Statehood Committee Records, 1939-1949
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Palestine Statehood Committee Records, 1939-1949, "Concerning the campaigns for a Jewish Army; to save the Jewish people of Europe and the establishment of a Hebrew Republic in Palestine" consist of correspondence, memoranda, reports, publications, advertisements, and clippings related to five committees active in the United States from 1939 to 1949: the American Friends of a Jewish Palestine, the Committee for an Army of Stateless and Palestinian Jews, the Emergency Committee to Save the Jewish People of Europe, the American League for a Free Palestine, and the Hebrew Committee of National Liberation. Among these papers are selected materials spanning the years 1939-1942 on the activities of similar groups in Great Britain and France: the British League for a Free Palestine, and the Ligue francaise pour une Palestine libre. The papers have been organized into four series: I. Correspondence, II. Public Statements, Press Releases, Reports, and Clippings, III. Subject Files, IV. Files of The Answer, advertisements, and clippings. Each series contains papers in Hebrew as well as in English. From the contents of Series I and Series II can be derived a chronology of the activities of the committees and a background of events which influenced their actions. Series III provides additional information on individuals, organizations, and topics of importance from Series I and II. Series IV is a record of the publicity campaign directed by the committees in the United States.
Panama: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1950-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents in this collection trace U.S.-Panamanian relations during the Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy administrations. Issues relating to shipping and the significance of the Panama Canal during the Cold War include: "Panama Stymies Use of Her Flag in Vietminh Trade ... A parallel situation exists in the trade with Red China" (September 1955); and "Ships Enroute to U.S. from Soviet or Satellite Ports" (October 1957). A letter to U.S. Ambassador Julian F. Harrington details "the possibility that the Conference on the Law of the Sea in 1960 would result in a general acceptance by the United States of a six-mile breadth of territorial sea" (April 1960). Other documents chart day-to-day aspects of the economy: a report on sugar production with tables on sugar production and consumption (June 1950); and an announcement by the Panamá Canal Company of a contract award for native lumber (August 1952)
Papers of Amiri Baraka, Poet Laureate of the Black Power Movement, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Arthur M. Guttery collection contains sermons, religious addresses, essays on China, correspondence, and memoirs of YMCA workers in China.
Papers of the Nixon Administration: The President's Confidential and Subject Special Files, 1969-1974
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This publication consists of documents of an administratively-sensitive nature, arranged according to subject from President Nixon's Special Files collection, comprising the Confidential and Subject Files. These documents provide an in-depth look into the activities of the President, his closest advisors, and the administration. These records support the behind-the-scenes historical inquiry into an administration that may well be the most significant one since World War II and one of the most important in the 20th century.
PapersFirst
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OCLC index of papers presented at conferences worldwide. Over 2,380,000 records. Covers every published congress, symposium, conference, exposition, workshop and meeting received by The British Library Document Supply Centre. Wide variety of subjects. Only one user allowed. 'Phrase' searches will find records with the words not necessarily next to each other. For example, a search on 'sunny day' might find 'the day was sunny'.
Passport
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource requires a campus login for access. Provides comparable statistics for 205 countries on economic indicators, health, foreign trade, environment, lifestyle, industrial and agriculture output, communications and more. Also includes market size data for over 300 consumer products and services. It covers demographic trends, economic indicators, finance, foreign trade, health, labor force, industrial and agricultural production, environmental data, consumer expenditure patterns, retail sales, advertising and media patterns, consumer prices, household patterns, literacy rates, telecommunications, automotive and transport figures, travel and tourism, income and earnings potential. It also includes market size data for over 300 consumer products and services.
Past Masters
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A collection of full-text humanities works in scholarly editions. It contains the works, correspondence, notebooks, diaries, journals, and memoirs of many major literary authors, philosophers and other intellectuals.
Past Masters: English Letters
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The English Letters collection features correspondence, diaries, memoirs and notebooks from important English authors, including Bacon, Hobbes, Boyle, Locke, Defoe, Fielding, Sterne, Johnson, the Wordsworths, Coleridge, Austen, Tennyson, the Bronts, George Eliot, Newman, Hardy , Yeats and others. Past Masters includes definitive, authoritative editions of literary works and authors' letters from distinguished academic publishers. All of the print apparatus is included and is fully searchable. Full-text searching may be made within any single volume, across an entire collection, or across all titles.
Past Masters: Philosophy
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of full text electronic editions in philosophy. Includes collected works of Aquinas, Aristotle, Augustine, Hume, Plato, and others. All of the print apparatus is included and is fully searchable. Full-text searching may be made within any single volume, across an entire collection, or across all titles.
Past Masters: Women Writers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Women Writers collection is a growing collection of works and/or correspondence of important authors such as Jane Austen, Aphra Behn, Charlotte Bronte, Fanny Burney, Mary Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft and others. Past Masters includes definitive, authoritative editions of literary works and authors' letters from distinguished academic publishers. All of the print apparatus is included and is fully searchable. Full-text searching may be made within any single volume, across an entire collection, or across all titles.
Pennsylvania Gazette,1728-1800
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Published in Philadelphia 1728-1800, the Gazette provides a first hand-view of colonial America, the American Revolution, and the New Republic. Articles cover events worldwide. The Gazette printed the texts of many important documents, including the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution.
Pennsylvania Genealogical Catalogue 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database primarily is a listing of marriages, deaths and obituaries from The Village Record, published in West Chester, Pennsylvania. Users will find information about emigration patterns, customs and traditions,
Pennsylvania Newspaper Record 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database documents the move to industrialization from a predominantly agrarian culture established by Quaker farmers in the 18th century. The collection contains full-text transcriptions of articles, advertisements, and vital.
Perdita Manuscripts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Produced in association with the Perdita Project based at the University of Warwick and Nottingham Trent University. Focuses on identifying and describing all manner of writing by early modern women from diaries to works of drama. Manuscripts include works of poetry, religious writing, autobiographical material, cookery, medical recipes, and accounts.
Periódica 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Periódica indexes articles published in Latin American journals specializing in science and technology.
Periodicals Archive Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An online archive of digitized, full-image journal articles, Periodicals Archive Online (PAO) provides access to hundreds of scholarly journals. Coverage includes U.S. and international scholarly journal literature in the arts, humanities and social sciences disciplines with date coverage ranging from 1802 to 2000. NOTE: Current journal issues are not included in PAO but may be covered in other journal collections. We only own Collection 1-4 + extensions.
Persée
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PERSEE, the website for scientific journals in social and human sciences, established by the Ministry of State Education, Higher Education and Research. The PERSEE website has as its mission the digitisation and online distribution of back collections of a vast corpus of periodicals. Wider availability of this rich scientific heritage will benefit French research by making it freely and publicly accessible.
Coverage:
- Annales. Histoire, Sciences sociales (éditions de l’EHESS),
- L’Homme (éditions de l’EHESS),
- Revue économique (Presses de sciences Po),
- Revue française de science politique (Presses de sciences Po)
- Bibliothèque de l’école des chartes (Société de l’écoledes chartes)
Revue de l’art (CNRS-périodiques),
Matériaux pour l’histoire de notre temps (Association des amis de la BDIC et du Musée).
Perseus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An interactive multi-media database for the study of the history, archaeology, art, and literature of archaic and classical Greece. Includes images of art and architecture, primary texts in Greek with English translation, a Greek-English lexicon, a world atlas, histories, articles and essays, and an extensive bibliography.
Persian Gulf and Yemen: American Ascendancy and the Cold War, 1950-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These documents highlight the structure and activities of the Persian Gulf States' and Yemen's political system, government, judiciary, laws, military, customs, economy, finance, agriculture, natural resources, industry, communications, and media. Because of the broad scope of these records, they both supplement and complement the coverage offered by the State Department's Foreign Relations of the United States series.
Personal Justice Denied: Public Hearings of the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment, 1981
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This publication consists of the testimony and documents from more than 750 witnesses: Japanese Americans and Aleuts who had lived through the events of WWII, former government officials who ran the internment program, public figures, internees, organizations such as the Japanese American Citizens League, interested citizens, historians, and other professionals who had studied the subjects of the Commission's inquiry. Many of the transcripts are personal stories of experiences of evacuees. Documents include publications, reports, press releases, photographs, newspaper clippings, etc. related to the hearings.
Peru: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents in this collection describe U.S.-Peruvian relations during the Cold War. Examples include: "Both Prensa Latina and Agence France Presse in Lima are staffed by Communists and Pro-Communists"; "Yugoslav ship calls in Peru"; memoranda on U.S. military interest in obtaining permission for essential air transportation traffic transit in Peru; and a letter from Texas Petroleum Company to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs regarding litigation between the Peruvian Government and the Company. Other records include: "Change in Method of Tax Payment for Foreign Mining Companies in Peru" (January 1960); and "Peruvian ‘Rights' in Antarctica" (May 1962).
Philadelphia Tribune (1912-2001) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Philadelphia Tribune (1912-2001) offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Philosophers Index with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Philosophers Index with Full Text is the largest and most targeted database for research in philosophy. It provides indexing and full text for more than 200 peer reviewed journals in all fields of philosophy.
PhilPapers: Philosophical Research Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PhilPapers is a comprehensive index of philosophy books and articles. PhilPapers offers unique features such as real-time indexing of pre-prints, fine-grained classification by topic, email alerts, reading lists, advanced search functionality, and discussion forums.


Phyllis Lyon, Del Martin and the Daughters of Bilitis
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The papers of Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin, life-long pioneers of the lesbian rights, gay rights, and women's rights movements. Important multidisciplinary resource for such subjects as LGBT studies, women's studies, political science, history, sociology, and American studies. Full-text, fully searchable database.
Pittsburgh Courier (1911-2002) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
ProQuest Historical Newspapers Pittsburgh Courier: 1911-2002 offers full page and article images with searchable full text. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
Pittsburgh Jewish Newspaper Project
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Pittsburgh Jewish Newspaper Project (PJN) is a unique, free, searchable fulltext archive that documents the history and life of the Jewish community in Pittsburgh and southwestern Pennsylvania. To date, it is a digital archive of The Jewish Criterion (1895-1962) and The Jewish Chronicle (1962-present).
PLOS BIOLOGY 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PLOS Biology is the flagship PLOS journal in the life sciences and features works in all areas of biological science and at every scale; from molecules to ecosystems, including works at the interface of other disciplines.
PLOS Medicine 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PLOS Medicine publishes articles of general interest on biomedical, environmental, social and political determinants of health. The journal emphasizes work that advances clinical practice, health policy or pathophysiological understanding to benefit health in a variety of settings. Coverage includes clinical trials, systematic reviews/meta-analyses, epidemiology, diagnostic testing, predictive and explanatory modeling, cost-effectiveness research, qualitative studies, and clinically-focused translational research.
Policy Citation Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes published policy reports from leading government, think tanks, and other non-government organizations. Allows users to view cited references and navigate to research publications used to formulate public policy recommendations.
Policy Map
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Policy Map provides access to over 15,000 indicators related to housing, crime mortgages, health, jobs, demographics, and education from more than 150 authoritative public and proprietary sources \. Data is cleaned and standardized , and updated regularly. the database basic GIS tools to create reports and maps.
Politics in America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Profiles of all the current members of the U.S. Congress. Information includes biographical data, committee assignments, election results, CQ Key Votes, interest group ratings, CQ Vote Studies, and contact information; campaign finance, partisan caucuses, standing committees; detailed descriptions of each member's congressional district as drawn after the 2000 census, including updated maps and voting trends; and the vote for president in each of the House districts. Profiles of the 535 members plus the delegates.
more...
Politics, Social Activism and Community Support: Selected Gay and Lesbian Periodicals and Newsletter
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
More than 200 rare newsletters and periodicals (totaling nearly 8,000 issues l) published between 1947 and 2004, documenting political and social activities as well as more private aspects of gay and lesbian life, especially during the formative years of the gay and lesbian movement
Popular Culture in Britain and America 1950-1975
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to archival materials related to popular culture in the UK and US from 1950-1975. Includes manuscripts, print materials, photographs, and video clips. Topics covered include politics, fashion, youth culture, the onset of Rock and Roll, campaigns for black power, civil rights, and women’s liberation.
Popular Medicine in America 1800-1900
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
From the collections of the Library Company of Philadelphia and the Philadelphia Museum of art, covers the history of "popular" medical remedies and treatments in nineteenth century America. Intended for laypersons and focuses on home treatment. Covers trends such as phrenology, herbal medicine and hydrotherapy, and the rise of widespread advertising by commercial manufacturers of medical aids.
Post-war Europe : refugees, exile and resettlement, 1945-1950.
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of materials from the holdings of the Wiener Library, London and The National Archives in the UK covers the international politics leading the administration, care, repatriation and emigration of the Displaced Persons (DPs) as well as the plight of the survivors, both Jews and non-Jews, of the Holocaust and World War II, and their reintroduction to life and community. A large percentage of the DPs were refugees from Eastern European countries fleeing Soviet rule who were not able to return to their homelands until after the fall of the Berlin wall
Poverty, Philanthropy and Social Conditions in Victorian Britain
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents the interactions between government policy and public philanthropy in Victorian and early twentieth-century society, tracing developments in welfare reform and the social tensions surrounding poverty.
Pravda Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Pravda (or "Truth") was the official voice of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the USSR between 1918 and 1991. Founded in 1912 in St. Petersburg, Pravda originated as an underground, daily workers' newspaper, and soon became the main newspaper of the revolutionary wing of the Russian socialist movement. From 1912 to 1914, Pravda was subjected to constant persecution, fines, penalties, and prohibitions by the government. When the Bolsheviks seized power during the October Revolution in 1917, Pravda became the official publication, or organ of the Soviet Communist Party. The paper's primary role was to deliver the official line of the Central Committee of the CPSU. Pravda remained the official voice of Soviet communism up until 1991, when Boris Yeltsin signed a decree closing Pravda down.
Presidential Election Polls, 1988: The Gallup/Conus Reports
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
In 1988 the Gallup Organization conducted one of the most comprehensive political surveys ever undertaken during a presidential election year. From January through November, 33 polls tracked Americans' preferences among candidates and opinions on key issues. The resulting reports, all of which are provided in this collection, reveal how the public felt about not just the candidates themselves but also the nominating process, the political parties, and the advertising they used. Each report contains a written analysis of significant trends along with poll results for the various questions asked. 1988 Presidential Election Polls will give researchers in political science and contemporary history an unprecedented insight into the process of choosing the chief executive.
Primary Search
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary Search contains full text for more than 50 popular, elementary school magazines. All full text articles are assigned a reading level indicator (Lexiles). Full text is also available for over 100 student pamphlets. Additionally, Primary Search includes the Encyclopedia of Animals, and features the Funk + Wagnall's New Encyclopedia, which provides students with easy-to-read encyclopedic entries written specifically for kids. This database also provides the American Heritage Children's Dictionary, 3rd Edition from Houghton Mifflin, and an Image Collection of 91,000 photos, maps and flags. ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database.
Pritzker Architecture Prize
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This site provides current information about the Pritzker Architecture Prize, the world's most prestigious architecture award and its Laureates. The purpose of the Pritzker Architecture Prize is to honor living architects whose work combines qualities of talent, vision and commitment, producing consistent and significant contributions to humanity and the built environment through the art of architecture. The competition is modeled after the Nobel Prizes, since Architecture is a creative endeavor not included in the Nobels. 1979 - present.
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. 1959-2012
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Each volume in this series includes, papers, many of a survey/expository nature, on a specific active area of mathematics. These papers were presented at symposia, summer research institutes, and summer research conferences sponsored by the AMS and other organizations. UMD has access to volumes 1 - 86 (1959-2012).
ProceedingsFirst
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OCLC index of worldwide conference proceedings. Over 74,000 records. Each record contains a list of the papers presented at each conference. Covers every published congress, symposium, conference, exposition, workshop and meeting received by The British Library Document Supply Center. 1993- present. 'Phrase' searches will find records with the words not necessarily next to each other. For example, a search on 'sunny day' might find 'the day was sunny'.
Professional Development Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The database provides a highly specialized collection of electronic information especially for professional educators. This collection offers information on everything from children's health and development to cutting-edge pedagogical theory and practice. This database contains author names with and without full first names. To find all authors with the last name 'Smith' and the first name 'Richard', you may want to search on 'Smith, Richard' OR 'Smith, R' in the Author field.
Project Muse
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of recent issues of over 240 journals from 40 scholarly publishers. Covers the fields of literary studies, history, the visual & performing arts, cultural studies, education, political science, gender studies, economics, and many other arts and humanities and social science disciplines. Covers the fields of literature and criticism, history, the visual and performing arts, cultural studies, education, political science, gender studies, economics, and many other arts and humanities and social science disciplines. Time span: Varies by journal. Some back to 1993, the majority from 1997 to the present.
PROLA
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Indexes all APS journal material published from 1893 to present. American Physical Society.
PropertyQuest DC
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This site brings together ownership and tax information, photographs, ward boundaries, and zoning and historic information for properties in Washington, D.C. and displays them in a searchable web interface with a variety of basemaps available including aerial photographs.
ProQuest Congressional: Executive branch documents
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to the entire range of Executive Branch Documents offering a record of federal department and agency activities. Once in the database, to limit the search to just these Executive Documents choose from the Content list. (5 modules available):
EBC 1 (1789-1932) EBD 2 (1933-1939) EBD 3 (1940-1942) EBD 4 (1943-1945) EBD 5 (1946-1948)
ProQuest Criminal Justice Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text coverage for 45 of the titles most frequently accessed by criminal justice researchers, and complete indexing and abstracts for another 140 relevant U.S. and international journals. All criminal justice topics including corrections administration, law enforcement, social work, industrial security, drug rehabilitation, and criminal and family law.
ProQuest Ebook Central
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Ebrary is a collection of thousands of online full text books and other materials in a variety of subject areas. In order to view, copy, or print you will need to install the ebrary Reader software. Links to download the reader are available from the main page after you connect. Truncation is not supported. Searches in ISSN, ISBN, and Year are done as Text searches. All searches report 'Hits were found' rather than the number of hits. Boolean NOT and OR searches are not supported.
ProQuest Historic Newspapers: The American Israelite (1854-2000)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This historical newspaper provides genealogists, researchers and scholars with online, easily-searchable first-hand accounts and unparalleled coverage of the politics, society and events of the time.
ProQuest Historic Newspapers: The Jewish Advocate (1905-1990)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This historical newspaper provides genealogists, researchers and scholars with online, easily-searchable first-hand accounts and unparalleled coverage of the politics, society and events of the time.
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The American Hebrew & Jewish Messenger (1857-1922)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This historical newspaper provides genealogists, researchers and scholars with online, easily-searchable first-hand accounts and unparalleled coverage of the politics, society and events of the time.
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Jewish Exponent (1887-1990)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This historical newspaper provides genealogists, researchers and scholars with online, easily-searchable first-hand accounts and unparalleled coverage of the politics, society and events of the time.
ProQuest Legislative Insight
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Federal legislative history service providing access to full text publications created by Congress during the process leading up to the enactment of U.S. Public Laws. Documents include bills (all versions), legislative reports, documents, CRS reports, committee prints, speeches in the Congressional Record and presidential signing statements. Currently, Parts A, C, and D are available which include legislative histories from 1929-2014.
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Baltimore Sun
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Baltimore Sun newspaper provide genealogists, researchers andscholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed)
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Barrons
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Barron's newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Chicago Tribune
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Chicago Tribune newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Los Angeles Times
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Los Angeles Times newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: New York Times
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized New York Times newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Wall Street Journal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Wall Street Journal newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
ProQuest Recent Newspapers: Washington Post
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The full-page images of the digitized Washington Post newspaper provide genealogists, researchers and scholars with cover-to-cover access to recent newspaper content. Every page is full-text searchable. Coverage: 2008 - recent (some content may be embargoed).
PsyArxiv 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is an Open Access database. PsyArXiv (psychology archive) is designed to facilitate rapid dissemination of psychological research. This PsyArXiv is a creation of the Society for the Improvement of Psychological Science (SIPS) and the Center for Open Science (COS). PsyArXiv allows scholars to post documents such as working papers, unpublished work, and articles. under review (preprints), making them accessible to other researchers and to the public at no cost.
PsycARTICLES
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PsycArticles provides access to 119 journals published by the American Psychological Association (APA) and affiliated journals, regarding social and behavioral sciences, including their flagship publication, American Psychologist. It includes access to current cutting-edge research from preeminent scholars, as well as historical underpinnings of the behavioral and social sciences.
Psychological Warfare and Propaganda in World War II: Air Dropped and Shelled Leaflets and Periodica
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This publication collection consists of over 1,000 air dropped and shelled leaflets and periodicals created and disseminated during the Second World War. The majority of items in this collection were printed by the Allies then air or container dropped, or fired by artillery shell over German occupied territory. Many leaflets and periodicals have original publication codes and were printed in over 10 languages. Only shelled leaflets, Germans to Allies (115 items), are in English.
Psychology & Behavioral Sciences Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Psychology & Behavioral Sciences Collection is a comprehensive database with nearly 470 full text titles. This database covers information concerning topics in emotional and behavioral characteristics, psychiatry + psychology, mental processes, anthropology, and observational and experimental methods.
PsycINFO
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PsycINFO is the most comprehensive index in psychology and related fields, with more than 1.7 million citations and abstracts of journal articles, book chapters and books, technical reports, and dissertations. Its holdings include material from 1,700 periodicals in over 30 languages. Covering the entire range of psychology disciplines, PsycINFO also includes information about the psychological aspects of related fields such as psychiatry, neuroscience, medicine, sociology, education, linguistics, anthropology, business and law. PsycINFO spans 1887 to the present. PsycINFO has links to the full-text articles in PsycARTICLES and the Psychology and in the Behavioral Sciences Collection (thus the user does not have to search each of these databases separately).
PubChem 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
PubChem is a database with information on the chemical properties and biological activities of small molecules. It is organized as three linked databases within the NCBI's Entrez information retrieval system. These are PubChem Substance, PubChem Compound, and PubChem BioAssay. PubChem also provides a fast chemical structure similarity search tool. Links from PubChem's chemical structure records to other Entrez databases provide information on biological properties. These include links to PubMed scientific literature and NCBI's protein 3D structure resource. Links to PubChem's bioassay database present the results of biological screening. Links to depositor web sites provide further information.
Public Health
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database delivers core public health literature with centralized access to journals, dissertations, videos, news, trade publications, reports, and more. Journal results are indexed from core literature collected from a variety of publishers using appropriate public-health terminology. Covers a wide variety of disciplines ranging from social sciences and biological sciences to business.
Public Health Archives: Public Health in Modern America, 1890-1970 Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Public Health Archives: Public Health in Modern America 1890-1970
Documents the evolution of public health legislation, policies, and campaigns at local, national, and federal levels, opening for researchers a new window on the roles played by key organizations and individuals to advance public health practices and outcomes. Through the lens of public health, this archive also tells a tale of twentieth-century urbanization and industrialization, the rise of public advocacy and impact of legislation at various levels, the transformation of domestic life, the role of state control in the care of its populations, the challenges presented by differences of and social attitudes respecting race, ethnicity, gender, citizenship, age, ability, and class, and finally the means, methods, and mechanisms for organizing and financing public health policy initiatives.
Public Health Image Library 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Created by a Working Group at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), this image database offers an organized, universal electronic gateway to CDC's pictures. The content is organized into hierarchical categories of people, places, and science, and is presented as single images, image sets, and multimedia files.
Public Housing, Racial Policies, and Civil Rights: The Intergroup Relations Branch of the Federal Public Housing Administration, 1936-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes directives and memoranda related to the Public Housing Administration's policies and procedures. Among the documents are civil rights correspondence, statements and policy about race, labor-based state activity records, local housing authorities' policies on hiring minorities, court cases involving housing decisions, racially-restrictive covenants, and news clippings. The intra-agency correspondence consists of reports on sub-Cabinet groups on civil rights, racial policy, employment, and Commissioner's staff meetings.
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Annual compilation of presidential statements, messages, remarks issued by the Office of the Press Secretary. 1992-2001
Publishers Weekly Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Continuously published since 1872, Publishers Weekly has consistently been the authoritative voice for US publishing industry news and book reviews, with ongoing coverage of the British book trade. The complete archive includes nearly 200,000 book reviews, and bestseller lists from 1895 forward.
PubMed
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The National Library of Medicine's Medline database that provides abstracts and indexing for about 4,600 biomedical journals published in the U.S. and 70 foreign countries, and includes additional older citations and out of scope citations from Medline journals. Medicine, nursing, dentistry, veterinary medicine, psychiatry, pre-clinical sciences, medical education, public health, health care planning and administration of services. Also includes additional life science journals. mid-1960s - present
Q
Quan guo tu shu shu mu zi xun wang: National Bibliographic Information Network (NBINet) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The network includes three bibliographic databases: NBINet Union Catalog (Taiwan), Chinese Publications in China and Chinese rare books.
Quan quo bo shuo shi lun wen zi xun wang: Dissertation and Thesis Abstract System (Taiwan) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The system contains over 280,000 records of dissertations and theses in all subject fields. Each record includes bibliographic information as well as abstract, table of contents and reference.
Quest For Labor Equality In Household Work: National Domestic Workers Union/1965-1979
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection contains minutes of the Union, the Citizen's Advisory Committee on Transportation, the Citizens Neighborhood Advisory Council, and MARTA. The collection also contains selected files relating to Equal Opportunity Atlanta, which funded many of the Union's projects.
R
Race Relations Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Includes bibliographic records covering essential areas related to race relations, including ethnic studies, discrimination, immigration studies, and other areas of key relevance to the discipline. Records are selected from many of the top titles within the discipline, including Race, Ethnicity & Education and Ethnic & Racial Studies. This resource does not contain ISBNs.
Race Relations in America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary source material on the Civil Rights Movement, segregation, discrimination and racial theory in America including surveys and papers from the Amistad Research Center, 1943-1970. Includes audio recordings, case studies and community self-surveys, photographs and posters.
Radical Scatters 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A searchable database of the manuscript fragments left by Emily Dickinson and now preserved in the Special Collections of Amherst College Library.
Ralph J. Bunche Oral Histories Collection on the Civil Rights Movement
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Ralph J. Bunche Oral History Collection from the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center is a unique resource for the study of the era of the American civil rights movement. Included here are transcriptions of close to 700 interviews with those who made history in the struggles for voting rights, against discrimination in housing, for the desegregation of the schools, to expose racism in hiring, in defiance of police brutality, and to address poverty in the African American communities.
RAMBI Reshimat Ma'amarim Be'mada'e Ha-yahadut/Index of Articles on Jewish Studies
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Bibliography of articles in the various fields of Jewish studies and in the study of Eretz Israel. Material listed in Rambi iscompiled from thousands of periodicals and from collections of articles - in Hebrew, Yiddish, and European languages. 1966-present.
Rastafari Ephemeral Publications From The Written Rastafari Archives Project
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides an historical time stamp and current affairs commentary on the transitional period in the Rastafari Movement's development—a period extending from the early 1970s through to the present.
Readers Guide Retrospective (1890-1982)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text, searchable information from 44 Readers' Guide annuals. Includes the complete text of the Wilson Library Bulletin from 1914 on and subject heading matching that enables searching of historical subjects using modern terminology.
Reaxys
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reaxys is a web-based platform based on three chemical information databases: (Former) CrossFire Beilstein, (Former) CrossFire Gmelin and the Patent Chemistry Database (PCD). In addition, Reaxys is an extensive repository of experimentally validated data, including structures, reactions (including multi-step reactions) and physical properties. It also contains pharmacological, eco-toxicological and toxicological data, specific bioassay results, logPs, toxicity values, and other valuable data. Reaxys allows searching for substances by chemical name or by structure, as well as for single and multi-step reactions. Searches can also be performed for citations, which are indexed from the primary organic, inorganic and organometallic chemistry journal literature going back to 1772, as well as from the patent literature.
Records of Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between US & Chile 1945-1959 DA
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection of U.S. State Department Central Classified Files relating to internal and foreign affairs, contain a wide range of materials including countless translations of high-level foreign government documents, including speeches, memoranda, official reports, and transcripts of political meetings and assemblies. After World War II, Emperor Haile Selassie exerted numerous efforts to promote the modernization of his nation. The country's first important school of higher education, University College of Addis Ababa, was founded in 1950.
Records of Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between US & Colombia 1945-59 DA
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents found in these files are predominantly instructions to – and despatches from – diplomatic and consular officials and are often accompanied by enclosures. Notes between the Department of State and foreign diplomats in the United States, memoranda prepared by State Department officials, and correspondence with officials of other government departments, as well as with private businesses and persons, are also included. Spanning the presidencies of Juan Antonio Ríos (1942–1946), Gabriel González Videla (1946–1952), Carlos Ibáñez (1952–1958), and Jorge Alessandri (1958–1964), this collection provides a history of the political relationship between the United States and Chile from the post-World War II era into the early years of the Cold War.
Records of Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between US & Costa Rca 1945-59 DA
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents found in these files are predominantly instructions to – and despatches from – diplomatic and consular officials and are often accompanied by enclosures. Notes between the Department of State and foreign diplomats in the United States, memoranda prepared by State Department officials, and correspondence with officials of other government departments, as well as with private businesses and persons, are also included. The history of Colombia following the Second World War was most notably marked by La Violencia (The Violence), a ten-year civil war spanning the years 1948 to 1958, between the Colombian Conservative Party and the Colombian Liberal Party. La Violencia conflict took place between the Military Forces of Colombia and the National Police of Colombia supported by Colombian Conservative Party paramilitary groups on one side, and paramilitary and guerrilla groups aligned with the Colombian Liberal Party and the Colombian Communist Party on the other side. The war was mostly fought in the Colombian countryside, with Conservative-supporting peasants seizing the agricultural lands of Liberal-supporting peasants, which provoked peasant-to-peasant violence throughout the country. Most estimates indicate 200,000 people lost their lives during La Violencia.
Records of Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between US & Ecuador 1945-1959 DA
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents found in these files are predominantly instructions to – and despatches from – diplomatic and consular officials and are often accompanied by enclosures. Notes between the Department of State and foreign diplomats in the United States, memoranda prepared by State Department officials, and correspondence with officials of other government departments, as well as with private businesses and persons, are also included. Teodoro Picado Michalski was the president of Costa Rica from 1944 to 1948. Picado's administration enacted many laws to modernize the state. The most prominent was the electoral reform of 1945, which created a modern Electoral Code of Laws and a Supreme Tribunal of Elections. To this day, the Electoral Code provides a guarantee of the Nation's continued democratic elections.
Records of the Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between the United States and Panama, 1950-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covering primarily the early Cold War documents, this collection gives researchers a unique insight into American foreign policy during one of its most stressful periods in international relations
Records of the Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between the United States and Paraguay, 1945-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents found in these files are predominantly instructions to – and dispatches from diplomatic and consular officials and are often accompanied by enclosures. Notes between the Department of State and foreign diplomats in the United States, memoranda prepared by State Department officials, and correspondence with officials of other government departments, as well as with private businesses and persons, are also included.
Records of the Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between the United States and Peru, 1945-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This period of the history of the Peruvian Republic not only saw the end of the Second World War, but was also near the end of the era in Peru known as the Democratic Spring.
Records of the Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between the United States and Uruguay, 1945-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents found in these files are predominantly instructions to – and dispatches from –diplomatic and consular officials and are often accompanied by enclosures. Notes between the Department of State and foreign diplomats in the United States, memoranda prepared by State Department officials, and correspondence with officials of other government departments, as well as with private businesses and persons, are also included.
Records of the Department of State Relating to Political Relations Between the United States and Venezuela, 1945-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Publications relating to political relations between the United States and other states generally include cables, memoranda, and correspondence addressing the political affairs and concerns affecting the particular state. Covering primarily the early Cold War documents, this collection gives researchers a unique insight into American foreign policy during one of its most stressful periods in international relations.
Records Of The Persian Gulf War
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains materials related to the diplomatic and military response by the United states (as part of a multi-national force) to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
Redalyc 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text database of a selected number of mostly peer reviewed Latin American journals in the humanities, social sciences and sciences. Coverage is from 1993 to the present and articles are published in English, Portuguese or Spanish.
Reference Universe
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reference Universe is a web-based research tool that provides a single search across more than 43,000 specialized subject encyclopedias and scholarly compendia. The database contains more than 26 million citations to both print and e-versions from all major and minor reference publishing houses. You can search the full breadth of the library's reference collection at index-level, both saving time and maintaining the authoritative level of research that peer-reviewed reference works provide. It's a great place to start your research!
Refugees, Relief, and Resettlement Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part 1:Forced Migration and World War II chronicles the plight of refugees, displaced persons and immigrants across Europe, North Africa and Asia from 1935 to 1950 through immigrant and refugee correspondence, studies, reports, organizational and administrative files, and much more. Covers the global scope of the forced migration and refugee crisis leading up to, during, and after World War II. Part 2: Early Cold War and Decolonization covers the causes of the refugee crisis following World War II from the onset of the Cold War to the decolonization of, and rise of independence movements within the nations of Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
Regional Business News
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Regional Business News provides full text coverage of 75 business journals, newspapers and newswires from the metropolitan and rural areas within the US. Updated daily.
Regulatory Insight
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Regulatory Insight seeks to facilitate teaching and learning about administrative law by legal researchers, as well as academic researchers from many other disciplines.
Religions of America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains over 660,000 pages of materials that follow the development of religions and religious movements born in the U.S. from 1820 to 1990. Includes the American Religions Collection, the Shaker Collection, the FBI Files on Jonestown, Moorish Science Temple of America and the Branch Davidians, the Hall-Hoag Collection of Dissenting and Extremist Printed Propaganda and Utah and the Mormons. Traces the history and unique characteristics of movements through manuscripts, pamphlets, newsletters, ephemera, and visuals.
Renaissance Women Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
When complete, the collection will include the full text of 100 works by women writers from the early modern period, together with introductions to the individual works and essays on the cultural context of the period. The RWO is a subset of the Women Writiers Online (WWO) database. Includes novels, poems, drama, and non-fiction. 1500-1700.
RePEc/EconPapers 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This free worldwide cooperative database of economics articles is similar to EconLit, but with less authoritative coverage of the core journals and more coverage of (and links to) working papers and other unpublished scholarship. Includes some full text from open access repositories, but does not link to the libraries' full text subscriptions.
Reports of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry Palestine, 1944-1946
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry (AACI), formed in 1945, was created to study the situation of Jewish survivors in Europe and the problems connected with their resettlement in Palestine. The committee was charged with gathering information and making recommendations on 1) the effect of Jewish immigration and resettlement on the political, economic, and social conditions in Palestine; and (2) the position of surviving Jews in Europe and the possibility of relieving the problem by repatriation or resettlement of the survivors in Palestine and other non-European countries. The committee called for a unitary state rather than partition based on ethnicity or religious profession. The records include AACI reference files, evidence submitted to the committee, transcripts of hearings, AACI reports, and papers of the Anglo-American Cabinet Committee.
Reports of the Immigrant Commission,1907-1910
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reproduces 41 bound volumes of reports by the U.S. Immigration Commission, analyzing the heavy waves of immigration to America early in this century and their effects on the country. These reports provide detailed information on the various nationalities of immigrants -- including the Japanese -- and on how they managed to fit into U.S. society.
Republic of New Afrika (Gale Archives Unbound)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides documentation collected by the FBI through intelligence activities, informants, surveillance, and cooperation with local police departments. These documents chronicle the activities of Republic of New Afrika national and local leaders, power struggles within the organization, its growing militancy, and its affiliations with other Black militant organizations.
Research Commons on Web of Science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Search platform that provides access to combination of items within Web of Science as well as additional journal content open metadata sources.
Resources For Economists 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Organized links to valuable online resources in economics from the American Economics Association, including data resources, professional contacts for students and scholars, and reference and teaching resources.
Revolution In Honduras And American Business: The Quintessential (Banana Republic)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection details the political and financial machinations of the fruit companies, the graft and corruption of the national government, the American banking community's loans, the U.S. government's response and the various aborted popular/revolutionary uprisings.
Revolution In Mexico/The 1917 Constitution/And Its Aftermath: Records Of The US State Department
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) This collection of U.S. State Department records consists of political and military documents relating to the Mexican Revolution and its aftermath -1910-1924.
RIA Checkpoint
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to a variety of tax information, including complete tax law, analysis, journals, news, cases, and rulings. Covers all aspects of tax law. Coverage varies, but most is from 1990 to the present.
RILM Music
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An international bibliography of nearly 500,000 scholarly writings on music and related disciplines in 140 languages. RILM indexes articles, books, conference proceedings, bibliographies, catalogues, dissertations, festchriften, iconographies, critical commentaries to complete works, ethnographic recordings and videos, reviews and more.

Encompasses historical musicology, ethnomusicology, instruments and voice, librarianship, performance practice and notation, theory and analysis, pedagogy, liturgy, dance, criticism, music therapy, and interdisciplinary studies on music and various other fields, including literature, dramatic arts, visual arts, acoustics, aesthetics, anthropology, sociology, linguistics and semiotics, mathematics, philosophy, physiology, psychology, and physics. 1967 - present.
ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database.
Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
RIPM Retrospective with RIPM Online Archive of Music Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
RIPM is the primary research tool for accessing 19th- and early 20th- century periodical literature on music. The resource provides an annotated index to over 135 important journals, with more than half being available as full-text. New titles are added every 6 months. The journals covered are in 14 different languages and originate chiefly from Europe and North America.
Rise and Fall of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The brief but dramatic political reign of Senator Joseph Raymond McCarthy (1908–1957) is examined in this collection, from the Wheeling speech in 1950 to McCarthy's condemnation by the Senate in late 1954. McCarthy rode the crest of U.S. anti-communist paranoia in the early 1950s, and his tactics of accusation through insinuation and innuendo have come to be known as "McCarthyism".
RISM Series A/II: Music Manuscripts after 1600 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
RISM part A-II documents and describes music manuscripts created after 1600 by more than 19,500 composers, using up to 100 information fields for each. The MSS database links to Composer, Library Sigla, and Bibliographic Citations databases. Graphical images of musical incipits are included.
Road to Palestine: Government Records, Lviv, Ukraine, 1890-1939
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Gives access to 13 documentary fonds (archival record groups) drawn from the Historical Archive in Lviv that shed light on Zionist and Jewish welfare institutions working in East Galicia from the early 1920s until the Nazi invasion of Poland in September 1939, soon followed by the Soviet annexation of East Poland. Reflects the essential dynamism of Jewish political and social life in interwar Poland from its development following the reestablishment of Polish independence in 1918 through the Holocaust.
Road to Palestine: Women's and Children's Organizations, Lviv, Ukraine, 1925-1939
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Sheds light on a variety of Zionist and Jewish welfare institutions working in East Galicia from the early 1920s until the Nazi invasion of Poland in September 1939, soon followed by the Soviet annexation of East Poland. Reflects the essential dynamism of Jewish political and social life in interwar Poland from its development following the reestablishment of Polish independence in 1918 through the Holocaust and focuses on one of the most politicized Jewish communities of interwar Poland: Eastern Galician Jewry and its capital in Lviv, which was then the third largest city in Poland.
Road to Palestine: Zionist Organizations, Lviv, Ukraine, 1908-1939
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reflects the essential dynamism of Jewish political and social life in interwar Poland from its development, following the reestablishment of Polish independence in 1918 through to the Holocaust. The collection focuses on one of the most politicized Jewish communities of interwar Poland: Eastern Galician Jewry and its capital in Lviv, which was then the third largest city in Poland.
Romanticism: Life, Literature and Landscape
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of working notebooks, verse manuscripts, and correspondence of William Wordsworth and contemporaries. Includes The Prelude and Michael and Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s Dejection: An Ode. Also contains personal correspondence, diaries, travel journals, scrapbooks, autograph books, financial records, and receipts.
Roper iPOLL
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research maintains one of the most complete collections of public opinion data. Data contributors include many major commercial polling firms and media survey organizations, such as ABC News, CBS News, Fox News, the Gallup Organization, Los Angeles Times, National Opinion Research Center, NBC News, New York Times, Princeton Survey Research Associates, USA Today, the Washington Post, and many others. RoperExpress, a data access tool for on-demand downloading of data in the Roper Center collection that are in ASCII or SPSS portable formats, is also available. This databank is a comprehensive, up-to-date source for questions asked on U.S. nationwide public opinion surveys since 1935. It provides question wordings, response percentages, and full survey-level citations. 1935 to the present.
In order to start using iPOLL, click "iPOLL Login" and complete the "iPOLL New User Registration" page on the website. 1935 - present.
Royal Shakespeare Company Archives. From Playwrights to Performance 1889-2013
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized the archives of the world-renowned Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) and its predecessor, the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company. The material within this collection allows users to explore how the works of William Shakespeare, his contemporaries, and other playwrights have been performed since the late nineteenth century. Researchers are able to chart the company's performance history through prompt books, which are further complemented by photographs, original designs, sheet music, programmes, and production records.
Royal Society of Chemistry eBook Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The RSC eBooks provide in-depth, up-to-date and authoritative coverage across the chemical science and related areas, making them valuable references for students, researchers and scientists in academia and industry.1968-2024.
Russian and Ukrainian Pamphlet and Brochure Collection: 1866-1949 from the Library of Congress 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This online bibliography of approximately 4400 records is the only electronic record for the individual items in the collection. Within the bibliography the records are grouped by LC classification and then listed alphabetically within each class. Moreover, nearly all of the 438 records in class "B" (religion and philosophy) have links to digital versions, courtesy of the Library's Meeting of Frontiers digital library.
S
Sabin Americana
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Sabin Americana, 1500-1926 is an online collection of books, pamphlets, serials and other works about the Americas, from the time of their discovery to the early 1900s. Covering a span of 400 years in North, Central and South America, as well as the Caribbean, this fully searchable digital archive is an essential tool for the study of the western hemisphere. It provides primary source material critical to the understanding of the society, politics, religious beliefs, literature, customs and events of the times.
SAE Mobilus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
SAE Mobilus includes resources related to mobility engineering from the Society of Automotive Engineering. UMD subscribes to SAE journals available through Mobilus.
Safehaven Reports On Nazi Looting Of Occupied Countries And Assets In Neutral Countries
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The records reproduced in this collection consist primarily of SAFEHAVEN reports and letters, cables, and military attaché reports referring to specific SAFEHAVEN reports or SAFEHAVEN-related topics. Such topics include information on alleged art looting; business matters (including alleged patent transfers) pertaining to leading German industrial firms such as Bosch and I.G. Farben; and various Third Reich personalities.
Sage Business
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Sage Business provides multidimensional content from diverse perspectives.
Sage Business Cases
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digital collection of over 4,850 interdisciplinary business cases from over 120 countries. Includes subjects such as entrepreneurship, accounting, healthcare management, leadership, social enterprise, and more.
it contains cases, foundations (key business theories), etc
Sage Campus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Designed to teach academic skills, often not covered in class, that are needed to conduct and publish professional research and ensure a successful academic career. Includes modules on topics ranging from information literacy, collecting and managing data, and planning and publishing research.
Sage Data
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Data Planet
Includes over 550 source databases from over 90 data providers in 16 subject categories ranging from Criminal Justice and Law Enforcement to Banking, Finance, and Insurance, as well as Education, Agriculture, Labor and Employment, Health and Vital Statistics, and Population and Income.
Sage Research Methods
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Designed to teach research methods, design research projects, understand or identify new methods , conduct research, and write up findings. Includes collection of case studies, teaching datasets, and video to offer real world applications and hands-on practice for hundreds of qualitative and quantitate research methods.
Sage Skills: Business
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers over 850 topics across five modules: Data Analytics, Entrepreneurship, Leadership, Organizational Communication, and Professionalism. Includes interactive self-assessments, virtual scenarios, downloadable data, and expert insights.
Sage Skills: Student Success
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Interactive digital resource featuring the work of a diverse set of academic experts to help undergraduates build confidence and gain essential skillsets for academic and personal success. Includes videos, self-assessment, audio summaries, and virtual scenarios.
Sage Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streaming video content in such areas as Business and Management, Counseling and Psychotherapy, Criminology and Criminal Justice, Education, Media, Political Science, Psychology, and Sociology. All videos are fully citable with searchable transcripts, custom clip creation and embedding. Videos include Documentaries, Films, Case studies, Tutorials, Interviews, and more.
San Francisco Chronicle (1865-1922) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The San Francisco Chronicle (1865-1922) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue
Saudi Arabia: Records of the US Department of State, 1930-1959
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents in this collection on Saudi Arabia are sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Schillers Werke
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Schillers Werke comprises the whole of the Nationalausgabe, the finest and most complete critical edition of his works, letters, and conversations, including all illustrations, notes, variants, and indexes. It currently includes 46 volumes, with further volumes added to the Web edition, and includes notes on sources as well as on the genesis of the works and their subsequent influence on German literature.
SciELO 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full-text database of a selected number of peer reviewed Latin American science and social science journals. Coverage is from 1997 to the present and articles are published in English, Portuguese or Spanish.
Science in the Nineteenth-Century Periodical
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Science in the Nineteenth-Century Periodical (SciPer) Index provides a scholarly synopsis of the material relating to science, technology, and medicine appearing in sixteen general periodicals published in Britain between 1800 and 1900. With entries describing around 7,500 articles (doubling to more than 15,000 when complete), and with references to over 5,500 individuals, 2,000 publications, and 1,000 institutions, it provides an invaluable research tool for those interested in the representation of science and in the interpenetration of science and literature in nineteenth-century Britain, as well as for students of the period more generally.
Science in World War II
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection provides nine classic works on the efforts of U.S. scientists during World War II. The first eight volumes tell the history of the Office of Scientific Research and Development, while the ninth volume presents a model of relations between the state and science.
ScienceDirect
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Peer-reviewed, full text database containing electronic book and journal titles covering the fields of science, technology and medicine. In addition to keyword searches, the image search and value added content associated with the publication can be found in the form of audio, video and datasets. Extensive coverage of the physical and biological sciences, significant numbers of journals in the social sciences, and some journals in the humanities. Dates of abstracting and indexing vary. Full text prior to 1995 often going back to vol. 1, iss. 1
Author searches are done on the last name only.
Subject searches are supported, but subjects are not presented within the records.
Truncation is not supported in phrases.
SciFinder-n
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
You must first create an account using your @umd.edu email address to use the web version. Unlimited simultaneous users. To use off-campus, sign into the GlobalProtect VPN and change the gateway setting to TunnelAll. SciFinder-n is published by the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) and gives you access to current high-quality scientific information in chemistry and related sciences. Content at a Glance: searching MEDLINE and Chemical Abstracts (CAPLUS) individually or at the same time; more than 15 million reactions; more than 1 billion predicted property values; more than 2 million experimental properties; the CAS REGISTRY database is updated daily; patent records from the major patent offices are available online within 2 days of the patents' issuance; sequences combined from CAS and GenBank databases, which are indexed and linked to scientific journal and patent literature.
Scopus
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Scopus is an abstract and citation database with over 80 million records and 1.8 billion cited references that date back to 1970. Includes over 27 thousand serial titles and 249 thousand monographs in the social, physical, life and health sciences, as well as over 44 million patent records. More information on using Scopus is available at: https://elsevier.libguides.com/Scopus.
Scopus AI
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Artificial Intelligence (AI) component of Scopus (https://proxy-um.researchport.umd.edu/login?url=https://www.scopus.com/). Designed to help researchers navigate the vast amount of information available in Scopus, to gain a deeper understanding of research topics generate new insights, and enhance the overall research experience
Score Collections Database 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The database represents all 23,000+ scores from numerous collections held by Special Collections in performing Arts. Students, faculty, and staff of the entire University System of Maryland, as well as members of select organizations, are welcome to borrow most of the works found in this database.
Senior High Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Senior High Core Collection is a selective list of fiction and non-fiction titles recommended for high school students (grades 9 through 12), along with review sources and other professional aids for librarians and school media specialists.

ISBNs are not part of a searchable field in this database.
Do not attempt to search on authors by truncating the first name. Last, F? will often result in zero hits. Try searching on Last or Last, First
Service Newspapers of World War 2
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains a range of both rare and well-known wartime publications for soldiers serving in major theatres around the world. Publications are included from many key nations involved in the conflict, such as the US, Canada, New Zealand, India, and the countries of Europe, Africa, and the Middle East. Both Allied and Axis publications are included. Module 1 includes Stars and Stripes London Edition, Fauji Akhbar, Springbok, printed in both English and Afrikaans, Die Wehrmacht, and 13 editions of the Union Jack.
Sex and Sexuality
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers a broad range of topics in human sexuality, drawn from leading archives around the world. Includes papers of leading sexologists and LGBTQI+ personal histories for the study of human sexuality, its complexities, and its history.
Shakespeare in Performance
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Features the prompt book collection at the Folger Shakespeare Library, telling the story of Shakespeare’s plays as they were performed in theatres throughout Great Britain, the United States and internationally, between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries. Entries include personal notes, sketches and cues for lighting and music, as well as set design and costuming, music, and acting.
Shakespeare's Globe Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Archive of Shakespeare's Globe, documenting over 300 productions from 1997-2016. Includes architectural plans, prompt books, wardrobe notes, musical scores, research bulletins, oral histories, show reports, video interviews, and essays.
SIAM eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Titles are written by internationally renowned experts spanning a wide range of topic areas in applied mathematics and computational science. Hosted by the same AIP/Scitation platform as SIAM Journals. All books through 2024 (excluding many textbooks and authors who have declined to be included in the institutional collection).


SimplyAnalytics
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) SimplyMaps
SimplyAnalytics contains extensive data including demographic, historic census, business, health, real estate, housing, employment, consumer spending, and marketing (over 70,000 variables total). Users can create customized maps and reports; data is down to the census tract level. Click on "Sign in as a guest" to use database. data is available at the State, County, City, ZIP Code, Census Tract and Block Group level as well as custom trade area and the entire United States. Access limited to 5 concurrent users.
Slavery and Anti-Slavery: A Transnational Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Four-part full-text resource consisting of more than five million pages from books, pamphlets, newspapers, periodicals, court records, and maps covering slavery and abolition issues from multiple perspectives. In four parts. Part I: Debates over Slavery and Abolition - focuses on the abolitionist movement. Part II: Slave Trade in the Atlantic World - focuses on the rise of slavery in Africa and its impact on the United States, Caribbean, and Latin America. Part III: The Institution of Slavery - Focuses on slavery from 1492 to 1888, including the Shong Massacre and the Dememara insurrection. Part IV: Age of Emancipation - Focusing on emancipation efforts in the United States, Latin America, and the Caribbean.
Slavery, Abolition and Social Justice
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of digitized books, pamphlets, manuscripts, court records, maps, and images documenting many aspects of transatlantic slavery and abolition. Subjects include slavery in the early Americas, the middle passage, religion, resistance and revolt, urban slavery, the underground railroad, the abolition movement, freedmen, education, slavery in the Islamic world, and the legacy and persistence of slavery.
Smithsonian Global Sound
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Smithsonian Global Sound includes published recordings of the Smithsonian Folkways Recordings label and archival audio collections of Folkways Records, and of Cook, Dyer-Bennet, Fast Folk Musical Magazine, Monitor, Paredon and other labels. Also included are field recordings collected on the South Asian subcontinent made available from the Archive Research Centre for Ethnomusicology (ARCE), sponsored by the American Institute for Indian Studies. Music recorded around the African continent in the mid-20th century by Dr. Hugh Tracey for the International Library of African Music is here, as are nature sounds, spoken stories, and memoirs. Album cover art and liner notes have been scanned into the database. Only 3 simultaneous users allowed.
SNAC: Social Networks and Archival Context 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
It is a free, online resource that helps users discover biographical and historical information about persons, families, and organizations that created or are documented in historical resources (primary source documents) and their connections to one another. Users can locate archival collections and related resources held at cultural heritage institutions around the world. SNAC is an international cooperative including, but not limited to, archives, libraries, and museums, that is working to build a corpus of reliable descriptions of people, families, and organizations that link to and provide a contextual understanding of historical records..
SocArxiv 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An open archive of the social Sciences, providing a free, non-profit, open access platform for social scientists to upload working papers, preprints, and published papers, with the option to link data and code.
Social Explorer
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Social Explorer provides access to demographic information about the United States from 1790 to the most current dataset. Available data includes census data, data from the public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), and American Community Survey (ACS) data. The database includes basic GIS tools to create reports, maps, and slide shows.
Social Sciences Citation Index
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Problem description: Provides an index, abstracts, and cited references for articles in the social sciences. Covers anthropology, history, linguistics, philosophy, sociology, urban studies, women's studies, psychology, political science and other social sciences related fields. Provides some full-text materials.
Social Services Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides bibliographic coverage of current research focused on social work, human services, and related areas, including social welfare, social policy, and community development.
Socialism on Film
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Providing a counterpoint to Western perceptions of communist states and their actions, this collection of films illuminates how socialist countries saw themselves and the world around them during the major political and social events of the twentieth century.
SocIndex with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The index features more than 1,300,000 records with subject headings from a 15,600 term sociology-specific thesaurus designed by expert lexicographers. This product also contains informative abstracts for more than 620 "core" coverage journals dating back to 1895. In addition, this file provides data mined from more than 500 "priority" coverage journals as well as over 1,390 "selective" coverage journals. Further, extensive indexing for books, monographs, conference papers, and other sources is included. Contains full text for 242 "core" coverage journals dating back to 1895, and 72 "priority" coverage journals. This database also includes full text for 547 books and monographs, and full text for 6,711 conference papers.
Something About the Author
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Something About the Author Online is a complete archive that preserves the full integrity of the print reference series, which includes more than 200 volumes, totaling more than 12,000 entries and nearly 17,000 images. You'll find a backfile of searchable page images digitized directly from the print volumes. You'll find thousands of illustrated biographical profiles of children's authors and illustrators, all in an easy-to-use interface that is ideal for teachers, librarians, professors, students, and other researchers of children's and young adult literature. Handy features include the ability to print, e-mail, download and access content by "Inside this Entry" and "Inside this Volume."
South Asia Commons
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Platform to discover South Asian/Indian Studies historical and cultural materials held by organizations around the world. Coverage includes India-Iran relations, Partition of India, and other topics such as Environment, Political Systems, and Religion. Material types include books, magazines, reports, historical journals, video, audio, zines, newspapers, magazines, letters, diaries, and other primary source materials. Includes over 625,000 documents presently held by over 500 organizations, including libraries, museums, archives, and government organizations.
Southern Israelite 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Southern Israelite is one of the major Jewish newspapers of the South in 20th century. Electronic access is for years 1929 through 1986.
Southern Negro Youth Congress and the Communist Party: Papers of James and Esther Cooper Jackson, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) The papers contain clippings (articles by and about Jackson), correspondence of both Esther and James Jackson, including the Jacksons' voluminous World War II correspondence with each other,
Soviet Cinema Online, Part 1 & Part 2
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection includes Soviet film magazines and newspapers from the 1920s and 1930s, reflecting the most interesting and fertile period in the history of Russian film. These publications shed light on the production side of Soviet cinematography, theoretical and practical concepts developed by the period's leading directors and critics, and the role of film in Soviet cultural life. They featured articles by leading Soviet directors (Lev Kuleshov, Sergei Eisenstein, Dziga Vertov, Aleksandr Dovzhenko, Abram Room), members of the avant-garde LEF, leading authors and philologists.
Soviet-Era Ukrainian Newspapers collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Soviet-Era Ukrainian Newspapers (SEUN) collection traces the history of Ukraine during the tumultuous era of the first part of the 20th century—covering these and events leading up to WWII. Comprising over 50,000 pages and five titles, SEUN includes newspapers from three cities: Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Lviv. This collection includes newspapers in both Ukrainian and Russian. The collection includes five titles, which can be browsed by clicking on the Title Navigation link on the left side of the page, selecting a specific title, and using the Date Navigation calendar on the left side to select issues available on any highlighted date.
SPIE eBook collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Collection of SPIE Press titles -monographs reference works, field guides, and tutorials. 1989-2014.
SPORTDiscus with Full Text
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This database covers key areas of sports medicine and related fields. Content areas range from sports physiology and sports psychology to physical education and recreation. SPORTDiscus is ideal for researchers studying different aspects of kinesiology, fitness, health, and sport studies. Sports, recreation, physical fitness, and sport science. 1975-present with some monograph indexing dating back to 1800.
Springer eBooks (2005-2011)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Accurate reproductions of over 30,000 Springer print book publications, with search capabilities and bookmarks.
Springer eBooks in Computer Science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Contains full-text of journals and eBooks, including the book series: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) with its subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence (LNAI) and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics (LNBI); Communications in Computer and Information Science (CCIS), and Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science (UTICS). Also included are comprehensive reference works, like the Encyclopedia of Database Systems and the Handbook of Natural Computing. Coverage: 2005-2011, 2014.
Springer Nature Link
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) SpringerLink
Springer has digitized nearly 1000 journals chronicled from Volume 1, Issue 1 in the Springer Online Journal Archives in the following subject packages: Behavioral Sciences, Biomedical and Life Sciences, Business and Economics, Chemistry and Materials Science, Computer Science, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Engineering, Humanities, Social Sciences and Law, Mathematics, Medicine, Physics and Astronomy. Archive full-text access ends with 1996.
Springer Protocols
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
SpringerProtocols (coverage from 1980-2023) is the largest electronic database of reproducible laboratory protocols, with over 25,000 reproducible laboratory protocols in biomedical and life sciences. Based on tried and tested resources, including the essential series Methods in Molecular Biology, it covers 15 comprehensive subject collections and offers researchers access to nearly thirty years' worth of easily reproducible, step-by-step protocols for immediate use in their lab. Written by renowned experts in the field and reviewed and approved by the prestigous editorial board for clarity, accuracy, and consistency, Springer Protocols is an invaluable resource for the modern research laboratory.
SRDS
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Standard Rate & Data Service
SRDS online locate ad rates and circulation for magazines, newspapers, TV and radio, and find demographic profiles of DMAs. Also includes audience analytics for websites that sell ads and the local Market Audience Analyst, containing demographic and life style information on consumers by geographic regions; this data comes from Experian Simons and Nielsen Claritas PRIZM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (1874-1922) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The St. Louis Post-Dispatch (1874-1922) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue.
State Health Facts 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides state health data such as medicare, health status, managed care, minority health, women's health, and more.
Statesman's Yearbook
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides the political, economic and social account of every country of the world along with key facts and analysis.
Student Activism
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Student Activism collection is intended to serve as a scholarly bridge from the extensive history of student protest in the United States to the study of today's vibrant, continually unfolding actions. The collection captures the voices of students across a great range of protests, political actions, and equal-rights advocacy from the 20th and early 21st century United States. The primary sources are broad-based across time, geography, and political viewpoint — from conservative to anarchist.
Sunday Times Historical Archive 1822-2021
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This archive brings two centuries of news together in one resource, providing the complete run of the newspaper up to 2021, including all of its supplements. It allows users to easily explore nearly 200 years of news, investigative reporting, and commentary from Britain’s premier Sunday publication. Since 1822, the Sunday Times has provided thoughtful analysis and commentary on the week’s news and society at large. From major national and international events to stories of everyday life in the nineteenth- and twentieth centuries, the paper has always aimed to publish all the news that is fit to print. Despite the similarity of names, the Sunday Times was an entirely separate paper from The Times until 1966, when both papers came under common ownership. The value of the Sunday Times Digital Archive lies in its extensive cross-disciplinary reach, offering perspectives on both national and international issues and stories.
Sur, 1931-1992
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A full-text searchable, digital archive of SUR, one of the most important and influential literary magazines published in Latin America in the twentieth century. The database contains images of the complete run of the magazine including covers, photographs and advertisements with an interface in both Spanish and English. Founded in 1931 by Argentine intellectual Victoria Ocampa, SUR is well known throughout the Americas and Europe for featuring writings from some of the best known figures in literature, philosophy, history and the arts, such as Virginia Woolf, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Jorge Luis Borges.
Sweets Guide Online 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Sweets provides the ability to find, compare, select, specify, and make purchase decisions in the product marketplace by making available In-depth and up-to-date product information.
Symptom Media
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Symptom Media is a subscription service offering an online resource for mental health education and training. Simulation Activities, used to practice clinical skills by watching a video without the diagnosis listed and then complete assignments such as a Treatment plan or Mental Status Exam.
Synthesis Digital Library of Engineering & Computer Science
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The basic component of the library is a 50- to 100-page "Lecture"; a self-contained electronic book that synthesizes an important research or development topic, authored by an expert contributor to the field. The library and its lectures are organized by series.
T
TAIR
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) maintains a database of genetic and molecular biology data for the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Note: Certain features on this site (commenting on genes or loci, registering a new mutant gene symbol) require setting up a free user name and password. Data available from TAIR include the complete genome sequence along with gene structure, gene product information, gene expression, DNA and seed stocks, genome maps, genetic and physical markers, publications, and information about the Arabidopsis research community. Gene product function data is updated every week from the latest published research literature and community data submissions. TAIR also provides extensive links to other Arabidopsis resources.
Talmud Yerushalmi Online 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This site eventually will include the entire Yerushalmi in the format of audio classes. Much of the Yerushalmi has already been uploaded. The website also contains much additional helpful material and links concerning Talmud Yerushalmi.
Teacher's Reference Center
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Teacher Reference Center provides indexing and abstracts for over 280 of the most popular teacher and administrator trade journals to assist professional educators.
Testaments to the Holocaust Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Testaments to the Holocaust is the online publication of the archives of the Wiener Library, London, the first archive to collect evidence of the Holocaust and the anti-semitic activities of the German Nazi Party. It contains documentary evidence collected in several different programmes: the eyewitness accounts which were collected before, during and after the Second World War, from people fleeing the Nazi oppression, a large collection of photographs of pre-war Jewish lif
Testaments to the Holocaust. Documents and Rare Printed Materials from the Wiener Library, London
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Testaments to the Holocaust is the online publication of the archives of the Wiener Library, London, the first archive to collect evidence of the Holocaust and the anti-semitic activities of the German Nazi Party. It contains documentary evidence collected in several different programmes: the eyewitness accounts which were collected before, during and after the Second World War, from people fleeing the Nazi oppression, a large collection of photographs of pre-war Jewish life
Textes de Francais Ancien
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Established at the Laboratoire de Francais Ancien (University of Ottawa) The base has now a total of about 3 014 389 word occurrences.
The Cyprus Crisis in 1967
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
N.B.: This collection comprises the entire contents of the Primary Source Media microfilm product entitled "The Cyprus Crisis, 1967: The State Department's Crisis Files
The Gilded Age and Progressive Era
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A richly varied range of archival sources charts the contradictions of the Gilded Age. This resource includes the personal and business papers of key industrialists, records of rail, steel, and oil corporations, material on labor disputes, politics and progressivism, and rich visual content on fashion, material culture, and architecture.
The Nixon Years 1969-1974
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These files allow scholars and researchers the opportunity to assess Nixon’s handling of numerous Cold War crises from a British, European, and Commonwealth perspective, his administration’s notable achievements, as well as his increasingly controversial activities and unorthodox use of executive powers, culminating in Watergate and resignation.
The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part of the "Making of America" project.
Theatre in Video I
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Streaming video collection of plays and documentaries. Includes "world's most important plays", live television broadcasts of New York productions in the 50s, contemporary revivals of classic works and experimental performances from the 60s and 70s, and multiple productions of some plays. Interviews with directors, designers, writers, and actors along with excerpts of live performances. Browse by genre, artist, time period, place, and other fields. Features include creating playlists and video clips of specific scenes, monologues, and staging.
Theatre in Video Volume II
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Theatre in Video: Volume II brings together classic and contemporary plays and documentaries. With a greater focus on contemporary and international productions, users can view the works of widely studied playwrights and theatre artists from around the globe, including many performances from Shakespeare's Globe Theatre collection (Opus Arte), Theatre Arts Films, the BBC, and TMW Media Group.
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae (TLL) 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Thesaurus Linguae Latinae is the most authoritative dictionary of ancient Latin. It is the only lexicon to cover all surviving Latin texts from the earliest times down to AD 600. Therefore it not only takes account of classical Latin but also treats in detail the special features of the language of late antiquity and Christian texts.As well as literary works,it examines medical and legal manuals inscriptions and many other types of text.
Times Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Times Digital Archive provides convenient access to an extraordinary library of back issues of this renowned newspaper online. By taking the microfilm collection of The Times (London) and producing a high-resolution digital format with searchable images, The Times Digital Archive represents unprecedented access to one of the most highly regarded resources for the study of 18th century history and onward.
Times Educational Supplement Historical Archive: 1910-2000
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Times Educational Supplement (TES) is one of the most well-regarded primary and secondary education news sources. Founded in 1910, TES became the leading publication on public policy and pedagogical practice over the decades, not only in the United Kingdom but worldwide. In these more than 4,300 issues, researchers will find ample material in fields such as education, social history, women’s studies, public health, literature and the arts, and a variety of topics in the humanities and social sciences.
Times Literary Supplement Historical Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) TLS Historical Archive
Includes the complete run of the times literary supplement with over 300,000 reviews, letters, poems and articles. Provides contemporary criticism searchable by article type,date,editor and translator.
Trade Catalogs and the American Home
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection presents a wealth of highly visual trade catalogs, cards, and marketing ephemera, tracing the rise of the ‘American dream’ and evolution of commerce throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Trade in Early Modern London: Livery Company Records,
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
An expansive resource for the study of the history of early modern London through the lens of the livery companies and trade. Livery companies evolved from London’s medieval guilds, becoming corporations under royal charter responsible for training in their respective trades, as well as for the regulation of aspects such as wage control, labour conditions, and industry standards. The resource enables users to search and compare the various livery companies records in one place, providing a unique overview of trade in early modern London over a key three-hundred year period, with commentary on pivotal events such as the Reformation, the Civil War, the Great Plague, and the Great Fire of London.
Trademark Electronic Search System 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Index to trademarks filed with the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Contains more than 3 million pending, registered and dead federal trademarks.
Transcripts of the Malcolm X Assassination Trial Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reproduced here are records of the New York State Supreme Court, which include a full testimony of all witnesses, including the two who spoke in secrecy to hide their identities; preliminary motions, summations, the court's charge, the verdicts, and the sentences; and a confession made years after the trial by one of the men convicted.
Transformation of Shopping: Department Stores, Social Change and Consumerism 1830-1994
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource uses company archives, trade journals and union records to explore a variety of fundamental social and business study themes. Features archival material from across the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and Europe and offers an array of comparative sources for studying how the retail landscape changed over time and location.
Travel Writing, Spectacle and World History
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource covers women's travel diaries and correspondence from the Schlesinger Library at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University. From the everyday to the extraordinary, these rare diaries and the supporting correspondence describe the travel experiences, destinations, and desires of nineteenth and twentieth century American women.
Treasures in Full: Shakespeare in Quarto 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digital images of the British Library's 93 copies of the 21 plays by William Shakespeare printed in quarto before the theaters were closed in 1642. Also includes background information about William Shakespeare, his works, his theater world and the printing of his plays.
Treaties and Agreements Library
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of all published treaties & agreements to which the US has been a party. Includes: US Treaties & Other International Agreements (UST); Treaties & Other International Acts Series (TIAS); Treaties in Force (TIF) and Guide to Treaties in Force; International Legal Materials (ILM); KAV Agreements; Bevans; Malloy; and Miller.
more...
Trends and Policy: U.S. Immigration
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary sources including legislation, executive orders, Congressional Research Service reports, hearings, Government Accountability Office reports, data from the annual reports and the Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, newspaper articles, and press releases. Resources are organized by topic, with a brief summary of how the issue has developed over time and a timeline showing important events.
TRID
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Transportation Research Information Database
TRID is an integrated database that combines the records from TRB's Transportation Research Information Services (TRIS) Database and the OECD's Joint Transport Research Centre's International Transport Research Documentation (ITRD) Database. TRID provides access to more than one million records of transportation research worldwide. 1960-present (but there is some material from the 1950s included) The PATH Database, the largest bibliographic database on intelligent transportation systems (ITS), is now available as part of TRIS.
Turfgrass Information Center
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Turfgrass Information Center houses the most comprehensive publicly-available collection of turfgrass research and educational materials in the world, and has also continuously produced the Turfgrass Information File (TGIF) database since 1983. The TGIF database contains more than a quarter million records, with over 60% of those records linking the user directly to the full-text of the item. The Turfgrass Information Center and TGIF database are irreplaceable resources for students, researchers, and professionals around the world who are responsible for maintaining golf courses, lawns, athletic fields, and managed landscapes of every kind, helping fulfill MSU’s land-grant ideal.
Turkey: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1802-1949
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Modern Turkey, from its late Ottoman roots in the early 19th-century to its emergence as a republic following the First World War, is traced here. Correspondences from U.S. Consults in Alexandretta, Ezerum, Harput, Siva, and Smyrna are included. This archive is sourced from the Central Files of the General Records of the Department of State. The records are under the jurisdiction of the Legislative and Diplomatic Branch of the Civil Archives, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Twentieth Century North American Drama Second Edition
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Twentieth Century North American Drama contains 1,905 plays by 419 playwrights, together with detailed, fielded information on related productions, theaters, production companies, and more. The database also includes selected playbills, production photographs and other ephemera related to the plays. More than 150 of the plays are published here for the first time, including a number by major authors. The plays themselves have been selected using leading bibliographies and with the editorial advice of scholars and the playwrights themselves. Twentieth Century North American Drama allows in-depth browsing and searching of both the bibliographic and the full-text elements within the database.
U
U.S Relations with Panama and Operation Just Cause
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes letters, memoranda, reports, papers, cables, and notes related to all aspects of our relations with Panama. Materials document high-level diplomatic efforts to resolve the situation in Panama, as well as plans and preparations.
U.S. and Castro's Cuba, 1950-1970: The Paterson Collection, The
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection includes declassified records that provide a detailed account of the diplomatic, economic, military, and cultural relationship between the United States and Cuba in the era of Fidel Castro (1926–2016). Included are extensive official records gathered from presidential libraries, government archives, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the Department of State (DOS
U.S. and Iraqi Relations: US Technical Aid, 1950-1958
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The program of technical cooperation in Iraq, prior to the Revolution of 1958, was frequently cited as an example of the ideal Point Four program. The overthrow of the established government led naturally to questions concerning the "failure" of American technical assistance in that country.
U.S. Data and Statistics 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Gateway to statistics, population, maps, and demographic and economic data from the most recent U.S. census.
U.S. Intelligence on the Middle East 1945-2009
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reports by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and other U.S. intelligence and security agencies on developments in the Middle East and North Africa from World War II to the near present. Some 2733 documents are included, arranged chronologically. The resource is also searchable.
U.S. Middle East Peace Policy and Americas Role In The Middle East Peace Process, 1991-1992
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains Bush Presidential Records from a variety of White House offices. These files consist of letters of correspondence, memoranda, coversheets, notes, distribution lists, newspaper articles, informational papers, published articles, and reports from the public, the Congress, Bush administration officials, and other various federal agencies primarily regarding American Middle East peace policy and the United States' role in the many facets of the Middle East peace process.
U.S. Military Activities and Civil Rights: Integration of the University of Mississippi and the Use of Military Force, 1961–1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection is from the Records of the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations (ODCSOPS) relating to the use of Federal marshals, U.S. Troops, and the federalized National Guard in Oxford, Mississippi, 1962-1963, on the occasion of James Meredith's enrollment at the University of Mississippi. The records cover events such as the riots of September 30 and Governor Barnett's efforts to obstruct Federal marshals, as well as daily events on campus and Meredith's progress under integration. The files detail the extensive Federal involvement, including preparations for the military operation, Executive Orders , after action reports on the costs and lessons of Federal involvement, congressional correspondence on the military's involvement, and effects on the media, public, and in particular, students and staff at Ole Miss
U.S. Military Activities and Civil Rights: The Little Rock Integration Crisis, 1957-1958 Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection is from the Records of the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations (ODCSOPS) relating to the use of Federal marshals, U.S. Troops, and the federalized National Guard in Oxford, Mississippi, 1962-1963, on the occasion of James Meredith's enrollment at the University of Mississippi.
U.S. Military Activities and Civil Rights: The Military Response to the March on Washington, 1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection reveals details of the Federal Government's plans to militarily intervene in the 1963
March on Washington (codenamed Operation "Steep Hill") in the event the march became disorderly.
Army staff communications and memos tracked the plans of the March organizers throughout the summer, and the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations prepared contingency plans for cooperation with District of Columbia police for controlling the march.
U.S. Operations Mission in Iran, 1950-1961
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A record of the U.S. Operations Mission's experiences in Iran. In it are outlined the programs that were initiated, the problems encountered, and the results of the 11-year effort.
U.S. Operations Mission to Saudi Arabia, 1950-1955: Records of the Office of the Director
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This record collection contains the correspondence files of the U.S. Operations Mission in Saudi Arabia during the early Cold War period, 1950-1955, as well as the Subject Files of the office of the Director documenting the myriad concerns and rationales that went into the control and direction of U.S. economic and technical assistance programs, as well as the coordination of mutual security activities, with respect to Saudi Arabia.
U.S. Patent Databases
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Bibliographic and full-text content of U.S. patents from U.S. Patent and Trademark Office web database. Includes full-text patents, images of patents, and published patent applications.Time Span: Full-text 1976 to present, images since 1790, applications since 2001.
U.S. Political & Legal History
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Heinonline
This database offers researchers an eclectic 50-state history of the United
States, on all the topics you may or may not have ever wanted to know about
these United States.
U.S. Relations with the Vatican and the Holocaust, 1940-1950
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Records of the dealings of Myron Taylor, the presidents representative to the Vatican, with Pope Pius XII and the Vatican, including cables, reports, and correspondence between Taylor and his staff, the State Department, other U.S. government agencies, the Vatican, and the Italian government. They document, among other subjects, Italian fascism, the Holocaust and the treatment of other minorities in Eastern Europe, and displaced persons in Eastern Europe after World War II.
Ulrich's Periodicals Directory
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Ulrich's Periodicals Directory is a bibliographic database providing detailed, comprehensive, and authoritative information on serials published throughout the world. It covers all subjects and includes publications that are published regularly or irregularly and are circulated free of charge or by paid subscription.
Understanding Hate in America: White Nationalism and the Press in the 1920s
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) Understanding Hate in America: White Nationalism and the Press in the 1920s
Collection of Klan and other white nationalist newspapers alongside Newspapers published by Catholic, African-American and Jewish organizations to counter the narrative of hate and bigotry. The collection contains national Klan publications as well as regional and local Klan produced papers.The collection will also include a set of papers sympathetic to the Klan alongside anti-Klan publications.
Union Label and the Needle Trades: Records of the United Garment Workers of America
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These records, covering the period 1893-1994, include three kinds of documents: 1) time and motion studies for the garment industry (used to determine piecework rates); 2) minutes of the General Executive Board of the United Garment Workers of America, documenting, in its early years, immigration, sick benefits, and the nine-hour workday, and, in later years, financial struggles and decline of membership; and 3) card files recording information about union locals.
United Nations Official Documents System 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The electronic repository for official documents published by the United Nations. ODS covers all types of official United Nations documentation, beginning in 1993. Older UN documents are, however, added to the system on a daily basis. ODS also provides access to the resolutions of the General Assembly, Security Council, Economic and Social Council and the Trusteeship Council from 1946 onwards. The full text of documents is accessible in PDF format in all official languages of the United Nations--Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. The ODS is a multilingual system. Therefore, it requires UNICODE-based Internet browsers.
United Nations Treaty Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of the United Nations Treaty Series (UNTS), the current status of the multilateral treaties deposited with the Secretary-General, and texts of recently deposited multilateral treaties. From 1998 - The Status of Multilateral Treaties is updated daily. Treaty text can only be printed one page at a time unless you download the AlternaTIFF plug-in - instructions at http://untreaty.un.org/ENGLISH/series/plugin/install_plugin.asp
United States Code (U.S. House of Representatives)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Codification by subject matter of the general and permanent laws of the United States. Full text since 1994. Comprised of 50 titles.
University of Maryland Student Newspapers 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
At present, UMD Student Newspapers contain issues of The Diamondback, Black Explosion, The Eclipse, and Mitzpeh. The UMD Student Newspapers database, a collaboration between the University of Maryland Archives and the UMD Libraries’ Digital Services and Technologies division, is an effort to digitize and make accessible the major student newspapers produced
on the College Park campus
University of Michigan Press
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
University of Michigan Press is a leading publisher and distributor of books and digital projects in the humanities and social science s that are aligned with the strengths of its parent institution. Areas of particular focus are performing arts; classical studies political science ; American studies (especially disability and class studies; and Asian and African Studies.
Urban Land Institute
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
1 simultaneous user. Access to detailed case studies of completed projects, ranging from low-income housing to commercial and industrial projects. Covers projects from 1985-present. Includes photos, site plans, costs and rents, and innovative features of projects.
Urban Studies Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Urban Studies Abstracts covers urban affairs, community development, urban history, and other areas of relevance to the discipline of urban studies. The index contains 40,000 records from a variety of key sources, with coverage back to 1973.
V
ValueLine.Com
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) ValueLine Investment Survey
Provides investment research on stocks, mutual funds, options and convertibles, and offers a family of no-load mutual funds.
VBIC
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
VBIC is a collection of online business and economics resources intended to provide research support to the Robert H. Smith School of Business, the Department of Economics, and general users seeking authoritative information on these subject areas. The portal includes major database subscriptions provided by the UMD Libraries and the Smith School of Business. Most of these resources are available to faculty, students and staff through the University of Maryland Libraries. Due to licensing agreements these resources are limited only to current University of Maryland students, staff, and faculty. The databases that are supported by the Smith School of Business, as noted in VBIC, are available only to their students, please contact: researchsupport@rhsmith.umd.edu for any inquiries.
Venezuela: Records of the U.S. Department of State, 1960-1963
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Documents in this collection illustrate Cold War contexts, the role of the United States in Venezuela's foreign affairs, and the centrality of oil in the Venezuelan economy.
Documents in this collection illustrate Cold War contexts, the role of the United States in Venezuela's foreign affairs, and the centrality of oil in the Venezuelan economy.
Victorian Popular Culture
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Digitized visual and rare print primary sources materials in three collections: Spiritualism, Sensation, and Magic; Circuses, Sideshows and Freaks; and Music Hall, Theatre and Popular Entertainment.
Victorians on Film
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Capturing a unique view of the lives of Victorians at the dawn of cinema, from workers at the factory gates to royalty and other dignitaries, these films showcase the inventiveness and artistry of the medium's pioneers in its earliest stages, including news, animation, drama, and special effects, as well as providing an invaluable exploration into how Victorians went about their day-to-day activities from their work to their leisure time.
Violence & Abuse Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Database of 35,000 records that cover the subject of violence and abuse, including such areas as family violence, sexual assault, and emotional abuse.
Virginia Company Archives
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource documents the founding and economic development of Virginia, as seen through the papers of the Virginia Company of London, 1606-1624. It provides a rich source for the study of trade between Britain and America. There is valuable evidence on the ethnic and gender composition of Virginia and new evidence of tensions among the colonists and of early relations with Native Americans.
Virginia Gazette
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Published weekly in Williamsburg, Virginia between 1736 and 1780, The Virginia Gazette contained news covering all of Virginia and also included information from other colonies, Scotland, England and additional countries.
W
Wall Street Journal (1889-2002 ) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
In addition to the printed stories, researchers also can study the charts, stock tables, graphics, and illustrations featured in the publication. 1889-2002.
Wall Street Journal
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides citations, abstracts and full-text articles from the newspaper. A financial newspaper with in-depth coverage of national and international finance as well as political news. Full-text: January, 1984--present
War Department and Indian Affairs, 1800-1824
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection consists of the letters received by and letters sent to the War Department, including correspondence from Indian superintendents and agents, factors of trading posts, Territorial and State governors, military commanders, Indians, missionaries, treaty and other commissioners, Treasury Department officials, and persons having commercial dealings with the War Department, and other public and private individuals. In addition, attachments include vouchers, receipts, requisitions, abstracts and financial statements, certificates of deposit, depositions, contracts, newspapers, copies of speeches to Indians, proceedings of conferences with Indians in Washington, licenses of traders, passports for travel in the Indian country, appointments, and instructions to commissioners, superintendents, agents, and other officials.
War of 1812: Diplomacy on the High Seas
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collectors often sent on to the Department the original applications and forwarded periodically abstracts of the commissions they had granted. During the war the Department also issued permits for aliens to leave the U.S., and it received reports from U.S. marshals on aliens and prisoners of war in their districts, from collectors of customs and State Department agents on the impressment of seamen, and from the Department's "Secret Agents" on the movements of the British in the Chesapeake Bay area. The Department also had responsibility for negotiating the treaty at the end of the war.
War on Poverty and the Office of Economic Opportunity: Administration of Antipoverty Programs and Civil Rights, 1964-1967
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection brings together a series of Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) collections that highlight efforts to meld the issue of civil rights and antipoverty initiatives.
War on Poverty Community Profiles: Midwestern States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Community Profiles provide an in-depth analysis of poverty in America with an extensive inventory of historical data at a local level. Each profile, composed as a narrative with statistical indices, contains information showing general poverty indicators, size and composition of the poor population, and selected aspects of geography, demography, economy, and social resources.
Midwestern states in this collection include Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin
War on Poverty Community Profiles: Northeastern States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Community Profiles provide an in-depth analysis of poverty in America with an extensive inventory of historical data of the United States at a local level.Northeastern states in this collection include Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont.
War on Poverty Community Profiles: Southern States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Community Profiles provide an in-depth analysis of poverty in America with an extensive inventory of historical data at a local level. Each profile, composed as a narrative with statistical indices, contains information showing general poverty indicators, size and composition of the poor population, and selected aspects of geography, demography, economy, and social resources.
War on Poverty Community Profiles: Texas
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The documents in this archive are from the Presidential Papers of Lyndon Baines Johnson, White House Office Files, Office Files of Fred Panzer: Office of Economic Opportunity Information Center, Community Profiles, in the custody of the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library in Austin, Texas.
War on Poverty Community Profiles: Western States
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Alternate Name(s) .
The Community Profiles provide an in-depth analysis of poverty in America by providing an extensive inventory of historical data at a local level. Each profile, composed as a narrative with statistical indices, contains information showing general poverty indicators, size and composition of the poor population, and selected aspects of geography, demography, economy, and social resources.
Western states in this collection include Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
War on Poverty: Office of Civil Rights, 1965-1968
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The collection contains correspondence, memoranda, reports, minutes of meetings, convention programs, and other records concerning the activities of Maurice Dawkins, Assistant Director for Civil Rights in the Office of Economic Opportunity. Reports, assessments, and background documents also include: Justice Department Task Force on Civil Rights, 1968; U.S. Commission on Civil Rights Report on Ghettoes, 1967; Poor People's Campaign and OEO, 1968; civil rights and the anti-poverty war; application of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; Equal Employment Opportunities and the U.S. Civil Service Commission; OEO reports on Job Corps centers; U.S. Commission on Civil Rights hearings in Montgomery, Ala., for 1968; and 1967 Booz-Allen & Hamilton report on statewide education study in Mississippi.
Washington Post (1877-2003) (Historical Newspapers)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Washington Post (1877-2001) offers full page and article images with searchable full text back to the first issue. The collection includes digital reproductions providing access to every page from every available issue. There are no ISBNs in this resource. Subjects are searchable, but do not appear in the records.
more...
Washington Post (1987-)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides citations and full-text articles from the newspaper. Coverage of local, national, and international news. Particularly known for its political reporting. Full-text: January, 1987--present
Washington Times
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Explore local and national news and politics with our new full-color digital archive of The Washington Times! This conservative-leaning publication was founded in 1982 as a counterbalance to the perceived liberal stance of The Washington Post. You can search this archive in the library or remotely through the library website. This new digital archive begins January 1, 2019 and will grow going forward. Archival issues prior to 2019 are available on microfilm. Please see a librarian for assistance.

Coverage: 2019- present
WAVES, Records for the Asst. Chief, Naval Personnel for Women, 1942-1972 Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These records contain information on the WAVES from 1942 to 1948 and on their subsequent activities and reunions through 1972.
We Were Prepared For The Possibility Of Death: Freedom Riders In The South, 1961
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
FBI reports documenting the 1961 attempt, organized by the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), to enforce court and administrative rulings integrating interstate public transportation. Interracial groups of civil rights activists planned to ride buses from Washington, D.C. to New Orleans, but they met with a great deal of violence.
Web of Science Core Collection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Web of Science Core Collection provides comprehensive coverage of the sciences, social sciences, and arts, and humanities across journals, books and conference proceedings. It indexes more than 5,700 major journals across 164 scientific disciplines. The best database for finding what papers have cited other papers. Cited references can be traced forward in time. Web of Science Training Materials available here: http://wokinfo.com/training_support/training/web-of-science
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Official publication of presidential statements, messages, remarks, and other materials released by the White House Press Secretary. Published weekly. 1993-present.
Westlaw Campus Research
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Westlaw Campus Research is a collection of thousands of law, news, and business publications

Law: The heart of Westlaw Campus Research is the full text of all federal and state U.S. cases. The collection also includes other legal primary sources and many secondary sources, including over 800 law reviews and journals.

News: The collection contains the full text of hundreds of newspapers, newswires, newsletters, broadcast transcripts, magazines, and trade journals from the US and around the globe.

Business: The collection contains company information from a variety of sources, including Westlaw’s Company Investigator system.


Wiley Digital Archives
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Wiley Digital Archives include papers of the New York Academy of Sciences (NYAS) and The Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland (RAI). The NYAS mission is to drive innovative solutions to society's challenges by advancing scientific research, education and policy. RAI is the world's longest-established scholarly association dedicated to the furtherance of anthropology in its broadest and most inclusive sense.NYAS colletion materials include constitutions and bylaws, records of governing bodies, directors and publications and photographs. RAI materials include manuscripts, maps, photographs and scientific papers.
NYAS materials span 1817-2008; RAI materials span 1863-1986..
Woman’s Tribune 1883-1909
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Woman’s Tribune, with its motto in the masthead: “Equality Before The Law”, was launched in August 1883 as the official publication of the Nebraska Woman Suffrage Association. The Tribune and its publisher – also editor, typesetter, and correspondent — would become one of America’s most outspoken proponents of Women’s Suffrage and political rights. This collection comprises the complete run of all 724 issues subdivided into five parts by date range.
Women and Social Movements in the U.S.
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
WPrimary documents, books, images, scholarly essays, reviews, pamphlets, personal narratives, advice literature, training guides, interviews and teaching tools. 1600-2000.
Women in the National Archives
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
A finding aid to women's studies resources in The National Archives, UK. Provides access to original documents on the Suffrage Question in Britain, the Empire and Colonial Territories.
Women Organizing Transnationally: The Committee of Correspondence, 1952-1969
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Committee of Correspondence Records, 1952-1989, provide a rich collection from which to explore gendered aspects of Cold War liberalism, the United States government's clandestine and overt cultural propaganda operations, women's relationships to US foreign policy, and the varied goals and methods of women's international organizations that interacted in United Nations forums and at international conferences during the first two decades of the Cold War.
Women Writers Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of women's writings in English or in English translation from 1400 to 1850. Includes novels, poems, drama, and non-fiction The Renaissance Women Online (RWO) database is a subset of this database.
Women, War and Society, 1914-1918 Digital Archive
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These unique documents - charity and international relief reports, pamphlets, photographs, press cuttings, magazines, posters, correspondence, minutes, records, diaries, memoranda, statistics, circulars, regulations and invitations - are published here for the first time in fully-searchable form, along with interpretative essays from leading scholars. Together these documents form an indispensable resource for the study of 20th-Century social, political, military and gender history.
Women's Issues and Their Advocacy Within The White House, 1974-1977
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection documents Patricia Lindh's and Jeanne Holm's liaison with women's groups and their advocacy within the White House on issues of special interest to women. It includes material accumulated by presidential Counselor Anne Armstrong and Office of Women's Programs Director Karen Keesling.
Women's Studies Archive: Female Forerunners Worldwide
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Focuses on individual women and organizations around the world who have broken new paths in society through business, social reform, popular culture, health care and more. Includes primary sources from 1759 to 2002 including collections from the Amistad Research Center, Library of Congress, London Metropolitan Archives, and Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
Women's Studies Archive: Issues and Identities
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Traces the path of women's issues from past to present, pulling primary sources from manuscripts, newspapers, periodicals, and more. Captures the foundation of women's movements, struggles and triumphs, focusing on the social, political, and professional achievements of women throughout the nineteenth and twentieth century
Women's Studies Archive: Rare Titles from the American Antiquarian Society 1820-1922
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides access to over one million pages of female-authored work across a diverse range of both fiction and non-fiction. Sourced from and curated by the American Antiquarian Society. It includes around 5,700 monographs published between 1820 and 1922 in the United States and authored by women.
Women's Studies Archive: Voice and Vision
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Explores critical areas of study including the abolition of slavery, alcohol and temperance movements, pacifism and political activism, domestic service, education, health and hygiene, and divorce and social reform. Includes materials from theBritish Library, Swarthmore College, the American Antiquarian Society, New York University, and the National Archives (UK). 1780-2000.
Women's Studies International
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Covers the core disciplines in Women’s Studies to the latest scholarship in feminist research. Supports curriculum development in the areas of sociology, history, political science & economy, public policy, international relations, arts & humanities, business and education. Includes journals, newspapers, newsletters, bulletins, books, book chapters, proceedings, reports, theses, dissertations, NGO studies, Web sites & Web documents, and grey literature. Coverage: Covers issues in women's studies including feminist theory and history, family, mental & physical health, prejudice & gender discrimination, law & legislation, employment etc. Time Span:1972 to present; quarterly updates.
Women's Voices and Life Writing, 1600-1968
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The resource brings together diaries and oral histories to enable students and researchers to explore the lives of hundreds of individuals from diverse backgrounds, from abolitionists to suffragists, and royalty to republicans. Vivid narratives cover a wide range of themes, including domestic life, travel, sport, feminism, gender fluidity, and class with the collection providing a platform for working-class, LGBTQ+, and disabled women’s voices.
World Bank Data Catalog
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Access to World Bank datasets, databases, pre-formatted tables, reports, and other resources. Includes: Africa Development Indicators, Doing Business, Global Development Finance, World Development Indicators and much more.
World Communism: Pamphlets from McMaster University
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This collection contains un-catalogued pamphlets pertaining to communism, socialism, and class struggle from 1901-1969. The pamphlets are global in scope, although they are all in English unless otherwise noted. The bulk of the collection originates from China and Soviet Russia during the post-WWII period, although Cuba and Britain are strongly represented as well.

World Development Indicators Online
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
World Bank database provides direct access to more than 550 development indicators, with time series for 200 countries and 18 country groups from 1960, where data are available. Data export options in Excel or ASCII.
World Economic Outlook
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This free online database, updated biannually by the International Monetary Fund with coverage back to 1993, is similar to World Development Indicators in providing basic statistics -- WEO is much more limited in both scope and history, but it includes commodity price data and regional data that's not easily available in WDI.
World Governments
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Policy Common's World Governments provides access to working papers, policy briefs, data sources, and media from municipalities, IGOs, NGOs, think tanks, and research
centers.
World History in Video
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
World History in Video is a wide-ranging collection of critically acclaimed documentaries that allow students and researchers to explore human history from the earliest civilizations to the late twentieth century. The video content offered here is truly global in scope, covering Africa and the Americas, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and Oceania. Upon completion, the collection will contain 1,000 hours of streaming video that offers access to more than 1,750 important, critically acclaimed documentaries from filmmakers worldwide.
World News Connection
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Translations of foreign news from non-US media sources. Coverage is from November 1995 - December 31, 2013. Coverage: 2006 - current
World Newspaper Archive: African Newspapers 1800-1922
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of more than forty African newspapers, in English and other languages.
World Protest and Reform Movements: Global Perspectives 1945-1996
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Primary source material offering insight into the protests and reforms that changed the course of world history. Coverage drawn from television and radio broadcasts, periodicals, newspapers, and government documents translated into English by a U.S. government organization that became part of the CIA. Covers influential protest and reform movements spanning decades as well as protests covering environmental movements, demands for nutrition and sanitation standards, strikes for workplace safety, demonstrations against nuclear war, and dozens of others that proved that social movements can shape international opinion as effectively as politics or government policy.
World Scientific eBooks
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Titles in the collection span a wide variety of subjects: Mathematics, Physics/Nonlinear Science, Chemistry/Materials Science/Nanotechnology, Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science, Medicine and Healthcare, Life Sciences, Business and Economics, General and Popular Science, Social Sciences and Asian Studies.
World Shakespeare Bibliography
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides abstracts and indexing of books, articles, book reviews, dissertations, theatrical productions, reviews of productions, audiovisual materials, electronic media, and other scholarly and popular materials related to Shakespeare
World War II Naval Histories and Historical Reports: Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet, Battle Experiences, December 1941-August 1945
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These secret information bulletins were prepared on a continuous basis during and shortly after World War II, and were issued for officers and commissioned personnel. The information in these reports was drawn from war diaries and battle reports of various commanders and ships and covers primarily surface operations. The locations covered are those in the South and Southwest Pacific.
World War II Naval Histories and Historical Reports: Intelligence Division, OPNAV, Combat Narratives
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
These twenty-six narratives were designed to provide commissioned naval officers with interim summaries of actions prior to the availability of official histories. Drawn from action reports, operation orders, war diaries, and personal interviews, the documents contain charts and photographs.



World War II Naval Histories and Historical Reports: Naval War College, Battle Analysis Series
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The Battle Analysis Series is a compilation of all information, drawn from both Allied and Japanese sources, available to the Naval War College at the time of publication (1953-1958) and is an " endeavor to maintain at all times the viewpoints of the commanders of the units involved on both sides.
World War II Naval Histories and Historical Reports: U.S. Submarine War Patrol Reports and Related Documents, 1941-1945
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Reference Documents on Submarine Operations and Submarines from 1941-1945.


World's Fairs
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This resource provides access to primary source material from hundreds of world's fairs, useful for research in globalization, imperialism, anthropology, mass communication, design, and more.
WorldCat UMD
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
OCLC's catalog of books, serial publications, media, visual materials, musical scores, and archival materials in libraries worldwide. Article citations from NLM Medline (medicine and health), ERIC (education), GPO (U.S. government publications, ArticleFirst and British Library serials
Worldwide Political Science Abstracts
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides coverage of the international serials literature in political science and its complementary fields, including international relations, law, and public administration / policy. International coverage of political science, international relations, law, and public administration and policy. 1975 to the present.
Wright American Fiction 1851-1875
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Full text of more than 2,800 novels published between 1851 and 1875.
Z
Zasshi Kiji Sakuin Shusei Detabesu (Zassaku Plus)
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Compiled by the publisher Koseisha, this database indexes Japanese periodical articles for the period of 1868 to the present. It also includes locally published journals from 1948 to the present not indexed by the National Diet Library of Japan. The contents of the Koseisha database are regularly updated.
zbMATH Open 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
This is an open access Formerly Zentralblatt MATH. Contains 4 million bibliographic entries with reviews or abstracts from over 3,000 journals and serials, and 180,000 books from all areas of pure mathematics as well as applications in particular to natural sciences, computer science, economics and engineering. 1826 to present.
Zhongguo zi xun hang: CyberMedia Network 
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
China Infobank is one of the most authoritative sources of China related information and currently comprises over 7 million business reports and articles - a figure which is increasing daily. It provides a range of economic, business, scientific and governmental data to the business and research community. There are three main categories of content: the Business Database, Financial Express, and the News Channel, which are based upon over 1,000 newspaper magazines and trade journals and over sixty other content providers. There are currently over nine million articles totaling more than six billion Chinese characters, expanding at a rate of ten million Chinese characters per day.
Zoological Record, 1864-present
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The world's oldest continuing database of animal biology. It is considered the world's leading taxonomic reference, and with coverage back to 1864, has long acted as the world's unofficial register of animal names.
#
17th and 18th Century Burney Collection: UK Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Part of the British Library Newspapers collection, 17th and 18th Century Burney Collection Newspapers is a full-text, fully searchable digital archive of nearly 1,270 newspapers and news pamphlets from the United Kingdom.
17th & 18th Century Nichols Collection Newspapers
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
17th and 18th Century Nichols Collection Newspapers Part of the British Library Newspapers collection, 17th and 18th Century Nichols Collection Newspapers is full text, fully searchable digital archive of newspapers and news pamphlets from the United Kingdom.
19th Century UK Periodicals
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Two of a five-series periodical collection covering British life in the Victorian age. Series 1: New Readerships includes a wide variety of periodicals that reflect the changes and influences in political and rural life, children's literature and leisure. Series II: Empire covers the expansion of the Empire, addressing economic as well as non-mercantile aspects of British expansionism. The two series, which can be searched separately or together, draw from the collections of the British Library, National Library of Scotland, National Library of Australia and National Library of South Africa.
19th Century English Language Journals Of The Far East
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Six English-language journals published during the nineteenth century by missionaries and early sinologists. They pertain mostly to China but Japan and Southeast Asia are also covered. They include articles on a wide range of religious, economic, political, and cultural subjects.
20th Century Media Information Database
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
The 20th Century Media Information Database is an article-level index to the magazines and a portion of the newspapers in the Gordon W. Prange Collection. The publications date from the early years of the Allied Occupation of Japan, 1945--1949
60 Minutes: 1997-2014
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Provides online full-episode access to all 60 Minutes broadcasts from 1997-2014, including many episodes not widely not seen since their original broadcast.
1980s Culture and Society
This opens a pop-up window to share the URL for this database
Compare grassroots media with official records to explore political, social and welfare issues of the 1980s such as the rise of conservatism, nuclear threat, and the AIDS crisis. Material is drawn from volunteer-led cooperatives to national archives, and spans the US and the UK with additional content from Australia and Canada
 Specialist
 College
 Library Location
Problems with our databases?
 Use our Report a Problem form here.
Quick Links

Journal Finder

Citation Finder

Reload Button

 Current as of December 2023

 Most electronic resources provided through the University of Maryland are protected by copyright and subject to a variety of restrictions on access and use.

 Common restrictions include prohibitions on non-academic use and limits on downloading and printing an excessive portion of any database or publication.

 Content from Databases may not be used in combination with artificial intelligence (AI) tools, including to train an algorithm; test, process, analyze, or generate output; or develop any for of a derivative tool.

 Users should always consult the terms governing use (often referred to as "Terms and Conditions" or "Conditions of Use") on the home page of a resource to inform themselves of restrictions and assure their use complies with copyright and contractual restrictions.

Popular Databases
Academic Search Ultimate

Multi-disciplinary database providing information for nearly every area of academic study. Includes an enormous collection of the most valuable peer-reviewed full text journals, as well as additional journals, magazines, newspapers and books. Multidisciplinary subjects including: social sciences, humanities, education, computer sciences, engineering, physics, chemistry, language & linguistics, arts & literature, medicine, ethnic studies. 1965- present.

Nexis Uni

Nexis Uni (formerly LexisNexis Academic) provides fulltext to news, business and legal information. Newspapers date back to the 1970's. Please Note: The Washington Post is no longer included in Nexis Uni.The National Newspapers Core database includes the Washington Post.

JSTOR
Electronic archive of core journals in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences. Includes complete runs of journals with full-text of all articles published from volume 1, issue 1. Please note, most journals have a “moving wall” (time lag) of three to five years between the most current issue published and content available on JSTOR. Coverage spans the humanities, sciences, and social sciences.
New / Trial Databases
We are not evaluating any trial resources at this time.
Address: McKeldin Library, 7649 Library Lane, College Park, MD 20742-7011
(301) 405-0800 | Ask a Librarian


Our Libraries
McKeldin Library (Main)
Architecture Library
Art Library
Hornbake Library
Michelle Smith Performing Arts Library
Priddy Library (Universities at Shady Grove)
Severn Library
STEM Library
Library Hours
Our Community
Share Feedback
Support the Libraries
Contact a Subject Specialist
Libraries' Directory
Careers
ASK A LIBRARIAN
MAKE A GIFT

© 2022 University Libraries, University of Maryland.

Privacy Policy | Give Now | Website Feedback | Web Accessibility

Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
