Title: Situation in Ukraine

URL Source: https://franceintheus.org/spip.php?article10690

Published Time: Mon, 12 Jan 2026 08:46:37 GMT

Markdown Content:
### Mme Catherine Colonna’s participation in the informal meeting of European Union foreign ministers with Ukraine in Kyiv – Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**Paris, October 2, 2023)**

Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, is taking part in the informal meeting of European Union foreign ministers with Ukraine, which is being held exceptionally in Kyiv. As the Minister has pointed out, this first is a sign of the European Union’s resolute support for Ukraine.

Building on the efforts made in the high-level week of the 74th United Nations General Assembly, the ministers will talk to their Ukrainian colleague Mr Dmytro Kuleba about continuing Europe’s support for Ukraine in every field. As the European Union pledged at the European Council of 29-30 June 2023 and in the declaration of 12 July 2023, this support is baked into the long term. Mme Colonna will emphasize the importance of defining the parameters for lasting support, particularly at military level, based on Ukraine’s needs.

Mme Colonna will call for progress on establishing a form of European backing for Ukraine’s reforms and reconstruction that supports Ukraine’s prospects for joining the European Union.

The Minister will also recall the significant efforts made by the European Union, particularly through the Solidarity Lanes, to ensure Ukraine is capable of exporting its agricultural production and contributing to global food security. The ministers will discuss the support of global partners, as Russia continues to turn food security into a political weapon./.

### France condemns Russia’s organization of sham elections on Ukrainian territory – Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**Paris, September 8, 2023)**

France strongly condemns Russia’s organization of sham elections on Ukrainian territory, and particularly in the autonomous republic of Crimea, the city of Sevastopol and the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson. These supposed elections are devoid of all legitimacy and are being held in territories which Russia is illegally occupying, as emphasized by Resolution A/RES/ES-11/4, adopted with a very large majority by the United Nations General Assembly on 12 October 2022.

France denounces the holding of these pseudo-elections and will not recognize their “results”. It calls on Russia to halt its war of aggression immediately, abandon its imperialist undertaking and withdraw its troops from the whole territory of Ukraine under its internationally recognized borders.

France pays tribute to the courage and resilience of the Ukrainian people, who are facing up to Russian attacks every day and suffering the many violations of international law of which Russia is guilty. France is continuing and will continue its support for Ukraine in every area, for as long as it takes./.

### France condemns the latest round of Russian strikes against Ukraine

**Paris, August 10, 2023)**

France utterly condemns yesterday’s Russian airstrikes against the southern Ukrainian region of Zaporizhzhia. These latest strikes killed at least two civilians and injured a dozen others.

These attacks once again targeted a residential neighborhood and civilian infrastructure, illustrating Russia’s contempt for all principles of international humanitarian law, which it flagrantly continues to violate.

As Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna has repeatedly emphasized, such acts are war crimes and cannot go unpunished. France is committed and will remain committed to bolstering its military support for Ukraine, in particular by working closely with its partners to strengthen Ukraine’s air defenses. Lastly, France maintains its full support for Ukrainian and international courts in an effort to combat impunity for the crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine.

### Interview given by Mme Laurence Boone, Minister of State for Europe, attached to the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, to LCI (excerpt)

**Paris, August 7, 2023)**

(…)

If we talk about what’s happening in Russia and Ukraine, the European Union – not you, but the European Union – has been severely criticized in recent days because observers, or at any rate those who were involved, believe it was very weak in its condemnation of Russia’s bombardment of the Danube ports. Well, Ukraine’s Black Sea ports are impracticable because they’re under fire from the Russian navy, so everything goes via the Danube, and some of them have been bombarded, 40,000 tonnes of grain have been lost and the European Union has been virtually inaudible. Have you noticed this, do you deplore it, and do you say that, for those attacks too, we must be extremely firm vis-à-vis the Russians?

THE MINISTER – Of course, but then I don’t understand at all why people are saying that. There were condemnations from Josep Borrell, there were condemnations from the whole European community. I get the impression that people are rather hitting the wrong target, in fact. After all, the absolute cynicism lies on Russia’s side, and furthermore I don’t know what role it may have played in this perception. Why does it lie on Russia’s side? They’re stopping, they’re blocking the Black Sea and actually carrying out these attacks on the Danube, and they’re doing so and bombarding grain silos at harvest time, so the silos are full. Last year 41 million tonnes of grain passed through the Black Sea, and at the same time – and this is where we see the cynicism again – Putin is proposing to six African countries to send them 25,000 tonnes, as opposed to 41 million tonnes that were bound for 45 countries, half of which are among the most vulnerable. So all I see in this is actually a bizarre attempt to undermine what the European Union is doing. The cynicism – we must make no mistake – lies on Russia’s side.

OK. And when you see the Belarusian tyrant Lukashenko flying his helicopters in the skies of Poland, do you tell yourself it’s a Polish problem, or a NATO problem, or a European Union problem? Who must handle this?

THE MINISTER – Well, I’ll tell you… so it is indeed a European problem; moreover, as you know, Lukashenko has chosen sides, and the European Union is applying to Belarus virtually all the sanctions it’s applying to Russia. So we too have made a choice here. That’s the first thing. The second thing is that NATO is actually following very carefully what’s currently happening, NATO has a deterrence and defence posture that is robust and responsive, and we, in partnership with our allies and all our partners, including Poland, are obviously being very vigilant and following [the situation] day by day, and Poland itself has strengthened its borders, and the sanctions obviously include ones on industry… so it’s both European and NATO, and we are of course on the alert.

Are you pinning great hopes, not on mediation itself but – because he has more than mediation, he holds the cards – on Mohammed bin Salman, i.e. Saudi Arabia, who says, “I’m going to propose a peace plan between Ukraine and Russia”, and some are listening to him sympathetically? Do you really believe in that possibility?

THE MINISTER – I don’t think he’s proposed his peace plan. What I find very positive is that we have in Saudi Arabia a whole spectrum of countries, including the BRICS, including Brazil, China, South Africa – people said this global South ultimately didn’t know which side it was on. Well, it’s clearly on the side of peace, democracy and the protection of borders. So that’s a first point that is extremely positive, the number of participants [in the Jeddah summit] and who those participants are. The second is, why did they go? They also went because they’re worried about the disastrous consequences of this war, not only on food security – and we were talking about this earlier, with Putin’s cynicism on grain, and obviously when there are consequences on food security there are also consequences on stability in many regions of the world. And I really think they’re also worried about this challenge to what are, perhaps slightly pompously, called the principles of the United Nations Charter, but which are the principles of territorial integrity, with clearly defined borders. So – and this is my second point – I find it very reassuring to see all these countries together, ready to talk about it. And thirdly, because you were talking about the peace plan: they worked on the basis of Zelenskyy’s 10-point peace plan, which you’re aware of. And they’re going to continue working on it, which is actually very positive, because what specifically is the idea? The idea is to arrive at a peace plan that Ukraine can present when it decides to, which is supported by a large part of the world, and this in fact is what’s currently being built. So yes, it may surprise you, but I find it positive.

No, no, not at all, I perfectly understand your point of view. Some people are saying increasingly loud and clear that since this war can’t last for ever, the Ukrainians are bound to lose in the end because Western support is going to wane, fizzle out, particularly if Mr Trump is re-elected in the United States. So, deep down, are you – you, Europe’s political leaders – starting to imagine something like that, that we’re going to run out of steam?

THE MINISTER – Firstly, this absolutely isn’t the assumption we’re working on; moreover, as President Macron and Minister Colonna have said, we’ll provide as much support as necessary, like all the countries of the European Union. That’s the first thing. The second is that, on the other hand, what we’re preparing, what we’re working on is effectively the reconstruction, and the way we’re going to rebuild Ukraine, both in terms of what’s very much “material” – infrastructure, bridges, electricity, energy – and then rebuild in a way which also facilitates its ever deeper association with the European Union. Then there’s obviously concern about the US election, and that’s why we Europeans must be absolutely ready to respond, compensate, if ever the election means there’ll be less support, but I think that’s really what we’re in the process of building, and as you can see… obviously it’s hard work, it isn’t always easy but, all the same, up to now we’ve had very, very great European unity both in terms of support in weapons, support in the defence industry, and for starting the reconstruction, because we began talking about it a year ago, and as you know, we’ve even got a special envoy for reconstruction. (…)./.

### France condemns Russian strikes against Ukraine – Communiqué issued by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**Paris, August 6, 2023)**

France condemns in the strongest terms the new series of missile and drone strikes that hit Ukraine on 5 and 6 August, particularly a blood transfusion centre in the east of the country, an attack that killed and injured several people.

These Russian strikes deliberately targeted the civilian population, another flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. As the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Catherine Colonna, has repeatedly emphasized, these unacceptable acts constitute war crimes and cannot go unpunished. In close coordination with its partners, France will continue to supply Ukraine with the necessary aid to enable it to defend itself, and will also continue its support for the Ukrainian courts and the International Criminal Court to combat impunity for the crimes committed by Russia./.

### Germany/Poland – Weimar Triangle press conference – Statements by M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic

**Paris, June 12, 2023)**

= Check against delivery =

Thank you for being here in Paris today following our meeting in the same format in February on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference, which allowed us to talk about military, economic and humanitarian support for Ukraine. Indeed, the situation in Ukraine today calls for us to continue this close coordination and together think about how we can best respond collectively.

The consultation between our three countries helps strengthen Europe’s unity and resolve, which is so necessary in the current period. I emphasized this only recently, with the Chancellor last week. I reiterated it in Bratislava two weeks ago. The war of aggression waged by Russia is already a strategic and geopolitical failure for the aggressor. It’s clear too that Ukraine won’t be conquered and the only peace conceivable today is that based on international law and the Ukrainian people’s sovereign choice.

Our three countries, with the European Union Member States and our allies, are committed to unreservedly supporting Ukraine and strengthening our own defence capabilities so that we’re equal to the task of responding to this crisis, and France is playing its full part in this.

Ukraine is defending itself with exemplary courage, while facing huge challenges, as the destruction of the Nova Kakhovka dam sadly reminded us last week. This is why our unfailing support for Ukraine must be maintained over the long term, be it political, military, economic, humanitarian or geared to reconstruction. We’ll work to ensure not just that Russia doesn’t emerge victorious from this sad experience, but that it cannot repeat it.

Our meeting today comes before a major diplomatic and strategic series of meetings, since after our recent meeting in Moldova, coming up we’ve got the European Council of 29 and 30 June and the NATO summit in Vilnius on 11 and 12 July. These two events must enable us to map out a way forward and give a clear vision of the future of our collective security. That’s what we’ll be talking about together this evening: the question of security guarantees for Ukraine, the support, the terms I’ve just stated and [the support] NATO also wants to lend Ukraine to give it all the prospects it is entitled to. Twenty years ago, some people talked about new Europe and old Europe to highlight our divisions.

Today we’re together, united, proactive, capable and determined that Ukraine’s victory should serve our common project for peace and security on our continent. And I think this Weimar format is precisely that of a united Europe which is resisting today, which wants victory and is also building the architecture for a safer and more stable Europe of tomorrow.

Thank you./.

### Joint statement by M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**Chișinău, - June 1, 2023)**

We, Presidents of Ukraine and France, met today in Chișinău, Republic of Moldova, on the margins of the Second European Political Community Summit.

The Presidents of Ukraine and France reiterated their agreement, reached during the bilateral meeting in Paris on 14 May 2023 to help to protect Ukraine’s population against Russian strikes through France’s support to air defence capabilities of Ukraine.

As it was agreed at the 12th meeting in the Ramstein format on 25 May 2023 we confirmed the readiness to develop the framework to start the training of Ukrainian combat aircraft pilots when appropriate for Ukranian Air Force.

Сonsidering parallel consultations with the US and others willing countries, we have tasked our ministers of defence to work together in order to prepare formal decision on concrete scope and the mechanism of the training of pilots and technical staff, based on the request of the Ukrainian side, to be taken at the next Ramstein meeting with all nations part of the fighter pilots’ training initiative./.

### Condemnation of the 18th salvo of Russian strikes against Ukraine – Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**(Paris - June 1, 2023)**

France utterly condemns the waves of Russian missile strikes, particularly by Iskander ballistic missiles, which have once again targeted Kyiv. This is the 18th attack on the capital since the beginning of May.

The strikes deliberately targeted civilian objectives again, in flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. They reportedly claimed the lives of three people, two of them children, and wounded at least 14 others, according to a provisional toll by the Ukrainian authorities.

As Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, has repeatedly stressed, these unacceptable acts constitute war crimes and cannot go unpunished. France will continue to lend support to the Ukrainian courts and the International Criminal Court to combat impunity for such crimes.

With 47 States meeting at the second European Political Community summit in Chisinau in Moldova, close to Ukraine, Russia appears isolated in its pursuit of escalation. France will continue its assistance to Ukraine in every sector for as long as necessary, to help it resist Russia’s illegal aggression./.

### Interview given by Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, to France 2 (excerpt)

**(Paris - May 23, 2023)**

(…)

The situation is still confused in Ukraine, around the ruined battlefield the city of Bakhmut has become. According to your information, has the city fallen into the Russians’ hands, yes or no?

THE MINISTER – I can’t comment on the situation on the ground day by day, district by district.

Because you don’t know, or…?

THE MINISTER – We have no special information and we look at what the Ukrainian authorities say. This war is going on in their country. Ukraine is under attack, subject to aggression by Russia. I think what you have to do, perhaps, is put things back in perspective: it’ll soon be 500 days since Russia attacked Ukraine. And in nearly 500 days, it’s failed. It’s achieved none of its objectives. Kyiv hasn’t fallen; Ukraine hasn’t crumbled; the European Union has reacted strongly and with unity, and Ukraine’s forces are preparing to conduct a counter-offensive; not to mention the diplomatic front, where Ukraine is able to explain itself better to large countries that didn’t always understand it, whereas Russia is treading water, and at the UN, in particular at the General Assembly, it’s absolutely not managing to get support on its position.

How would you describe relations between France and Russia today? Is it an enemy? Is it an adversary? Is it still a partner? What is Russia?

THE MINISTER – No, it’s not an enemy. As a country, Russia is a great country on our continent, which we respect, but we’d like it to behave differently. So you have to distinguish between the country and its current policy.

Are we still talking to the Russians?

THE MINISTER – We sometimes talk to each other at various levels, including ministerial level, even though we do so rarely. We have an embassy there, we have contacts of all kinds. But we deeply disagree with an aggression carried out by Russia against a sovereign country, which violates all the basic principles of international law and all the principles underpinning life between nations. That’s why we must help Ukraine defend itself. It’s as simple as that.

Help Ukraine defend itself. Last weekend, at the G7 summit in Japan, US President Joe Biden was very clear. He opened the door to a delivery of American fighter planes – F-16s – to the Ukrainians. Is this progress on the American side likely to push France to review its stance, after so far limiting itself to training pilots? Does it change anything for us?

THE MINISTER – France – President Macron when he hosted President Zelenskyy last Sunday, 14 May I believe – was the first to say publicly that it envisaged basic training for Ukrainian pilots. This will probably enable them, by continuing their training elsewhere, to be in a position to pilot the latest generation of planes.

Training, that’s very clear. But what about sending planes?

THE MINISTER – Basic training, which can then perhaps be continued elsewhere, through final training. And you’re aware that the Ukrainians would like F-16s and that France has no F-16s.

But if the Ukrainians asked for Rafales, would they get Rafales?

THE MINISTER – I don’t think that makes any sense, given what they’ve asked for. They’d like to gradually build up [a fleet], and the United States now has no objection to other countries that possess F-16s perhaps making them available to Ukraine when the time comes.

You said last week that a Chinese envoy was expected in Paris this week. First of all, is he here? Has he arrived? When will he come?

THE MINISTER – He’s here. And he’ll have a meeting today at the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs with the Political Director, who is one of my ministry’s most important directors.

His mission is to try and find a political solution to the conflict. Does this political solution to the war seem to you possible, realistic, practicable, in the short term?

THE MINISTER – I think any efforts that contribute to the search for peace, a peace based on the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter, are welcome. But it must be this type of negotiation and this type of peace that are sought, i.e. respect for States’ territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty. So yes, China very often recalls its commitment to those principles. We have to see whether it wants to further them in a way that takes account of a sovereign country’s legitimate interests.

In other words, whether China wants to put a bit of pressure on Russia to say things, to say things…?

THE MINISTER – We’ll see. It’s conducting a diplomatic tour, as others have done, including President Zelenskyy himself, to set out his position and argue in favour of his own peace plan, because Ukraine has set out a peace plan.

You’re also Minister for Europe. Dropping the diplomatic language for a second, would you say that in a few years’ time Ukraine will certainly be a member of the European Union?

THE MINISTER – Yes; it has to carry out fundamental reforms, as you know. It’s a country which comes from another system, which has progressed a great deal, but it now has European prospects.

In what timeframe? Can we already say?

THE MINISTER – No, it’s impossible to say.

Two years, five years, 10 years, later?

THE MINISTER – No, it’s impossible to say. I can’t answer that question and I don’t think there’s any pre-established answer. There’s a clear prospect of accession; the acceptance of a bid that has been received by the European Union Member States…

France’s support.

THE MINISTER – The unanimous support of France and the 27, nearly a year ago; and now a path which has been taken, which must be followed, and along which we’ll help Ukraine progress so that, when the time comes, it can join us, when it’s ready. (…)./.

### Joint declaration by France and Ukraine – Press release issued by the Presidency of the Republic¹

**(Paris - May 15, 2023)**

At their meeting in Paris on 14 May 2023, the Presidents of Ukraine and the French Republic issued the following declaration.

The presidents of Ukraine and France reiterated their unequivocal condemnation of Russia’s ongoing war of aggression against Ukraine. Ukraine has shown remarkable determination in exercising its inherent right to self-defence against this unprovoked and unjustified attack. Russia must immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw all its military forces from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders. France and Ukraine call specifically on Russia to withdraw from the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant (ZNPP), of which the irresponsible seizure and militarization by Russian armed forces is causing a grave threat.

France remains unwavering in its commitment to Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. France commends the determination and courage of the Ukrainian people and armed forces and acknowledges their significant contribution to the security of the European continent and beyond. France will continue its political, financial, humanitarian and military support to Ukraine for as long as it takes – individually and through international cooperation within the European Union, NATO, the United Nations and in other formats. By defending the security of the European continent, France, Ukraine and other partners are also safeguarding the rules-based international order.

The military support provided by France since the beginning of the war in order to allow Ukraine to defend itself continues, as new packages are being prepared, constantly taking into account the most urgent and immediate needs of Ukraine to strengthen its defence capabilities. France is aiming at providing full capacities in all areas. In the coming weeks, France will train and equip several battalions with tens of armoured vehicles and light tanks including AMX-10RC. Besides, France is focusing its effort in supporting Ukraine’s air defence capacities in order to defend its population against Russian strikes. In addition to its national contribution, the French Republic is actively involved in the measures of the European Union and NATO in the military assistance to Ukraine and in the training of Ukrainian soldiers.

Beyond the military assistance, France has been providing Ukraine with civilian assistance, including financial, humanitarian and emergency support. In particular, France has sent to Ukraine two mobile DNA laboratories to strengthen Ukraine’s capacity to prosecute war crimes. This assistance will continue to grow.

France supports Ukraine’s initiative for a just and sustainable peace based on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Ukrainian Peace Formula includes a variety of important objectives, many of which France is already working on. France expresses its support to the Ukrainian Peace Formula and stands ready to cooperate with Ukraine to ensure as wide international participation as possible in a Global Peace Summit to be convened in the coming months on the basis of the Ukraine Peace Formula proposal and other possible good-faith proposals. 

 Ukraine and France are determined to fight against impunity, and underline their firm commitment to bringing to justice those responsible for war crimes and other atrocity crimes committed in connection with Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. France is participating in ongoing international efforts, in cooperation with Ukraine, to ensure accountability through the establishment of an appropriate mechanism for prosecuting the crime of aggression. Broad international support is key in this regard, since it provides maximum international legitimacy while ensuring the prosecution of the political leadership. Therefore, while participating in the Core Group on achieving accountability for the crime of aggression against Ukraine, France encourages other countries to join and to build international support for the creation of an ad hoc tribunal. France welcomes the agreement on the new International Centre for Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression against Ukraine (ICPA) in The Hague, and looks forward to its launch as soon as possible.

Ukraine and France reiterate their support for the investigations of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, which are a step towards accountability, and have taken note of the court’s arrest warrants. France has provided additional support to the International Criminal Court in order to enhance its capacities in the framework of the war of Russia against Ukraine.

Ukraine and France agree on the need to increase collective pressure on Russia through further sanctions to weaken Russia’s ability to continue its illegal war of aggression. Furthermore, they agree on the need to strengthen efforts to ensure the effective implementation of sanctions and to prevent and counter circumvention in and by third countries.

Ukraine and France will continue to work together with others to develop mechanisms to provide compensation for losses, injuries and damages caused by the Russian aggression. To this end, the international register of damage, to be presented at the Reykjavik Summit of the Council of Europe on 16-17 May 2023, is an important milestone. Our efforts will continue to explore appropriate options for the financing of a compensation mechanism, including a sound legal basis for the use of frozen and immobilized Russian assets, to support Ukraine’s reconstruction and for the purposes of reparation.

Ukraine and France remain also determined to support countries suffering from the consequences of the Russian war, notably to reduce the consequences of the food crisis. In this regard, France emphasizes the importance of Ukraine’s consistent efforts to continue the Black Sea Grain Initiative and launch the Grain from Ukraine Humanitarian Programme, aimed at enhancing global food security. Ukraine highly appreciates France’s support for the Grain from Ukraine Humanitarian Programme and encourages further strengthening of the relevant support.

 Ukraine welcomes the fact that France organized an international conference on 13 December, which led to the establishment of the "Paris Mechanism" for better coordination of emergency aid. France, together with international organizations and partners, is committed to participate in the recovery and reconstruction of Ukraine after the war. Already now, it is important to lay the ground for an ambitious and long-term engagement that will create opportunities and enable the Ukrainian people to rebuild their country. Engaging all relevant partners, including private companies and internationally, with the aim of securing the financial support, investments and knowledge needed, is essential to ensure a prosperous future for Ukraine.

The future of Ukraine and its people lies within the European family. The European Union has already recognized the European perspective of Ukraine and granted Ukraine the status of candidate country. France strongly supports Ukraine in its reform efforts and in meeting before the end of 2023 the required conditions, looking forward to the European Commission’s report, with a view to start accession negotiations. Ukraine and France call on the EU to continue supporting the country in all fields. Regarding military support, they welcome the recent agreements aiming at delivering more ammunition and missiles to Ukraine, notably through the expansion of the European industrial base. Furthermore, Ukraine has a key role to play within the newly-founded European Political Community and will work towards the success of the Chisinau Summit, together with France and Moldova.

In the NATO framework, France continues to focus on the immediate support to Ukraine. France continues its strong support to bolster Ukraine’s capacity to defend itself, and recalls that Ukraine has the right to choose its own security arrangements. France fully supports the NATO-Ukraine Commission as a venue to further increase and expand the ongoing cooperation to help fulfil Ukraine’s path towards the Euro-Atlantic family, consistent with the Bucharest Declaration. Ukraine and France look forward to addressing these issues at the NATO summit in Vilnius in July 2023./.

_¹Source of English text: Elysée Palace website._

### New Russian air strikes – Press briefing by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**(Paris - May 9, 2023)**

France condemns in the strongest possible terms the missile and drone strikes that again targeted Ukraine in recent days, particularly the city of Kyiv. While Vladimir Putin falsely claims that Russia is the victim of an attack by the “collective West,” it is Ukraine and its people that are continually subjected to massive missile and drone strikes.

These strikes and bombardments once again deliberately targeted civilian objectives in flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. They once again underscore Russia’s desire to continue escalating its war of aggression against Ukraine. Yesterday and the day before yesterday, a Ukrainian Red Cross warehouse full of humanitarian aid was destroyed in Odesa and a mobile hospital was damaged by Russian strikes in Mykolaiv.

As Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna has stressed repeatedly, these unacceptable actions are war crimes and cannot go unpunished. France will continue to provide support to Ukrainian courts and to the International Criminal Court to combat impunity for such crimes. It will also continue its military and civilian support in order to bolster Ukrainian resilience for as long as necessary. (…)

### Interview given by Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, to France Inter (excerpt)

**(Paris - May 4, 2023)**

(…)

Throughout the winter the Russian army tried to regain the city of Bakhmut; it didn’t entirely succeed. For months the Ukrainian army has been preparing a counter-offensive to recapture territories. Does it have the capacity to do so? And I’m not going to ask you whether we’re on the eve of this great counter-offensive, but seen from the Quai d’Orsay what scenarios are being envisaged at this stage, in terms of this war in Ukraine and what follows?

THE MINISTER – Indeed, I won’t be giving you the date of the Ukrainian counter-offensive, which is being prepared. I don’t know it and I don’t think it’s been set, either. It’s obviously up to the Ukrainians to decide on the moment when it’ll be possible and the moment it’ll be effective. What’s certain, however, is that we must continue helping Ukraine to defend itself, on the one hand, and to conduct a counter-offensive to regain ground, restore a more favourable balance of power, and maybe hope Russia returns to the negotiating table. Let me remind you, even so, that it was Ukraine which was attacked by Russia, Russia took the decision to invade it, it’s occupying 20% of its territory, it’s waging a war there with methods that violate international humanitarian law – executions, crimes, rapes, child deportations – and this must stop. But it’s up to the Ukrainians to be in control of their destiny, with our help. And why are we helping Ukraine? If you’ll allow me one more second…

Go ahead.

THE MINISTER – It’s because, of course, a country that is attacked has the right to defend itself. The UN Charter says so, but also because we must enforce the principles enabling people to live in peace and stability in international society, namely independence, non-aggression, territorial integrity – all those principles that are being trampled on by Russia.

Indeed, and at the heart of Europe. For the sake of our security, selfishly, must Ukraine win this war?

THE MINISTER – The Russian aggression must be defeated. I’ve just told you why: re-examining what underpins the international order and international life, what enables us to live in relative stability – even if that stability is currently affected by excessive disorder –, is essential to everyone, because if an attack were to be rewarded, then believe me it would be a lesson, it would happen elsewhere, and no one would be safe.

The Russian aggression must be defeated – does that mean Crimea will also have to return to Ukraine at the end of this conflict?

THE MINISTER – If you’re asking me what Ukraine’s internationally recognized territory is, I’ll reply to you, like everyone, that Crimea is part of it.

So if negotiations begin in the coming months or years, will they have to lead to Crimea returning to the Ukrainian fold?

THE MINISTER – That’s the aim at any rate; negotiations must still take place. And you know today that whereas Ukraine has always advocated dialogue, only recently set out a peace plan at the end of last year and is continuing to seek peace, Russia, for its part, is showing no signs of being prepared to conduct negotiations in good faith.

Can negotiations be conducted with Vladimir Putin, who has an arrest warrant against him issued by the International Criminal Court?

THE MINISTER – The arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court means the person implicated, in this case him and one other Russian person, the Commissioner for Children’s Rights – very inappropriately named because she’s responsible for the programme of abductions and deportations of Ukrainian children –, would be arrested if they travelled to a State party to the Rome Statute, which is the foundation of the International Criminal Court. As long as he’s in Russia, with Russia not being a party to the Court, this scenario doesn’t arise. However…

So can he be put at a negotiating table…

THE MINISTER – …if your question is more political than legal, and I think it is…

It is.

THE MINISTER – There must indeed be negotiations, when the time comes and if it’s possible – and if it’s possible –, because, I repeat, with those now in power, Russia is showing no willingness to do so.

Can Emmanuel Macron – will he – talk to Vladimir Putin again, if Putin so wishes, for example?

THE MINISTER – It’s entirely possible: communication channels must be kept open – we’ve done so and others are doing so; I don’t think President Macron and Vladimir Putin have spoken since last autumn, they discussed the International [Atomic] Energy Agency’s return to the Zaporizhzhia and other power stations. Today instead it’s time to try and persuade [him] that it’s necessary to act differently. We made a lot of diplomatic efforts to ensure the United Nations General Assembly condemned the Russian aggression, that was done, and only recently we called quite simply for the complete, unconditional and immediate withdrawal of Russian troops.

Is the hand which for a long time, for months, has been held out to Vladimir Putin perhaps seen today as a strategic error? Or at any rate may it have been misunderstood by some of our European partners?

THE MINISTER – I don’t think so, and at any rate certainly not by the primary people concerned, namely the Ukrainians. President Zelenskyy’s advisers said so again, I think, a few days ago: it’s desirable for there to be channels of dialogue, it enables messages to be sent, it may allow calls for a return to reality when necessary. To say we’re being heard, no, that would be too simple, but we’re convinced that communication channels remain essential. One of the Russian leadership’s problems today is that it’s confined to a parallel reality, and we mustn’t reinforce, we have no interest in reinforcing this mental isolation, which, among other things, led to the strategic error President Putin made of deciding to invade a neighbour that in no way threatened him. And that’s what was done on 24 February last year. It’s a mistake. That mistake comes from a failure to appreciate reality, as subsequent history has shown.

Would you say this isolation is being reinforced as the days and weeks go by?

THE MINISTER – That’s the risk; it’s the reason why all communication channels with Russia… We’re maintaining them, we have an embassy there, we have contacts with the various parties, but also the contacts we’re encouraging. For example, when the President went to China, he spoke at length to President Xi Jinping, the Chinese President, about the advantage there would be for him in influencing the Russian President, to make him “come to his senses”, as he put it.

It didn’t really work.

THE MINISTER – Barely a few weeks afterwards, President Xi Jinping called President Zelenskyy, which he hadn’t done…

But not Vladimir Putin to tell him to pull back.

THE MINISTER – There was no need because he’d just seen him, but if you read the Chinese-Russian statement that was negotiated by the two countries concerned, adopted when President Xi Jinping visited Moscow, you’ll see that the friendship isn’t perhaps what some people were saying and that distancing is possible; we’re encouraging it. China repeats its commitment to the major principles of international law; well, we’re encouraging it to do so, to say so, and to say so directly to Vladimir Putin.

Apart from a military defeat, what can bring Vladimir Putin back to reality, because you say he’s in a parallel reality?

THE MINISTER – First of all, obviously – and this is what we’re working on – we must help Ukraine regain a better position on the ground. The path of negotiations will undoubtedly require better results on the ground; that’s why we’re helping it to be capable of conducting a counter-offensive, just as we’re helping it diplomatically, politically, on the humanitarian level and also economically.

For this counter-offensive, weapons are needed: is France going to deliver more weapons to Ukraine in the coming weeks?

THE MINISTER – First of all I’d like to remind you that it’s been concentrating its efforts on the delivery of what’s useful, i.e. today essentially the Caesars, whose effectiveness the Ukrainians have learned to admire, I think…

These are the long-range howitzers France produces.

THE MINISTER – The especially effective and mobile long-range howitzers, but also anti-aircraft defence equipment, ammunition, and armoured personnel carriers, which enable them to advance while being protected…

And so more weapons, more deliveries to come?

THE MINISTER – We’ve been concentrating on Ukraine’s needs, in a constant dialogue with Ukraine, and I repeat, the Ukrainians appreciate what we’ve done. They appreciate it especially because we’ve delivered everything we’ve promised, and we’ve delivered it on time. And yes, indeed, we’re working on a new assistance package.

On this weapons issue, European Commissioner Thierry Breton yesterday set out the EU’s plan to supply Kyiv with a million munitions in a year. The European Union is going to release €500 million to help European manufacturers move into war-economy mode, as Thierry Breton put it. Is this possible? Does France support this plan?

THE MINISTER – Not only does it support it, it’s been supporting it to such an extent that the plan is a reality. There are three aspects to what was adopted just over a month ago. First of all, helping deliver ammunition to Ukraine swiftly, through a mechanism enabling reimbursement through what we call the European Peace Facility, to the tune of €2 billion, one tranche of which you’ve just mentioned. The second element is joint purchasing mechanisms, also in order to act more quickly and perhaps also at a better cost. And the third element, the one you were talking about, is strengthening European industry’s production capacity, because while we had excellent equipment and a technological lead in many fields, there was actually no reason to have mass production. So now it’s necessary to increase that production to help Ukraine more and deliver to it the ammunition it needs to defend itself and conduct a counter-offensive.

I’m going to ask more personally how you feel. You’re a career diplomat, it’s already a long career…

THE MINISTER – Very long – thanks for emphasizing my age!

No, I’m not saying your age…

THE MINISTER – Go on, go on.

I’m just saying you have a lot of experience, you’ve seen a huge number of things. What’s your feeling when you see Europe rearming?

THE MINISTER – Europe is defending its values and its freedom of choice. It’s important to remind people – I tried to do so earlier – that what’s at stake in this war in Ukraine is obviously the fate of Ukraine and the Ukrainians, but it’s also, as you said, the European continent’s stability. But beyond that, above all it’s our ability to live in a world where rules are observed. So we’re defending our values, we’re defending our interests by defending Ukraine. And to that end, if we must help it defend itself, which is a legitimate right, we must do so, it’s in our interest. I repeat that if an attack is rewarded, other attacks will occur elsewhere. We don’t want to see that in Europe.

You talk about the continent’s stability: does it necessarily involve Ukraine becoming a member of NATO? The Poles and the Baltic countries are in favour of that; as for the Americans and Germans, they’re very reluctant. What is France’s position?

THE MINISTER – NATO’s policy since 2008 has been to reaffirm a basic principle of international law, the principle underpinning the reality of States, namely that everyone must be free to choose their alliances, so my answer to you is that this “open-door” policy is still there and it’s right to reaffirm it, it’s a possibility. Now, it seems to me that in the current circumstances we’ve just been talking about, the priority for Ukraine is to be able to defend itself, regain its sovereignty…

So the priority isn’t NATO membership?

THE MINISTER – The priority is actually to stop being attacked, occupied and targeted by missiles and bombs every day, as we saw again last night.

The problem is Article 5 of the treaty, which says an attack on one member of the Alliance is regarded as an attack on all the others. Does that oblige us to invest even more in the conflict?

THE MINISTER – We have invested, as much as necessary, with our European partners, our friends and allies, for as long as it takes, as you know, and on every aspect of support which is not only military but also humanitarian, economic, financial and legal. You were talking earlier about the ICC: we, the various parties, are helping the ICC to do its work, because France was among those countries that took matters to the International Criminal Court, just as it’s helping the Ukrainian courts in practical terms. The support being provided to Ukraine isn’t confined to the military aspect, even though it’s obviously important because a war is unfolding there.

Some people believe we’re witnessing today the first steps towards a genuine Defence Europe, a Europe which wants to be sovereign in order to ensure its security. But what purpose does it serve? And what would this Defence Europe be, when the first consequence is that NATO is very far from being brain-dead, NATO is emerging stronger from the crisis and most Europeans – especially in the east – believe that their best security won’t perhaps be found in Brussels, but Washington?

THE MINISTER – If you’re referring – and perhaps you are – to statements the President made in an interview at the end of 2019…

When I say NATO is brain-dead?

THE MINISTER – …you have to recognize – and the President made a clear statement calling for a strategic rewakening, which we’ve seen and are still seeing develop. Incidentally, you’ve seen that NATO is so attractive that, indeed, Finland and Sweden want to join it to increase…

Is the reawakening a result of Russia’s escalating invasion of Ukraine?

THE MINISTER – Not solely; it stems from things decided at the end of 2019 – the beginning of December, if my memory is correct – during the NATO summit, which took place just outside London, which President Macron participated in.

Without the invasion, would Finland still have wanted to join NATO?

THE MINISTER – Let me answer the second part of the question, which is an opportunity for me to emphasize that European defence complements the Atlantic Alliance, and that the two strengthen each another, as the Atlantic Alliance itself says and as we see it. So it’s important that in parallel to what the Atlantic Alliance is doing – perhaps more ambitiously and nimbly than before – Europe builds itself sovereignty, not just sovereignty in the military sphere. We mustn’t talk only about European defence: we must talk about our industrial and economic sovereignty and that of investing in up-and-coming technology – everything which will mean Europe is free to make its own choices and be master of its destiny. Who would want the opposite?

(…) Will there be Russian athletes at the Paris 2024 Olympic Games?

THE MINISTER – It’s a decision for the International Olympic Committee, which is independent. That decision – since the 2024 Olympics are in 2024 – hasn’t been taken yet. The situation will need to be looked at, of course, ahead of the Olympics, since all this is being prepared. It isn’t a decision for France, in any case.

It won’t be France that decides?

THE MINISTER – It’s the International Olympic Committee which takes decisions about the organization of the Olympic Games.

So even though France doesn’t want Russian athletes in Paris…

THE MINISTER – If you’re asking me what I feel today, the situation we’re in…

If the Games were happening tomorrow?

THE MINISTER – …it would be difficult to consider everything to be normal, even though I know how committed the Olympic bodies are to the idea of a truce and neutrality. And what does neutrality mean, when a country wages a war with capabilities which don’t adhere to the laws of war, let me repeat, and a large proportion of whose athletes are in, are often forced to be in the armed forces? (…)./.

### Telephone conversation between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Joe Biden, President of the United States of America – Press release issued by the Presidency of the Republic

**(Paris - March 8, 2023)**

President Macron spoke on the telephone to Mr Joe Biden, President of the United States of America, on Tuesday 7 March 2023.

The two presidents talked about the situation in Ukraine. They reiterated their determination to provide Ukraine with the necessary military support for as long as necessary to thwart the Russian aggression. They likewise reaffirmed their shared goal of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity being restored.

Following on from the discussions in Paris on 8 February 2023 with the Ukrainian President and German Chancellor, President Macron talked to his American counterpart about the longer-term prospects of a return to peace in Europe. Among other things, the two presidents discussed security guarantees which could be provided to Ukraine in this framework.

President Macron also welcomed the continuation of discussions on the Inflation Reduction Act following the State visit in December 2022, in order for the legislation’s impact on European countries to be taken into account.

Finally, the two presidents talked about the situation in the Indo-Pacific region and in Iran./.

### Statement by G7 heads of State and government – Press release issued by the Presidency of the Republic¹

**(Paris - February 24, 2023)**

1. At the one-year mark of Russia’s brutal invasion of Ukraine, we, the Leaders of the Group of Seven (G7), met with Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to reaffirm our unwavering support for Ukraine for as long as it takes. Russia’s heinous attacks over the last 365 days have laid bare the cruelty of the ongoing aggression. We condemn Russia’s illegal, unjustifiable, and unprovoked war, disregard for the Charter of the United Nations (UN) and indifference to the impacts that its war is having on people worldwide. We salute the heroism of the Ukrainian people in their brave resistance. We commit to intensifying our diplomatic, financial and military support for Ukraine, to increasing the costs to Russia and those supporting its war effort, and to continuing to counter the negative impacts of the war on the rest of the world, particularly on the most vulnerable people.

2. Russia started this war and Russia can end this war. We call on Russia to stop its ongoing aggression and to immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw its troops from the entire internationally recognized territory of Ukraine. In the past year Russian forces have killed thousands of Ukrainians, caused millions to flee, and forcibly deported many thousands of Ukrainians, including children, to Russia. Russia has destroyed hospitals, schools, and energy and critical infrastructure, and left historic cities in ruins. In areas liberated from Russian forces, there is evidence of mass graves, sexual violence, torture and other atrocities. We strongly condemn all of Russia’s outrageous acts. Amidst Russia’s assault, Ukrainians are more united, proud and determined than ever.

3. Russia’s war against Ukraine is also an attack on the fundamental principles of sovereignty of nations, territorial integrity of States and respect for human rights. We remain united and resolute in our support of the UN Charter. We reiterate our unequivocal condemnation and firm rejection of the attempted illegal annexation by Russia of Ukraine’s Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions. As in the case of Crimea and Sevastopol, we will never recognize these illegal annexation attempts.

4. We reiterate that Russia’s irresponsible nuclear rhetoric is unacceptable, and any use of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons by Russia would be met with severe consequences. We recall the consensus achieved in Bali of all G20 members, including Russia, that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is inadmissible. We also recall the importance of the 77-year record of non-use of nuclear weapons. We deeply regret Russia’s decision to suspend the implementation of the New START treaty. We express our gravest concern over Russia’s continued occupation and control over the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant. The situation can only be resolved by complete withdrawal of Russian troops and equipment from the premises. We support the International Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) efforts to strengthen nuclear safety and security in Ukraine, including through the continuous presence of IAEA experts and the cessation of all combat operations in and around the plant and surrounding infrastructure.

5. We welcome the resolution A/ES-11/L.7 titled “Principles of the Charter of the United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine” resolution which was adopted with the broad support of the international community at the Emergency Special Session of the UN General Assembly yesterday. We remain committed to diplomacy and welcome and support President Zelenskyy’s earnest efforts to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in line with the UN Charter by outlining basic principles in his Peace Formula. With a view to a viable post-war peace settlement, we remain ready to reach arrangements together with Ukraine as well as interested countries and institutions on sustained security and other commitments to help Ukraine defend itself, secure its free and democratic future, and deter future Russian aggression.

6. We remain committed to coordinating efforts to meet Ukraine’s pressing military and defence equipment needs, with an immediate focus on air defence systems and capabilities, as well as necessary munitions and tanks.

7. Building on the results achieved during the international conference held in Paris on 13 December, we also reaffirm our commitment to provide additional humanitarian assistance to the Ukrainian people, assistance to support Ukraine’s energy sector, and other assistance in Ukraine and neighbouring countries, including to ensure access to healthcare including mental health. We welcome the establishment of the Multi-agency Donor Coordination Platform to help advance Ukraine’s reform agenda, promote private-sector-led sustainable growth, and ensure close coordination among international donors to deliver assistance in a coherent, transparent and accountable manner.

8. We will continue to help maintain Ukraine’s economic and financial stability, including addressing urgent short-term economic needs. In this context, we welcome the progress made by our finance ministers to increase our budget and economic support to $39 billion for 2023 and look forward to additional commitments. We ask finance ministers to continue engagement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Ukraine to deliver an ambitious programme by the end of March 2023 and to continue working together, with the IMF and others, for necessary budget support to Ukraine throughout and beyond 2023.

9. We support Ukraine’s reconstruction efforts, including the recovery of infrastructure destroyed by Russia’s aggression. It is essential that this process continues to involve a wide range of actors, including Ukrainian subnational entities and civil society, international financial institutions and organizations, and the private sector. The Ukraine Recovery Conference to be held in London in June this year will offer a venue for Ukraine, international partners, private sector and civil society to further promote momentum behind Ukraine’s recovery. At the same time, we will continue to support the determination of Ukraine to build a society free from corruption. We support the Ukrainian Government’s efforts to advance necessary institution-building in line with Ukraine’s European path, including in the judicial sector and promotion of the rule of law by empowering the independent Ukrainian anti-corruption institutions. In this regard, we reiterate our full confidence in the role of the G7 Ambassadors Group in supporting the implementation of the reform agenda.

10. We reaffirm our commitment to strengthening the unprecedented and coordinated sanctions and other economic measures the G7 and partner countries have taken to date to further counter Russia’s capacity to wage its illegal aggression. We remain committed to presenting a united front through the imposition of new coordinated economic actions against Russia in the days and weeks ahead. Specifically, we are taking the following new measures, consistent with our respective legal authorities and processes and international law:

(i) We will maintain, fully implement and expand the economic measures we have already imposed, including by preventing and responding to evasion and circumvention through the establishment of an Enforcement Coordination Mechanism to bolster compliance and enforcement of our measures and deny Russia the benefits of G7 economies. We call on third countries or other international actors who seek to evade or undermine our measures to cease providing material support to Russia’s war, or face severe costs. To deter this activity around the world, we are taking actions against third-country actors materially supporting Russia’s war in Ukraine. We also commit to further aligning measures, such as transit or services bans, including to prevent Russian circumvention.

(ii) We are committed to preventing Russia from finding new ways to acquire advanced materials, technology, and military and industrial equipment from our jurisdictions that it can use to develop its industrial sectors and further its violations of international law. To this end, we will adopt further measures to prevent Russia from accessing inputs that support its military and manufacturing sectors, including, among others, industrial machinery, tools, construction equipment, and other technology Russia is exploiting to rebuild its war machine.

(iii) We will continue to reduce Russia’s revenue to finance its illegal aggression by taking appropriate steps to limit Russia’s energy revenue and future extractive capabilities, building on the measures we have taken so far, including export bans and the price cap for seaborne Russian-origin crude oil and refined oil products. We commit to taking action in a way that mitigates spillover effects for energy security, in particular for the most vulnerable and affected countries.

(iv) Given the significant revenues that Russia extracts from the export of diamonds, we will work collectively on further measures on Russian diamonds, including rough and polished ones, working closely to engage key partners.

(v) We are taking additional measures in relation to Russia’s financial sector to further undermine Russia’s capacity to wage its illegal aggression. While coordinating to preserve financial channels for essential transactions, we will target additional Russian financial institutions to prevent circumvention of our measures.

(vi) We continue to impose targeted sanctions, including on those responsible for war crimes or human rights violations and abuses, exercising illegitimate authority in Ukraine, or who otherwise are profiting from the war.

11. We will continue our efforts to ensure Russia pays for Ukraine’s long-term reconstruction. Russia bears full responsibility for the war and the damage it has caused, including to Ukraine’s critical infrastructure. We collectively reaffirm the need for an international mechanism to register the damages Russia has inflicted. We are determined, consistent with our respective legal systems, that Russia’s sovereign assets in our jurisdictions will remain immobilized until there is a resolution to the conflict that addresses Russia’s violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and integrity. Any resolution to the conflict must ensure Russia pays for the damage it has caused. We will work with partners beyond the G7 which hold those Russian sovereign assets to build the broadest coalition possible to advance these objectives.

12. We are united in our determination to hold President Putin and those responsible to account, consistent with international law. We support investigations by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, the Prosecutor-General of Ukraine, and other national prosecutors who are able to establish jurisdiction under national law. In this regard, we support exploring efforts to develop an international centre for the prosecution of the crime of aggression against Ukraine (ICPA) which is linked to the existing Joint Investigation Team supported by Eurojust.

13. We deplore that many countries in the world have been severely affected by the repercussions of Russia’s war of aggression. Russia’s weaponization of food has caused global economic hardship and a rise in global food prices, increasing the cost of living of people, compounding the economic vulnerabilities of developing countries, and exacerbating already dire humanitarian crises and food insecurity around the world. We reiterate the G7’s united will to continue to provide rapid assistance, including food-related aid, to countries in need and affected populations and we will continue to design our restrictive measures to shield such populations from unintended consequences by ensuring food and fertilizers are carved out. We will continue to support food security and the availability and sustainable use of fertilizers to vulnerable countries in need of assistance and welcome the related work undertaken by the UN World Food Programme (WFP) and other relevant agencies. We recognize the importance of the EU-Ukraine Solidarity Lanes, President Zelenskyy’s Grain from Ukraine Initiative and the UN- and Turkey-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative (BSGI). In this context, we stress the importance of the automatic extension of the BSGI by 18 March and its expansion.

14. We also express our profound sympathy for all those affected by the horrifying earthquakes in Turkey and Syria. We stand in solidarity with the people of Turkey and Syria and pledge our continued support to tackling the consequences of this catastrophe. It is vital that humanitarian aid reaches all those who require it as efficiently as possible. We welcome the expansion of cross-border aid for an initial period of three months, and underscore that the humanitarian needs of those in northwest Syria should continue to be met. We also welcome the EU initiative to host a donor conference in support of the people in Turkey and Syria in March.

15. Above all, our solidarity will never waver in standing with Ukraine, in supporting countries and people in need, and in upholding the international order based on the rule of law.

_¹Source of English text: European Council website._

### Interview given by Mme Anne-Claire Legendre, Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson, to LCI (excerpts)

**(Paris - February 12, 2023)**

(…)

Military commentators are emphasizing the gaps in Russian organization after a year, or nearly a year, of fighting. (…) What is France’s assessment of this? (…) There was the first impression, with people – not just in France but generally – thinking Ukraine would never hold out in the face of the Russian giant, and it’s held out. (…) But at the same time President Zelenskyy himself is saying: these are difficult times for us.

THE SPOKESPERSON – What we’ve been able to see on the ground is a threefold Russian defeat: a tactical defeat, and we’ve seen everything Régis Genté [journalist] has described: logistical problems, equipment that hasn’t lived up to expectations, forces that are poorly trained and poorly prepared for this offensive; it obviously remains to be seen what the Russian army is preparing, and we can see a new mobilization effort being made. A diplomatic defeat too, with the international isolation that Vladimir Putin ultimately hadn’t foreseen. And also a moral defeat, of course, because we’re looking again at war crimes on the ground and a major international condemnation of Russia. (…)

In the space of a few days, a lot of things have happened, obviously with Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s visit to London, Paris – with the welcome you gave him – and then Brussels. When you see how France did everything possible to welcome and honour the President, really on the scale of a State visit, the Garde Républicaine, the honours. (…) And yet, the disappointment about the plane: for the time being there’s still disappointment about the plane. What exactly is the situation with that? We know Volodymyr Zelenskyy is very clear, he wants those planes, and France seems to be beating about the bush somewhat.

THE SPOKESPERSON – I wouldn’t present the situation in that way at all. The welcome given to Volodymyr Zelenskyy was a sign of the French people’s admiration, a sign of the appreciation shown to him by the French President in decorating him, as you know, with the highest insignia of the Légion d’honneur, the Grand Croix of the Légion d’honneur, the highest decoration he could be awarded. It gave President Macron – who is in extremely regular contact with him – another opportunity for an in-depth discussion about Ukraine’s priority needs. Currently the priority needs expressed to France are for artillery and anti-aircraft defence. On this, as you know– because the Ukrainian Minister of Defence was in Paris last week – we’ve made some new, very significant announcements in response to the Ukrainian request.

Well, there’s another request reiterated in the past few hours, echoing what Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on this channel: money, there’s Russian money in France – do we know roughly how much money belonging to Russian oligarchs?

THE SPOKESPERSON – Several types of funds have been frozen by European sanctions: €300 billion belonging to the Russian central bank has been frozen under sanctions, and €1.3 billion belonging to Russian oligarchs has been frozen in France.

What is France’s doctrine for the time being? Can we take this money compulsorily and give it to Ukraine?

THE SPOKESPERSON – At this stage, what the European sanctions provide for is a freeze, an immobilization. We can’t seize those assets unless there’s a judicial decision following a crime, a bypassing of those sanctions. So at this stage there’s no possibility of transferring those funds. But as you know, the European Commission has decided to work with new proposals, not to transfer the funds to Ukraine but to assess how far we could use the funds to contribute to reconstruction. (…)

President Macron presenting him [Zelenskyy] with the insignia of the Grand Croix of the Légion d’honneur was obviously the striking image. We’re going to see it again, of course: a lot of commentators have made the link with Vladimir Putin, because Vladimir Putin was awarded another Grand Croix of the Légion d’honneur. Is it tenable for France for them both to have a Grand Croix?

THE SPOKESPERSON – The President has responded very clearly about this: he signalled our admiration for President Zelenskyy, which is why he presented him – during that exceptional visit to Paris, which also showed the central role France plays in European unity…

That’s the clear part. The other part’s a bit less clear: about whether or not to withdraw the insignia of the Grand Croix from Vladimir Putin.

THE SPOKESPERSON – He said very clearly that the decision hadn’t been taken and was due to be looked at to see whether it was appropriate, but this wasn’t the case at this stage. (…)

Mme Colonna said on this channel: yes, we’re going to try and create an ad-hoc criminal tribunal. What stage is this at?

THE SPOKESPERSON – We’ve been working a great deal on justice issues, because it’s a priority for France for there to be justice in Ukraine and no impunity for the crimes committed. As you know, the ICC Prosecutor himself has spoken about possible war crimes, crimes against humanity, and so our first task was to support the International Criminal Court so it could go and investigate on the ground and gather all the evidence of war crimes which we’ve seen and The New York Times has reported. So this support is continuing; as you know, we’ve sent gendarmes and forensic doctors to support the investigators from the ICC and the Ukrainian prosecutor’s office on the ground. We’ve also send a DNA laboratory. There’s a second one that will be sent very soon, in the spring. And we’ve also heard the Ukrainians’ request to work on this issue of a special tribunal. There’s currently a working group in which France is taking part, and we’re ready to talk to them to see if it would be possible to have a hybrid tribunal, but for that to happen we’d have to ensure conditions of legitimacy and sufficient international consensus. (…)

Is Russia currently succeeding in splitting the international community?

THE SPOKESPERSON – No, it’s not succeeding, but it’s trying to. That’s what President Macron said at the United Nations General Assembly: our job today is to prevent that fracturing of the world. (…)./.

### France’s Assistance to Ukraine

**Paris - February 8, 2023)**

**France’s Assistance**
### Council agrees on further military support under the European Peace Facility – Press release issued by the Council of the European Union

**(Brussels - February 2, 2023)**

Ahead of the summit between the European Union and Ukraine, the Council today adopted assistance measures under the European Peace Facility (EPF) that provide further military assistance to the Armed Forces of Ukraine. These consist of a seventh package worth €500 million, and a new €45 million assistance measure supporting the training efforts of the European Union Military Assistance Mission in support of Ukraine (EUMAM Ukraine).

Ukraine should get all the necessary military equipment and training it needs to defend its territory and its people from Russia’s war of aggression. They are not just defending their country; they are also defending our common values and the basic principles of international law. Today’s new measures send a clear message at a crucial time: we will continue supporting Ukraine for as long as it takes and as long as it is needed.

With today’s decision, the EU is stepping up its support to Ukraine to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, and protect the civilian population against the ongoing Russian war of aggression. The seventh package will now bring the total EU contribution under the EPF for Ukraine to €3.6 billion.

The aim of the new assistance measure supporting the Armed Forces of Ukraine trained under EUMAM Ukraine is to provide necessary non-lethal equipment and supplies as well as services to back the training activities.

The mobilization of additional military assistance and support to the Armed Forces of Ukraine trained by EUMAM Ukraine demonstrates that the EU remains steadfast in its support for the Ukrainian military in defending the country against the escalating illegal aggression. Russia’s latest indiscriminate attacks on Ukrainian civilians and civilian infrastructure are additional proof of Russia’s complete disrespect for human rights and international law.

**Background**

Previous assistance measures under the EPF for Ukraine were agreed on 28 February, 23 March, 13 April, 23 May, 21 July and 17 October 2022.

On 17 October 2022, the Council adopted a decision establishing EUMAM Ukraine with an initial duration of two years. The mission is a direct response to Ukraine’s request for support addressed to the High Representative. It is intended to provide individual, collective and specialized training to Ukraine’s Armed Forces, as well as coordination and synchronization of Member States’ activities delivering the training.

In the face of Russia’s war of aggression, the EU stands resolutely with Ukraine and its people, and is unwavering in its support of Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, as well as of Ukraine’s inherent right of self-defence against the Russian aggression./.

### Telephone conversation between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**(Paris - January 24, 2023)**

President Macron spoke on the telephone to Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, today, Tuesday 24 January 2023.

The Head of State asked President Zelenskyy about the situation on the ground and Ukraine’s needs, reiterating France’s full readiness to meet them. President Zelenskyy thanked France once again for the deliveries of anti-aircraft defence systems and for sending AMX-10 RC battle tanks.

The Ukrainian President also thanked France for the continued deliveries aimed at helping Ukraine get through the winter, following the international support conference held in Paris on 13 December 2022.

The two leaders also talked about the prospects of peace returning to Europe. President Macron reaffirmed his full support for Ukraine’s proposal for a 10-point peace plan, and his determination to support the initiative in the international arena./.

### Death of the Interior Minister

**(Paris - January 18, 2023)**

France was very sad to learn of the death of the Ukrainian Interior Minister, Denys Monastyrsky, following a helicopter crash in Brovary which killed many people, including children.

As Co-Chair of the France-Ukraine Joint Economic Commission, Denys Monastyrsky was personally involved in deepening relations between our two countries.

France extends its very sincere condolences to the victims’ families and close friends and to the whole Ukrainian people over this tragedy.

### Telephone conversation between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine – Press release issued by the Presidency of the Republic

**(Paris - January 4, 2023)**

President Macron spoke on the telephone to Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, today, Wednesday 4 January 2023.

The Head of State reaffirmed France’s unfailing support for Ukraine to regain its full sovereignty and its territorial integrity. He also reiterated his strong condemnation of the Russian bombardments targeting Ukrainian civilian infrastructure.

The discussion focused on the terms of military aid to Ukraine. President Zelenskyy thanked France for its effective, long-term support, be it through the delivery of equipment – including ground-to-air defence equipment –, the training of Ukrainian forces or the creation of the special €200-million fund to enable Ukraine to obtain supplies of materiel.

The Head of State told his counterpart of his decision to extend this aid in response to the needs expressed by Kyiv, delivering French-built light battle tanks for the first time.

The discussion also focused on putting the “Standing with the Ukrainian people” conference held in Paris on 13 December into operation, in order to help Ukraine get through the winter. In this regard, France will deliver 63 high-powered electricity generators and five million LED bulbs in the coming days.

Finally, President Macron reiterated his full support for President Zelenskyy’s proposal for a 10-point peace plan, and voiced his willingness to support Ukraine’s efforts on this basis./.

### Telephone conversation between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**(Paris - December 11, 2022)**

The French President spoke on the telephone to the President of Ukraine, Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, today, Sunday 11 December 2022.

The Head of State expressed France’s solidarity with Ukraine, as the country continues to undergo bombardments targeting its civilian infrastructure. He repeated to President Zelenskyy that Ukraine will be able to count on France’s support for as long as it takes, to see its sovereignty and territorial integrity fully restored. President Macron welcomed the Ukrainian proposal for a 10-point peace plan, saying he fully supported it.

The two presidents reviewed preparations for the two conferences in Paris organized, on their initiative, for Tuesday 13 December 2022. The first, entitled “Solidarity with the Ukrainian people”, will bring together Ukraine’s international supporters to provide very short-term practical responses to their urgent needs for getting through the winter, in particular as regards access to electricity, heating and water. The second, the French-Ukrainian conference on resilience and reconstruction, will bring together nearly 500 French companies to address Ukraine’s critical needs, help rebuild the country and invest in the Ukrainian economy’s potential in the long term.

President Zelenskyy, who will speak at the two events by video link, thanked President Macron for hosting them in Paris and co-chairing them alongside him./.

### Meeting of French civil society organizations on Ukraine – Press briefing by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**(Paris - December 7, 2022)**

In the run-up to the 13 December international conference on civilian resilience in Ukraine, organized jointly by France and Ukraine, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna will convene a meeting of French civil-society stakeholders (representatives of local governments, NGOs and corporate foundations) that have shown exceptional solidarity in providing assistance to the Ukrainian people, who have suffered from the war in their country.

Through the Crisis and Support Centre (CDCS) of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, France has carried out some 40 solidarity-based logistical operations since the beginning of the Russian aggression. Thanks to essential contributions from civil society organizations, more than 2,600 tonnes of goods and equipment were shipped to Ukraine: generators, emergency shelters, medical supplies, fire engines and ambulances, prefabricated bridges and food supplies.

At this meeting, the Minister will hail the contributions of more than 1,700 local governments to the Local Government External Action Fund (FACECO) established by the CDCS and the work carried out by humanitarian NGOs, foundations and local civil society organizations. They raised €31 million to support 18 humanitarian NGOs and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which are helping to meet the essential needs of displaced Ukrainians and refugees in the areas of healthcare, food, aid to displaced persons, continuing access to education, the fight against impunity and humanitarian mine action./.

### IAEA confirms the absence of undeclared nuclear materials and activities – Press briefing by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Deputy Spokesperson

**(Paris - November 4, 2022)**

IAEA inspectors have completed their verification activities and concluded that there are no indications of undeclared nuclear materials or activities at Ukrainian locations. The Agency’s investigation was carried out at the request of the Ukrainian government in order to respond to Russian allegations that material from those locations was being diverted to enable Ukraine to make and use a “dirty bomb” on its territory. The IAEA investigation shows that Russia’s false, irresponsible allegations have zero basis in fact. France commends the transparency shown by Ukraine./.

### Telephone conversation between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**(Paris - November 1, 2022)**

The President of the French Republic spoke with the President of Ukraine, Mr Volodymyr Zelenskyy, by telephone today, Tuesday 1 November 2022.

They discussed the situation on the ground as well as latest developments in Ukraine’s counter-offensive. The French President reiterated that France was fully prepared to step up its military support for Ukraine forthwith, especially as concerns anti-air defence.

The President of the French Republic furthermore underscored his determination to support Ukraine through the oncoming winter, as Russian strikes have considerably damaged the country’s water supply and electricity infrastructure. He stated that France is to intensify its support in this regard and will furthermore push for international mobilization. The two presidents agreed to hold an international conference in Paris on 13 December to build support for the country’s civilians throughout winter. Preparatory work to this end is to commence shortly along with Ukraine’s other partners. In addition, the two presidents also agreed to hold a bilateral conference, slated for 12 December, with the aim of mobilising French firms.

The presidents discussed Russia’s withdrawal from the agreement facilitating Ukrainian grain exports through the maritime corridor. The French President denounced Russia’s unilateral decision as posing a renewed threat to the world’s food security.

They also addressed the situation of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, where pressure on Ukrainian personnel from Russian forces is further jeopardizing the plant’s safety.

Finally, with regard to Russia’s unfounded claims of Ukraine’s plans to develop a dirty bomb, the President of the French Republic commended Ukraine’s exemplary transparency, which enabled an immediate IAEA on-site inspection, so as to demonstrate Ukraine’s full compliance with safeguards and debunk the groundless accusations./.

### Russian attacks on civil infrastructure

**(Paris - October 31, 2022)**

France condemns in the strongest possible terms the Russian attacks targeting critical civil infrastructure, which took place this morning in numerous regions across Ukraine.

Thus, the Russian Federation continues to intentionally bomb civil infrastructure in violation of international humanitarian law.

France will maintain its commitment to supporting the Ukrainian authorities, the International Criminal Court and Eurojust so that these actions do not go unpunished.

We will continue to mobilize our efforts in support of Ukrainian civilian resilience, including over the short term as winter approaches. To this end, we will be organizing an international conference on December 13 with the goal of providing concrete responses to the immediate needs of the Ukrainian people and ensuring the consistency of the international aid provided to Ukraine.

### Civilian Resilience - Communique Issued by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**(Paris - October 28, 2022)**

The massive bombing Russia has been carrying out intentionally for several weeks against Ukraine’s energy infrastructure and civilian population bring with them the serious risk of a new humanitarian crisis as winter approaches. This critical situation requires urgent mobilization by the international community.

France has been resolutely committed to Ukraine and the Ukrainian people since the beginning of the illegal and unjustifiable aggression of which they are the victim. Since March 2022, as part of the $2 billion of assistance it has released to support Ukraine, France has provided several thousand tonnes of emergency aid (food, health, emergency services), equipment for rehabilitating homes, emergency bridges and, very soon, several dozen electricity generators. It has also supported, to the tune of €70 million, NGOs and international organizations playing an active role on the ground to provide essential services to the Ukrainian people and to prepare for winter. It is contributing to the European effort to support Ukraine, which currently stands at €22 billion, as well as through its contributions to the multilateral organizations mobilized to this end.

**Massive, long-term assistance**

For example, in response to the needs expressed by Ukraine, France has conducted more than 30 solidarity operations since the Russian aggression began, delivering more than 2,600 tonnes of goods with a value of €41 million, including 1,000 tonnes during the latest operation, “Un Bateau pour l’Ukraine” [a ship for Ukraine], which left the port of Marseille on 28 September and has arrived in the country.

Moreover, €30 million has been mobilized to support 17 NGOs whose action aims to address the essential needs of Ukrainian displaced people and refugees. In particular, emphasis has been put on the rehabilitation and insulation of community centres, increased health support to limit the spread of winter illnesses, support for the logistics chain to supply vulnerable people with equipment for the winter, and financial support to vulnerable people to buy essential goods. France is playing its full role in hosting Ukrainian refugees within the European Union, including by sending children to school.

France has also supported, through more than €38 million, the work of several international organizations (the High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization for Migration, the ICRC, UNICEF) engaged in helping vulnerable and displaced people.

It is also lending essential support to Ukraine’s emergency services, which have been put under great strain since the Russian aggression began. For example, more than 70 intervention vehicles, eight water craft and nearly 200 tonnes of specialized equipment have been provided since March 2022.

Finally, France is practically involved in supporting Ukrainian and ICC investigators to gather evidence and identify the victims of war crimes.

**Mobilization to respond to the arrival of winter**

With winter approaching, France will step up its active efforts, directly and through NGOs and international organizations, to provide practical responses to the Ukrainian people’s essential needs in terms of food, heating, lighting and electricity supplies: electricity generators, lamps, heating facilities, the repair and insulation of homes, and fuel purchases. The work of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Centre has been redirected towards this as a matter of priority for several weeks.

**Organization of a conference in Paris on civilian resilience**

To continue this commitment, as the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs has said, France will organize a conference in Paris on support for Ukraine’s civilian resilence, in the presence of multilateral donors and stakeholders wishing to take action alongside it. The conference will be held on 13 December. Its aim will be to identify practical responses to address the winter emergency. Special emphasis will be put on the supply of essential equipment and the rebuilding of critical infrastructure, in particular energy infrastructure. It will also seek to establish a working method and create a network bringing together Ukraine and the donors to ensure consistency between Ukraine’s needs and the international community’s support capabilities.

### Joint Statement by Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom and the United States

**(Paris - October 24, 2022)**

We, the Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, reiterate our steadfast support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in the face of Russia’s ongoing aggression. We remain committed to continue supporting Ukraine’s efforts to defend its territory for as long as it takes.

Earlier today, the defense ministers of each of our countries spoke to Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoygu at his request. Our countries made clear that we all reject Russia’s transparently false allegations that Ukraine is preparing to use a dirty bomb on its own territory. The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation. We further reject any pretext for escalation by Russia.

The Foreign Ministers also discussed their shared determination to continue supporting Ukraine and the Ukrainian people with security, economic and humanitarian assistance in the face of President Putin’s brutal war of aggression.

### Signature by France and Ukraine of the agreement creating the special support fund for Ukraine – Press release issued by the Ministry for the Armed Forces

**(Paris - October 13, 2022)**

On the sidelines of the NATO ministerial meeting in Brussels today, Thursday 13 October, M. Sébastien Lecornu, Minister for the Armed Forces, and Oleksii Reznikov, Ukrainian Minister of Defence, signed the agreement creating the special support fund for Ukraine.

Announced by the French President in Prague on Friday 7 October, the fund, which will initially be endowed with €100 million, will enable the Ukrainian army to acquire the equipment it needs directly from French manufacturers.

This is a new element of France’s military support for Ukraine in the face of the Russian aggression, in addition to the delivery of full operational capabilities – equipment, fuel, ammunition etc. – and the operational training of Ukrainian soldiers and maintenance teams.

 All the equipment the fund relates to is the type of military weaponry and equipment necessary to Ukraine’s defence operations.

Through the fund, France is reaffirming its long-term support for Ukraine, by creating a flexible and responsive instrument to help the Ukrainian army face up to the various scenarios of how the conflict will evolve.

### Telephone conversation between Mr.Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**(Paris - October 2, 2022)**

President Macron spoke on the telephone to Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, today, Sunday, October 2, 2022.

President Macron reiterated his strong condemnation of Russia’s illegal annexation of four Ukrainian regions. He reaffirmed France’s determination to help Ukraine regain its full sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to work with its European partners on further sanctions.

They talked about the situation in Zaporizhzhia, which remains very worrying. President Macron condemned the arrest by Russian forces of the power plant’s director. The two presidents stressed the urgency in the very short term of allowing the rotation of the Ukrainian staff who ensure the operation and safety of the facilities. President Macron also repeated that he is committed to Ukraine’s sovereignty over the plant and to working towards the withdrawal of Russian forces from the site.

### Press briefing by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson (excerpt)

**(Paris - September 30, 2022)**

France utterly condemns President Putin’s announcement of the illegal annexation of the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk and parts of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions into the Russian Federation. It calls on all countries committed to respect for international law to join in this condemnation.

These regions, like Crimea, are an integral part of Ukraine within its internationally-recognized borders. France will never recognize these illegal annexations or the results of the sham referendums which preceded them.

The announcement is a serious and unacceptable violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the United Nations Charter.

France supports the adoption of new European sanctions against Russia and those responsible for both the Russian aggression in Ukraine and these illegal annexations. By continuing the escalation of its war of aggression in order to divert attention from its defeats on the ground, Russia is sinking deeper into a military, diplomatic and political impasse. Its isolation is more apparent every day.

Neither this escalation nor this unilateral decision by Russia will in any way change the total commitment of France and its partners to support Ukraine, for as long as it takes, in its legitimate and necessary battle to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity. (…)

### Visit by Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson (Kyiv - September 27, 2022)**

Mme Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, is in Kyiv today for the third time since Russia launched its aggression. In the context of the irresponsible statements issued by the Russian authorities and the illegal organization of sham referendums on Ukraine’s territory, the Minister would like to demonstrate to the Ukrainian people France’s solidarity and its full determination to step up its support for Ukraine and for its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The visit follows the French authorities’ active efforts during the United Nations General Assembly High-Level Week, which highlighted Russia’s isolation and the international community’s widespread support for respecting the United Nations Charter and the territorial integrity of States.

On this visit, Ms. Colonna will talk to her Ukrainian counterpart, Mr.Dmytro Kuleba, and President Zelenskyy. She will emphasize France’s increased support in terms of supplying defence equipment and tools to fight impunity, and on the financial and humanitarian levels, on the lines of operation Un bateau pour l’Ukraine [a ship for Ukraine]; the ship will leave Marseille on 28 September with over 1,000 tons of aid on board. The Minister will be going to Marseille for this purpose following the Ukraine visit. The Minister will also work with her Ukrainian interlocutors on swiftly implementing the IAEA Director General’s proposals to establish a protection zone around the Zaporizhzhia power plant, which received broad international support in New York following France’s initiative.

In line with the Security Council’s first ministerial meeting on the fight against impunity in Ukraine, which she chaired last week and which was attended by Dmytro Kuleba and the International Criminal Court Prosecutor, the Minister will talk to the Ukrainian Prosecutor General, Mr Andriy Kostin. She will welcome the new mission of the Gendarmerie Forensic Institute (IRCGN), which will help identify victims and gather evidence of the crimes committed in the Kharkhiv region, and particularly in Izium.

During the visit the Minister will inaugurate Neo-Eco’s pilot materials-recycling project, in the presence of Mr.Oleksiy Kuleba, Governor of Kyiv Oblast, as part of our efforts to support the rebuilding of Ukraine. She will visit both the Institut français in Kyiv for its reopening, to talk to French-speaking Ukrainian students, and the Embassy, to pay tribute to the outstanding work of all its staff since the crisis began.

### MEETING BETWEEN CATHERINE COLONNA AND HER UKRAINIAN COUNTERPART

**Prague - August 30, 2022**

Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna met today in Prague with her Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba, on the sidelines of the informal meeting of EU foreign ministers.

Ms. Colonna and the Ukrainian minister reiterated how important it is for the IAEA mission at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant to proceed in the best possible conditions. Following an intense session in which France strongly advocated for this mission, the minister commended the constructive role played by the Ukrainian authorities in laying the groundwork for a successful mission by the IAEA experts.

In the wake of the 31 st anniversary celebrations of Ukrainian independence and the second Crimea Platform summit, the minister reaffirmed France’s determination to maintain our support for Ukraine in every area – military, humanitarian, economic, and in future reconstruction efforts. The ministers also discussed France’s continuing commitment to fight impunity for those responsible for crimes committed in Ukraine.

### United States/Germany/United Kingdom – Teleconference between M. Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, Mr.Joe Biden, President of the United States, Mr Olaf Scholz, Chancellor of Germany and Mr Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom

**Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic (Paris - August 21, 2022)**

The President participated in a teleconference with Mr.Olaf Scholz, Chancellor of Germany, Mr.Joe Biden, President of the United States of America, and Mr.Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, today, Sunday, August 21, 2022.

The four leaders reaffirmed their determination to support Ukraine over the long term to enable it to defend itself. They also discussed the situation around the Zaporizhzhia plant and emphasized the importance of enabling a mission from the International Atomic Energy Agency to visit as soon as possible, with the necessary security guarantees.

The discussion also focused on the negotiations under way concerning the Iranian nuclear program.

### Statement of the G7 Foreign Ministers in support of the IAEA´s efforts to promote Nuclear Safety and Security at the Zaporizhzhya Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine

**August 10, 2022**

We, the G7 Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, and the High Representative of the European Union, reiterate our strongest condemnation of the ongoing unprovoked and unjustifiable war of aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine. The Russian Federation must immediately withdraw its troops from within Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders and respect Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty.

In that context, we demand that Russia immediately hand back full control to its rightful sovereign owner, Ukraine, of the Zaporizhzhya Nuclear Power Plant as well as of all nuclear facilities within Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders to ensure their safe and secure operations. Ukrainian staff operating the Zaporizhzhya Nuclear Power Plant must be able to carry out their duties without threats or pressure. It is Russia’s continued control of the plant that endangers the region.

We remain profoundly concerned by the serious threat that the seizure of Ukrainian nuclear facilities and other actions by Russian armed forces pose to the safety and security of these facilities, significantly raising the risk of a nuclear accident or incident and endangering the population of Ukraine, neighboring states and the international community. It also undermines the IAEA’s ability to monitor Ukraine’s peaceful nuclear activities for safeguarding purposes.

We welcome and support IAEA Director General Grossi’s efforts to strengthen nuclear safety and security in Ukraine and we thank the Director General and the IAEA staff for their steadfast commitment in this regard. Against this background, we underline the importance of facilitating a mission of IAEA experts to the Zaporizhzhya Nuclear Power Plant to address nuclear safety, security and safeguard concerns, in a manner that respects full Ukrainian sovereignty over its territory and infrastructure. We strongly endorse the importance of the Seven Pillars of Nuclear Safety and Security as outlined by Director General Grossi.

We reiterate our full and continued support for the IAEA. IAEA staff must be able to access all nuclear facilities in Ukraine safely and without impediment, and engage directly, and without interference, with the Ukrainian personnel responsible for the operation of these facilities. The safety of all individuals implementing these efforts must be addressed to strengthen nuclear safety, security and safeguards in Ukraine.

We encourage all countries to support the IAEA’s efforts.

### UK – Telephone conversation between President Macron and Prime Minister Boris Johnson of the United Kingdom

**Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic (Paris - August 9, 2022)**

The French President spoke on the telephone to UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson today, Tuesday, August 9, 2022.

President Macron and the Prime Minister reaffirmed their determination to support Ukraine as long as necessary and maintain a high level of coordination between partners, to meet the Ukrainians’ military, humanitarian and economic needs.

They also discussed the food crisis caused by Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The two leaders reiterated their support for Europe’s efforts to enable the export of volumes [of cereals] by road and river, as part of the "Solidarity Lanes".

Finally, the President and Prime Minister spoke about strengthening the bilateral relationship between France and the UK.

### Reply by Ms. Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, to a question in the National Assembly

**Paris - August 2, 2022**

We’ve indeed reached a tipping point. A tipping point morally, first of all, because the violence of which Ukraine is victim knows no bounds. The war crimes, atrocities, murders and torture of which Ukrainians, and sometimes Ukrainian prisoners under Russian protection, are victim sadly remind us of this once again, as you said. And a tipping point in terms of security, because the conflict on our doorstep affects our lives. It’s our defense, our food security and our energy security which are at stake.

Up against this reality, for which Vladimir Putin’s Russia is solely responsible, our first duty is to support Ukraine, which is fighting for its sovereignty, its independence and its European, democratic future. But we’ve also got to defend an international order based on the law and respect for the UN Charter, which concerns us all.

Our commitment rests on four pillars. Political, humanitarian and economic support, in concrete terms, amounting to €2 billion from France, €9 billion from the European Union, and candidate status. Military support, with equipment which demonstrates its usefulness on the theatre, for example Caesar self-propelled howitzers and infantry vehicles. The fight against impunity, particularly with what we’re doing with the International Criminal Court. And finally, strict sanctions against Russia to disrupt the financing of its war effort.

We can indeed be proud of this policy – and we are proud of it, collectively, as French people, particularly faced with those who shamefully seek to put victim and oppressor on the same level.

### Telephone conversation between President Macron and President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine

**Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic (Paris - August 1, 2022)**

The French President spoke on the telephone to the President of Ukraine, Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, today, Monday, August 1, 2022.

A few days after another massacre committed by the Russian armed forces in Olenivka, and with the number of war crimes increasing, President Macron reaffirmed his support for the Ukrainian people and their resistance, and expressed his determination to ensure that those crimes do not go unpunished. Following the dispatch of a team of forensic experts to the site, France is continuing its support in this regard by donating a mobile DNA analysis laboratory.

President Macron asked President Zelenskyy about his military, humanitarian and economic needs. He confirmed France’s willingness to continue supporting the Ukrainian armed forces to enable them to resist Russia’s aggression.

He also spoke again about his visit to Cameroon, Benin and Guinea-Bissau last week, during which he firmly denounced the war being waged by Russia in terms of news, in particular on the African continent. The French and Ukrainian Presidents agreed to continue their joint efforts to counter Russian disinformation at global level.

President Macron welcomed the departure from the port of Odesa today of the first ship transporting Ukrainian grain. He added that European efforts to export Ukrainian grain by land and river will continue in the framework of the Solidarity Lanes.

Finally, President Macron confirmed to President Zelenskyy his desire to ensure the provision of short-term macro-economic support for Ukraine and for rebuilding the country.

### OSCE – France welcomes the publication of a second independent experts’ report on the war in Ukraine

**Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Deputy Spokesperson (July 15, 2022)**

France welcomes yesterday’s publication by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) of a second independent experts’ report “on Violations of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights Law, War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity Committed in Ukraine (April 1-June 25, 2022)”, under the so-called Moscow Mechanism. The report was launched on the initiative of 45 countries including France, following Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.

France was deeply concerned to learn of the conclusions of this report, which highlights “serious violations of IHL [international humanitarian law], attributable mostly to Russian armed forces”. The offences described in the report are especially alarming, particularly with regard to allegations that the Russian Federation created “filtration canters” and canters for transferring detainees to the two separatist entities of Donestsk and Luhansk, where they risk the death penalty.

France remains resolutely committed alongside Ukraine, the Ukrainians, its international partners and the international courts to combating impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes. The report’s conclusions will feed into the investigations under way with a view to formally establishing legal and political responsibility for the atrocities committed on Ukrainian territory.

### Exceptional delivery of emergency medical assistance by France

**Joint press release by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Health and Prevention (June 28, 2022)**

At the request of the Ukrainian authorities, the Crisis and Support Center (CDCS) of the French Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, in liaison with the Operational Regulation and Response Center for Health and Social Emergencies (CORRUSS) of the French Ministry of Health and Prevention, Regional Health Agencies and hospitals, has today delivered medical equipment to Ukraine via Slovakia. This equipment will be handed over to the Ukrainian Ministry of Health.

This latest delivery of French support includes a mobile health post with medical equipment and medicines aimed at strengthening emergency facilities and enabling treatment of 250 patients, as well as medical devices used for anesthesia and resuscitation, amongst others.

This operation, carried out under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, is a demonstration of France’s solidarity with the Ukrainian people.

### Statement by Ms. Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**Paris - June 10, 2022**

France is extremely worried about news of the death sentence imposed, following a sham trial, on two British nationals and one Moroccan national taken prisoner by pro-Russian separatist forces in Donetsk. These people must be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law. We call on Russia and its auxiliaries in Ukraine to comply with their obligations in this regard.

### Statement by Ms. Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**Paris - June 3, 2022**

It has been 100 days since Russia launched its aggression against Ukraine and the Ukrainian people. For 100 days, Russia has been continually and indiscriminately bombarding Ukrainian military forces and civilians. France stands in solidarity with the Ukrainian people in their suffering. It has done so not only since 24 February, but since 2014, which saw the illegal annexation of Crimea and the eruption of the conflict in the Donbas. There can be no impunity whatsoever for the atrocities committed by Russian soldiers in Ukraine – in Bucha and other cities.

During my recent visit to Ukraine, I conveyed a message of friendship and admiration to Ukraine and the Ukrainian people. I reaffirmed France’s unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, evidenced by the humanitarian, economic, financial, diplomatic and military aid France provides to that country, which we intend to increase and continue in the long term. The aid announced by President Macron now totals $2 billion, making France one of Ukraine’s leading international supporters.

Ukraine is fighting for its sovereignty and its territorial integrity. We must continue to make the cost of continuing this aggression unsustainable for Russia. France continues to urge Russia to abide by its international commitments, to end its aggression, and to withdraw its armed forces.

### Passing of the journalist Frédéric Leclerc-Imhoff – Statement by Ms. Catherine Colonna, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**Kyiv - May 30, 2022**

The death of Frédéric Leclerc-Imhoff, a BFM journalist killed today while covering a Ukrainian evacuation operation near Severodonetsk, is deeply shocking. I condemn it and extend our condolences to his family and colleagues.

France demands that a transparent inquiry be launched as soon as possible to shed full light on the circumstances of this tragedy.

France reaffirms its steadfast and resolute commitment, throughout the world, to press freedom and the protection of journalists and all those whose expression contributes to free information and public debate.

### Telephone conversation between Mr.Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine

**Paris - May 17, 2022**

The French President spoke on the telephone to the President of Ukraine, Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, today, Tuesday, May 17, 2022.

President Macron asked President Zelenskyy about the situation on the ground – particularly in Mariupol, with evacuations from the Azovstal factory continuing – and about Ukraine’s needs. He reaffirmed his full determination to meet all the requests for support expressed by Ukraine, particularly in terms of defense materiel, fuel, humanitarian aid, economic and financial support, and to combat impunity. He confirmed that deliveries of weapons by France will continue and be stepped up in the coming days and weeks, as will the delivery of humanitarian equipment. Last weekend, an additional 13 emergency vehicles were delivered, bringing the amount of humanitarian aid delivered since February 24 to more than 800 tons.

They discussed the challenge of food security, and in this regard they spoke about possible ways of allowing Ukrainian cereal exports, on which much of the world depends for its food.

 The two presidents also discussed the security guarantees France could provide to Ukraine in the framework of an international agreement, to ensure that the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity are respected.

President Macron also confirmed to President Zelenskyy that Ukraine’s application to join the European Union will be considered at the European Council in June on the basis of the opinion the European Commission issues, and in the spirit of the declaration at the Versailles summit by all the member countries that Ukraine is part of the European family. Today the President recalled his speech at the European Parliament in Strasbourg on 9 May 2022 and his proposal for a “European political community”, which, among other things, would enable candidate countries to be supported in the framework of cooperation projects of use to all.

### Support for the media and journalists in the context of the war in Ukraine

**Paris - May 5, 2022**

The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Culture welcome the initiative by French media organizations and journalism training centers to support Ukrainian and Russian journalists and media organizations prevented from doing their jobs and forced to leave their countries by the war Russia is waging on Ukraine. The commitment of French media players testifies to their professional solidarity, their desire to defend freedom of information and their contribution to the fight against disinformation.

In the framework of its support fund for welcoming artists and culture and media professionals affected by the war in Ukraine, the Ministry of Culture is supporting the _Maison des journalistes_ in establishing a platform dedicated to journalists and their families: **ukraine@maisondesjournalistes.org**.

This address allows them to be directed to offers of accommodation, available studios and equipment, training and support in terms of media placements.

The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs supports the steps taken by journalists in exile who would like France to take them in and the actions of the French Media Development Agency (CFI) in Europe to welcome these journalists and enable their news activities to continue, particularly within a hub being developed by France Médias Monde in Bucharest, attached to the editorial staff of RFI România.

France – which initiated the Information and Democracy Partnership in 2019, bringing together 45 States today – is deeply and resolutely committed to defending the freedom of the press, freedom of expression and the protection of journalists.

### Telephone conversation between Mr.Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr.Vladimir Putin, President of Russia – Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic

**Paris - May 3, 2022**

The French President spoke on the telephone to Russian President Vladimir Putin today, Tuesday 3 May 2022. The conversation follows President Macron’s telephone discussion with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on April 30

President Macron again emphasized the extreme seriousness of the consequences of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.

He expressed his deep concern regarding Mariupol and the situation in the Donbas, and called on Russia to allow the evacuations begun in recent days from the Azovstal plant to continue, in coordination with humanitarian bodies and leaving the evacuees to choose their destination, in accordance with international humanitarian law.

He also expressed his willingness to work with the relevant international organizations to help lift the Russian blockade on Ukrainian food exports via the Black Sea, given the consequences on global food security.

The French President called on Russia to live up to its responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security Council and end this devastating aggression.

He signalled his continued readiness to work on conditions for a negotiated solution to bring about peace and full respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Finally, President Macron repeated his demand for a ceasefire.

### Telephone conversation between Mr.Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic, and Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine – Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic

**Paris - April 30, 2022**

The French President spoke on the telephone to Mr.Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, today, Saturday, April 30, 2022.

President Macron reaffirmed to President Zelenskyy his desire to work actively during his second mandate to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, while still maintaining close coordination with his European partners and allies.

The President reiterated his deep concern over the continued Russian bombing of Ukrainian towns and cities, particularly in Kyiv on Thursday during the visits by the United Nations Secretary-General and Bulgarian Prime Minister. He expressed his particular concern over the intolerable situation in Mariupol, despite his repeated appeals to the Russian President to comply with international humanitarian law.

 President Zelenskyy thanked France for its deliveries of significant military materiel, which are contributing to the Ukrainian resistance. President Macron said this support will continue to be stepped up, as will the humanitarian assistance France is providing, with more than 615 tonnes of equipment now having been delivered, including medical equipment, generators for hospitals, food aid, shelter assistance and emergency vehicles. He added that at the Ukrainian authorities’ request, the French expert mission helping gather evidence to fight impunity and enable international courts to work on crimes committed as part of Russia’s aggression will continue.

The progress of negotiations to bring about a lasting solution to the conflict and a return to security on the European continent was also discussed. In this regard, President Macron reiterated his commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and France’s willingness to contribute to an agreement providing security guarantees for Ukraine.

### Conversation between Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian and Mr.Antony Blinken, US Secretary of State

**Paris - April 27, 2022**

M. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, spoke this afternoon to US Secretary of State Mr.Antony Blinken.

The two ministers discussed our close, confident coordination on the war in Ukraine. The Minister recalled the efforts made by France to support Ukraine in terms of defence equipment. The two ministers discussed possible initiatives for further sanctions targeting Russia, given its continued war of aggression against Ukraine. They talked about food security and the FARM initiative promoted by France and the European Union.

The two ministers also discussed the importance of our relationship with the Western Balkans countries and our coordination to ensure that these partners are stable and anchored to Europe in the face of the consequences of the war in Ukraine.

### Conversation between Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian and his Ukrainian counterpart – Statement by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Spokesperson

**April 25, 2022**

M. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, spoke to his Ukrainian counterpart Mr.Dmytro Kuleba today.

In this new discussion, the 12th this year between the two ministers, the Minister emphasized France’s ongoing strategy in the Ukraine conflict and our determination to continue and deepen France’s support to Ukraine in every sphere. In this respect, the Minister talked about the recent decisions taken by President Macron concerning the supply of defence equipment to the Ukrainian forces, in the artillery field in particular, given Ukraine’s especially significant, urgent needs.

The two ministers also discussed the parameters of stronger European sanctions against Russia, supported by the French presidency of the Council of the European Union.

The two ministers discussed the tragic situation in Mariupol, the target of uninterrupted bombing by Russian forces. The Minister reiterated France’s call for free movement of civilians and free access to humanitarian aid in the city, as in the rest of Ukraine.

### Special delivery of emergency medical aid by France – Joint communiqué issued by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry for Solidarity and Health

**April 21, 2022**

At the Ukrainian authorities’ request, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs Crisis and Support Centre (CDCS), in conjunction with the Ministry for Solidarity and Health and several French hospitals, is delivering over 28 tonnes of medical equipment to Poland by road. The equipment will subsequently be handed to the State Emergency Service of Ukraine, then forwarded to several medical establishments in Ukraine.

This new French shipment includes: an oxygen generator allowing a hospital to treat up to 500 patients using oxygen therapy; 50 sets of respiratory equipment and their consumables for the treatment of several hundred patients; a second batch of respiratory equipment provided by the voluntary organization Antadir, and their consumables provided by the company ResMed; a batch of 4.5 tonnes of medicines (emergency, general practice, paediatrics) enabling up to 500 seriously injured people to be treated, and a second batch of emergency medicines provided by several French hospitals (Nancy regional university hospital, Niort and Lozère hospitals and the René Dubois hospital in Pontoise, with logistical support from the Henri-Mondor university hospitals).

This special delivery includes a high-capacity generator to boost the electricity security of a Ukrainian health facility. Some of the donations were funded through contributions by local authorities and businesses paid into the Ministry’s dedicated support funds.

The _Etablissement français du sang_ [French blood agency] has also provided two lorries delivered by the Crisis and Support Centre in March to collect blood. They are currently being used in Ukraine for the benefit of sick and injured Ukrainians.

These operations, conducted under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM), testify to the solidarity of France and its hospitals, local authorities and businesses with the Ukrainian people.

### Telephone conversation of the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs with his counterpart

**April 14, 2022**

Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, spoke today by telephone with his Ukrainian counterpart, Mr.Dmytro Kuleba.

The Minister informed his Ukrainian counterpart of the French authorities’ decision to move the Embassy of France in Ukraine back to Kyiv from Lviv, where it has been located since the beginning of March. This move will happen shortly and will enable France to broaden its support to Ukraine in all areas to address the war engaged by Russia on 24 February. The Minister welcomed the fact that France’s representation to Ukraine, which has remained in Ukrainian territory since the start of the war, can move back to the Ukrainian capital.

Against this backdrop, the Minister talked about France’s support to Ukraine in the Ukrainian authorities’ investigations, in liaison with international courts, to document and collect evidence about the violent acts committed by Russian forces in Ukraine. The Minister also underlined the continuation of our humanitarian efforts on the ground, including in the areas of food security, civil security and crisis management. Lastly, the two Ministers talked about the support provided by France, in liaison with its allies and partners, in the area of defense equipment, following on from the discussions held the previous day by our two Defense Ministers.

### National solidarity with Ukraine: second convoy of vehicles and rescue equipment – Joint communiqué issued by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior

**April 14, 2022**

After a first convoy of 27 vehicles was delivered to the Ukrainians on March 26, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior are once again drawing on the solidarity of departmental fire and rescue services.

Thanks to this exceptional and ongoing mobilization, on April 15 a second convoy organized by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior will deliver to Romania response vehicles and equipment that will be provided to Ukraine’s Emergency Situations Service, mobilized day and night to provide relief to victims.

A hundred firefighters, navy firefighters and rescue workers will deliver the vehicles and equipment provided – 12 fire engines and 12 rescue vehicles – to the border with Ukraine on April 15. They will also deliver four lorries carrying 50 tonnes of equipment, in particular for search and rescue (victim-location equipment and drilling, cutting and extrication equipment) and firefighting (protective equipment, hand ladders, fire hoses and equipment for fighting hydrocarbon fires). Some of the equipment was bought with contributions from local authorities and businesses to the dedicated support funds set up by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Centre.

The operation is being coordinated by the Interior Ministry’s General Directorate for Civil Protection and Crisis Management and the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Centre, in conjunction with our embassy in Ukraine.

These operations, carried out under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM), testify to the solidarity of France, its local authorities and businesses with the Ukrainian people.

### Joint Communiqué issued by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice

**April 11, 2022**

Following the discovery of mass acts of violence reported on Ukrainian territory in the areas previously occupied by Russian forces, in the city of Bucha in particular, France is resolutely committed alongside the Ukrainians, its international partners and the international courts to preventing impunity for intolerable acts constituting war crimes.

In accordance with President Macron’s instructions, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice are fully mobilized to lend practical support to the efforts deployed by the Ukrainian authorities and the international courts – the International Criminal Court, among others – as part of the investigations they have begun in the context of the war in Ukraine.

Following the violent acts committed in Bucha, an Interior Ministry technical team tasked with lending the Ukrainian authorities its identification and evidence-gathering expertise arrived in Ukraine this morning. In agreement with the Ukrainian authorities, it will also be able to contribute to the ICC investigation.

It is made up of two forensic scientists and around 15 gendarmes from the National Gendarmerie Criminal Research Institute (IRCGN), crime-scene investigators and victim-identification experts. Among other things, they have got recognized expertise in ballistics, explosives, DNA sampling and processing, and fingerprinting. The team will be able to establish a process for examining and identifying bodies. Finally, it will deploy LabADN, a rapid, projectable genetic-testing system. The equipment has been developed by the IRCGN.

As a reminder, France is also supporting the International Criminal Court by sending two judges and 10 investigators and making an exceptional extra financial contribution of €500,000, in addition to the annual funding it provides for its regular operations.

Finally, as holder of the presidency of the Council of the European Union, in the next few days in Brussels France will be promoting an initiative aimed at coordinating contributions by Member States and EU agencies, Europol and Eurojust among others, to bring to light and investigate possible war crimes in Ukraine.

Faced with such atrocities, France, true to its values, will not look the other way.

### War crimes in Ukraine - Statement by Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**April 3, 2022**

I have received reports of massive acts of violence committed by Russian forces in Ukrainian cities and towns that they have occupied in recent weeks, particularly in the town of Bucha. I condemn in the strongest terms these acts constituting war crimes, if they are confirmed. We are working, together with our partners, the Ukrainian authorities and the competent international jurisdictions, particularly the International Criminal Court, to ensure that these acts do not go unpunished and that their perpetrators are tried and sentenced.

The strongest international and economic pressure possible on Russia must be continued and strengthened to force the Russian authorities to end the war of aggression against Ukraine they began on February 24 and whose human cost and humanitarian impact are graver by the day. France remains fully committed to contributing to these efforts, particularly with its European partners under the French presidency of the Council of the European Union and in the G7, and will continue to lend its determined support to the Ukrainian authorities, in all its forms.

### As part of the international support provided to Ukraine, France grants a budgetary loan of €300 million to the Ukrainian Government to meet its financial, economic and humanitarian needs

**Communiqué issued by the Ministry of the Economy, Finance and the Recovery – March 29, 2022**

France is actively contributing to the European and international financial effort of solidarity with Ukraine, to help it face up to its financing needs, at a time when the country’s humanitarian, financial and economic situation has sharply deteriorated since the invasion by Russia.

As part of the commitment made by the French President, the Minister of the Economy, Finance and the Recovery, Bruno Le Maire, asked the Chief Executive Officer of the French Development Agency (AFD) to urgently set in motion a budgetary loan of €300 million for Ukraine, to help the country face up to the economic and social consequences of the conflict under way. The AFD’s board approved this operation, carried out on the State’s behalf.

On March 29, 2022, a credit agreement for the operation was reached between Ukraine and France, via the AFD. The actual payment of the funds will be made in the coming days. This financial support is a practical demonstration of France’s solidarity with the Ukrainian Government and people.

### International Criminal Court investigation into crimes committed in Ukraine

**March 23, 2022**

On March 2, 2022 the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor opened an investigation into crimes committed in Ukraine. The decision was taken after 41 States, including the 27 European Union Member States, asked for the opening of the investigation by the Court’s Prosecutor to be sped up.

On this basis, the Prosecutor asked the States to lend him financial and human assistance to ensure the proper conduct of the investigation.

France reiterates its firm condemnation of Russia’s unjustifiable, illegal and unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. Those responsible for the atrocities committed in the context of this aggression must be prosecuted as part of the essential fight against impunity.

Consequently, France, which staunchly supports the essential work carried out by the ICC, will make judges, investigators and experts available to the Prosecutor to allow him to conduct his investigation under the best conditions. It will also provide the Court, via the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ budget, with exceptional financial support of €500,000. This financial assistance may subsequently be increased if need be. As a reminder, France is already the third-largest contributor to the ICC’s budget.

In this context, the Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice will visit The Hague (Netherlands) on March 24, 2022 as representative of the French presidency of the Council of the European Union (FPEU), to take part in a meeting of justice ministers from States supporting the Prosecutor’s action. At the meeting, Mr.Éric Dupond-Moretti will encourage the States taking part in it to step up their support for the ICC.

Mr.Ladislav Hamran, President of the European Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation (Eurojust), will also take part in the meeting today, March 24. Indeed, as the March 4, 2022 Council of Justice Ministers of the European Union Member States asked it to do, Eurojust may play a major role in coordinating national courts’ investigations into allegations of crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in Ukraine and may provide decisive assistance to evidence-gathering by the ICC Prosecutor.

### France condemns the sentencing of Aleksei Navalny and the confirmation of Memorial’s liquidation and applauds the courage of the Russian civil society activists who are being unjustly persecuted and sentenced for their ideas

**March 23, 2022**

We strongly condemn the nine-year prison sentence and 1.2 million ruble fine imposed against the opposition figure and anti-corruption activist Aleksei Navalny by Moscow’s Lefortovo court on March 22.

The Russian authorities’ decision attests to the legal harassment of Mr.Navalny, his family and his close collaborators. The arrest of Mr.Navalny’s lawyers, Olga Mikhailova et Vadim Kobzev, following the trial is highly concerning and demonstrates the pressure that is being exercised against the defense.

We maintain that Mr.Navalny did not receive a fair trial and does not belong in prison. Once again, we call on the Russian authorities to release him.

We likewise condemn the decision by the Russian Federation’s Supreme Court to reject a request to delay the liquidation of the NGO Memorial International.

We applaud the courage of Mr.Navalny, the members of Memorial and all the civil society activists in Russia who are being unjustly persecuted and sentenced for their ideas.

### National solidarity effort for Ukraine: donations of equipment and emergency vehicles

**March 22, 2022**

The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior welcome the surge of solidarity towards the Ukrainian people shown by departmental fire and rescue services from all over France.

Thanks to this exceptional mobilization, on March 23, a convoy organized by the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior will dispatch to Romania response vehicles and equipment, which will be provided to Ukraine’s Emergency Situations Service, mobilized day and night to provide relief to victims.

On March 23, 100 fire and rescue personnel will dispatch to the border with Ukraine the vehicles and equipment being provided: 11 fire engines, 16 rescue vehicles, and 23 lorries transporting 49 tonnes of health and emergency equipment (protective gear, extending ladders, fire hoses, medical equipment etc.).

The operation is being coordinated by the Ministry of the Interior’s General Directorate for Civil Security and Crisis Management and the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Centre.

A convoy of 21 new ambulances which left on March 22, completes the donation. They were bought with contributions from local authorities and businesses, paid into the dedicated support funds managed by the Crisis and Support Centre.

The operations, carried out under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM), demonstrate the solidarity of France, its local authorities and its businesses with the Ukrainian people.

### Conversation between Jean-Yves Le Drian and his Ukrainian counterpart

**March 17, 2022**

The two ministers reviewed in detail the support provided jointly to Ukraine by France and its partners as a consequence of the war provoked by Russia. The Minister confirmed that a €300 million financial assistance package will be released in the coming days in line with the French President’s commitment to President Zelensky. He pledged to continue our efforts at the European level to increase the cost that continuing its military operations would represent for Russia. He also presented the various aspects of the humanitarian aid provided by France to people both inside and outside of Ukraine who are affected by the war.

The minister very strongly condemned Russian military actions against civilian populations and population centers in violation of international humanitarian law. He called for the urgent establishment of a complete ceasefire throughout Ukrainian territory, as the International Court of Justice asked Russia to implement yesterday. Only such a ceasefire can make it possible for serious negotiations to end the conflict. Lastly, the minister addressed the importance of the discussions taking place under the auspices of the IAEA regarding the security and safety of Ukraine’s civilian nuclear facilities.

### Death of the journalist Pierre Zakrzewski - Statement from Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**March 16, 2022**

I was deeply shocked to hear of the deaths in Ukraine of the Franco-Irish journalist Pierre Zakrzewski and the Ukrainian journalist Oleksandra Kuvshynova. They were both killed in the same attack, alongside Benjamin Hall, who was seriously wounded. Pierre Zakrzewski worked for the Fox News channel and had covered very many theatres of war, as a fervent campaigner for freedom of information.

I extend my sincerest condolences to his family and close friends, as well as those of Oleksandra Kuvshynova, and stand by them in the face of this tragedy.

Following the deaths of Brent Renaud and then Evgeny Sakun in the Russian armed forces’ attack on the TV tower in Kyiv, I repeat that the armed forces have an obligation to protect journalists in accordance with international humanitarian law, and I utterly condemn any action which targets them.

France reaffirms its steadfast, resolute commitment to press freedom, freedom of expression and the protection of journalists and all those whose expression contributes to free, pluralistic information and public debate, throughout the world.

These events illustrate the extreme dangerousness today of what is happening in Ukraine.

### Statement of the G7 Non-Proliferation Directors Group on a Nuclear Safety and Security Framework for Ukraine

**March 15, 2022**

G7 leaders and ministers have condemned Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine.

Profoundly concerned, in this context, by Russian attacks at and in the direct vicinity of nuclear facilities in Ukraine, and condemning any acts compromising the safety of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes,

Mindful that the risk to civilians from damage to a nuclear site during armed conflict has the potential to increase dramatically and that the radiological risk to civilians and the environment from a nuclear accident go beyond the borders of any country,

Welcoming the IAEA Director General’s efforts to establish a framework agreement on the safety and security of nuclear installations for peaceful purposes in Ukraine during the current armed conflict,

The G-7 strongly endorses the following seven pillars outlined by Director General Rafael Grossi:

1.   The physical integrity of the nuclear facilities, whether it is reactors, fuel ponds, or radioactive waste storage and disposal sites, must be maintained;
2.   All safety and security systems and equipment must be fully functional at all times;
3.   Operating staff must be able to fulfil their respective safety and security duties, with appropriate staff rotation, and have the capacity to make safety and security-related decisions free of undue pressure;
4.   There must be secure off-site power supply from the grid for all nuclear sites;
5.   There must be uninterrupted logistical supply chains and transportation to and from the sites;
6.   There must be effective on-site and off-site radiation monitoring systems and emergency preparedness and response measures; and
7.   There must be reliable communications of the sites with the regulator, as appropriate;

We support the Director General’s efforts to conclude an agreed framework for the safety and security of all nuclear installations in Ukraine as a matter of urgency, while respecting full Ukrainian sovereignty over its territory and infrastructure. Further, we urge all countries to make available to the IAEA all necessary resources and equipment to facilitate technical support to Ukraine and provide safety to individuals implementing the seven pillars in areas of armed conflict.

We thank Director General Grossi and his staff for their tireless efforts to secure the framework agreement to support the safety and security of Ukraine´s civilian nuclear sites, and we commit to continuing to support the Agency in facilitating these seven pillars of safety and security of peaceful nuclear installations.

### "Memorial and the universal importance of the history of Stalinism: European memories and national histories" - Speech by Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**March 10, 2022**

Ladies and gentlemen,

As Vladimir Putin’s regime ventures every day a little further along the paths of an unjustifiable war against Ukraine and massive repression of Russian civil society, I was keen to be with you to reaffirm France’s support to Memorial which, for more than 30 years, has represented everything those two courses of action deny. Memorial’s future is now seriously threatened in Russia.

I would therefore like to warmly welcome Nicolas Werth and Alain Blum who, on behalf of Memorial France, invited me to speak before you, following an afternoon of discussions that have been very fruitful and useful, as we have just heard. It shows how important the words of historians should be today.

To find our bearings in the profoundly historic time into which we have all been plunged, we need you: your knowledge, your outlook and your vigilance.

Firstly, this moment is a time in which everybody can feel the return, at the very heart of our continent, of the most painful echoes of the last century.

The military aggression that Vladimir Putin irresponsibly chose to launch against Ukraine and 44 million Ukrainians in violation of international law marks the return to Europe, after years of peace and several decades of stability, of war in the strictest and most canonical sense of the term: a vast military offensive, carried out by one State against another, with the goal of invading its territory and imposing its will by force.

The columns of tanks on the roads, the cities under siege and the exodus of refugees under enemy bombardment are images that, like many more that now haunt us ceaselessly, revive the memory of all the darkest hours of the 20th century.

Of course, comparison is not proof. But we have all thought of 1914, of 1939, of 1956, of 1968, of 1992, of 1999 and of each of the terrible years of this long European tragedy, as Ukraine was at the centre of what one of your colleagues has called the “bloodlands” of our continent.

The moment we are living through is also, very objectively, a moment of historic regression.

Because it violates the cardinal principles of international law and the European security order, Vladimir Putin’s choice brutally undermines more than seven decades of joint efforts, made with the USSR and then Russia, to break away from the horrors of the Second World War and build a safer, more stable world and Europe by regulating power balances and governing the competition between powers by means of the law, mutual commitments between States, and diplomatic dialogue.

We are all aware that what has just happened is the sinister culmination of a long effort to undermine and dismantle that order. We must recognize that a new threshold has just been breached, at the cost of a qualitative leap in transgression which is most certainly a tipping point.

This tipping point thrusts us into a new era. In this sense too, we are living through a historic moment: a time when the fabric of our present is being ripped apart, where a certain world is disappearing irrevocably, and where, perhaps more than usual, our future is dependent on the choices that we can make.

The upheavals and shifts of recent years have gradually defined a new configuration of power, where brutalization – of international relations, of the information space and of the rivalry between models – is fully at work in the war waged by Russia against Ukraine. But this war is no less an event, in the strongest sense of the word. While it can be analysed through the prism of existing and already proven trends, it takes on its full meaning in the light of the consequences it is likely to bring.

That is why European countries and their allies were quick to take unconventional decisions.

Unconventional decisions, firstly, to address the emergency.

That is the meaning of the support we are providing to the Ukrainian government and resistance, who are standing firm.

That is the meaning of the massive sanctions we have imposed on the Russian economy to make the cost of the war untenable. They will be strengthened.

And that is the meaning of our humanitarian efforts and our work to welcome refugees from Ukraine.

Unconventional decisions, too, to address the long-term consequences of what is currently happening.

That is focus of the summit dedicated to the future of our European model and European sovereignty that is taking place today and tomorrow in Versailles, with the President of the Republic and his counterparts from the 27 EU Member States.

And that is what we will continue to do throughout the coming weeks and months. France, which currently holds the Presidency of the Council of the European Union for the first half of this year, has particular responsibility in this respect, and we intend to shoulder it fully.

These different levels of historicity – the echoes of Europe’s 20th century, the shock of a major regression in international relations, and the experience of being thrust into historic turmoil – which saturate, as I was saying, the moment we are living through, all collide, intertwine and overlap, with the risk of amalgamation.

There is also another level of historicity, no less crucial, that is at the heart of the present moment. It is that the war launched by Russia against Ukraine is very overtly an armed revisionism.

The speech by President Putin on 21 February, to provide a semblance of justification for his decision to recognize the independence of the two puppet republics of Donbas, a speech that opened the way for the launch of a large-scale military offensive against Ukraine, took the form of a discourse mainly focused on the past of Ukraine and of Russia of much the same sort as the essay that same Vladimir Putin published last summer on the subject of what he considers to be – to use his words – “the historic unity of Russians and Ukrainians”. Those words are of course problematic, presenting as a fact what the pseudo-demonstration they introduce is supposed to show.

Many historians immediately challenged the validity of the biased and sometimes even dishonest sophisms advanced by Vladimir Putin in the two texts. It is not my role to go back over that.

What I do want to say, as a political figure of a country where some also sometimes seek to rewrite history, is that the theorization of historical revisionism has been used to justify the conduct of a geopolitical revisionism. And this two-fold revision is today leading to the denial, through acts of war, of the territorial integrity of Ukraine in its internationally recognized borders, of the sovereignty of Ukraine and, ultimately, of the very right of the Ukrainian nation to exist.

Similar violence is expressed in the discourse that presents Ukraine as the product of so-called historical errors and in the deployment of military means to correct said “errors” – an expression that I use in quote marks and with all the required distance.

It is a violence against the Ukrainian nation, which is showing, however, through its brave resistance, its determination to stand strong as the protagonist of its own history.

It is a violence against facts, and not only historical facts.

Marc Bloch wrote that “misunderstanding of the present is the inevitable consequence of ignorance of the past”.

That is true. But today, we are seeing another spiral of falseness take shape, when the distortion of the past extends into a falsification of the present. It is very clear, and unfortunately proven, that manipulations of history and manipulations of information answer and strengthen one another mutually.

That is particularly striking, and revolting, in the instrumentalization and misuse, by the Russian authorities, of the notions of denazification and genocide, as said in the introductory remarks.

So, denial of facts.

Because neither President Zelenskyy, if only for obvious personal reasons, nor the political movements chosen democratically by the Ukrainian people to govern the country are Nazis, neo-Nazis or admirers of the Third Reich. As everyone can see, for that matter, from their words and their actions.

A denial of facts also because the idea that the Russian-speaking populations of Ukraine are victims of a genocide does not stand up at all, there is not the slightest basis and it cannot be supported by any type of evidence.

The instrumentalization and misuse of the notions of denazification and genocide are therefore a denial of the terrible historic experiences they refer to.

That is why the violence of Vladimir Putin’s revisionism is also a violence that relates to the most sensitive aspects of the memories of the Second World War.

I particularly have in mind Ukrainian, and therefore European, memories.

I have in mind our own European memories, in all their diversity.

But also Russian memories, to which this shameful distortion of the past and present is an insult.

The fact that Vladimir Putin is waging a war under the pretext of a clear distortion of history undoubtedly does not surprise you, as you are people who share Memorial’s commitment and combat. To be truthful, nor does it surprise me.

Because, like you, I have noted that for several years, history and memory have been placed where political abuses of his regime meet geopolitical ones.

At the core of the headlong rush into authoritarianism, which, in Russia itself, has one by one battered all the principles of the rule of law and all civil liberties, there is a policy of consolidation of an official national historical narrative based on the advent of a strong State through the centuries, coupled with a policy of harassment and systematic repression of all “producers of history” that could undermine the univocal nature of this narrative. Harassment of which the different aspects have been well documented and analysed in a report by the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), written by one of you here today, Ilya Nuzov, and I thank you for this very valuable work.

Political and geopolitical abuses because at the core of Russia’s race for power in the international and European arena, which since 2008 has taken the form of a gradual rise in violence and destabilization, we see propaganda at play which is based on the imperial dimension of this same historical narrative, and used to justify the worst violence. As if the war were nothing more than a continuation of history through other means.

That is why repression against Memorial has increased since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea and began its efforts to destabilize the Donbas region. And that is why Memorial is threatened now more than ever.

 At the end of December, while troops prepared to march towards the Ukraine borders, Russian courts ordered, under false pretenses which fooled no one, the judicial liquidation of Memorial’s two branches: the NGO Memorial International and the Memorial Human Rights Centre.

A few days after the offensive against Ukraine began, this verdict was confirmed.

Last Friday, while authorities were ramping up pressure on civil society, the Moscow offices of the Memorial Human Rights Centre were being searched.

That day – as you may very well know – President Macron spoke with Alexander Cherkasov, with whom he met, I remember this well, during an official visit to Saint Petersburg in 2018. He assured him of France’s support.

That is the same message I came here to share.

I would like to reiterate to you – and particularly to you, Nikita Petrov and Natalia Morozova – France’s indignation and concern about this unacceptable repression aimed at silencing Memorial.

Silencing Memorial is not only an attack on Russia’s past, but on its future as well.

I remind you of this, with the words of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn explaining, unequivocally, why silence in the face of atrocities is a poison for entire generations.

Allow me to read a few lines: “We must publicly condemn the very idea that men can exercise such violence on other men. In keeping silent about evil, in burying it so deep within us that no sign of it appears on the surface we are implanting it, and it will rise up a thousand-fold in the future. When we neither punish nor reproach evildoers, we are not simply protecting their trivial old age, we are thereby ripping the foundations of justice from beneath new generations.”

I would also like to reiterate, that, like our European Union partners, we call for the release of Yury Dmitriev, a historian, who we mentioned earlier, specializing in the mass graves of the Stalinist era, human rights defender and local leader of Memorial, whose prison sentence was extended last December to 15 years in a penal colony.

I would like to reiterate our solidarity with all the members of Memorial’s different branches.

For three decades, taking more and more risks, it has been fighting to firmly establish a documented history in Russia, starting with the Stalinist era, in the name of a demand for truth, which is scientific, social and ethical.

By consulting archives, witness accounts and academic research, they have accomplished remarkable historical work that has crucially contributed to information on 20th century mass crimes, and to the rehabilitation and remembrance of millions of victims of repression.

It is historical and memorial work, which pertains both to truth and justice, and lives on through tireless efforts to defend human rights in Russia, and in theaters of war where Russia has been engaged – from Chechnya and Syria to Ukraine as of 2014. The importance of which today can only seem obvious as we witness the sieges of Mariupol and Kharkiv, similar to those of Grozny and Alep in terms of their horrifying violence and terrorizing approach.

And I would lastly like to say that France and its European partners will support Memorial in safeguarding archives collected.

 It is unthinkable that the fruit of 30 years of work could be lost.

It is unthinkable that the legacy of Andrei Sakharov could disappear.

It is unthinkable that the flame of Memorial could be extinguished, the flame of this little candle that has become the symbol of its fight for us all.

For we all need the light that it shines on the past and the present.

Yes, we all need it. I have heard that this is what you wanted to underline by emphasizing here today the universal, singularly European scope of Memorial’s contribution to the history of Stalinism.

For this reason, the motive that serves as pretext for the judicial harassment of Memorial and so many other organizations defending freedom of expression and human rights in Russia, namely its status as a supposed “foreign agent”, is not merely a sad tactic to cover up the repressive and slanderous motive.

This is not only the height of cynicism, coming from a power that has made interference in public spaces and elections of democracies one of its specialities.

But also the expression of a deep misunderstanding of the value of Memorial’s work, and the reasons for which a country such as France supports it.

The “foreign agent” notion insinuates quite strongly that Memorial supposedly acts against the interests of Russia, on behalf of other powers. When, in reality, the complete opposite is true.

Memorial provides Russian society with decisive instruments for having a clear view of its own history.

And in doing so, Memorial provides its society with decisive instruments for understanding Europe’s past.

For neither the history of the Great Patriotic War nor the history of Stalinism belong to Russia – and even less so to its President alone. They are, at the very least, links to our own European history.

 That is why I also wanted to commend the joint effort of all European Memorial branches, meeting here today, to continue Memorial’s work.

It runs through France, Italy – thank you Niccolò Pianciola – and the Czech Republic – thank you Štěpán Černoušek – as well as many other countries of our Union. And all Europeans have reason to be grateful for that.

For while it is a sign of solidarity with organizations persecuted in Russia, it is also a response to one of our greatest European challenges: the challenges of building a shared European historiography and memory which ensure an implacable diversity of our national histories and an implacable plurality of our European memories.

Each of us here knows that this crucial work – which is essential for the ability of our Europe to affirm its sovereignty, its model and its stature as a power in the international arena – mainly stumble over the fact that we still meet too often to talk about our experiences, which are at times radically different, of the end of the Second World War, which did not restore freedom to our entire continent. The history and memory of the Soviet past are certainly one of the main reasons for this. That is why they not only concern Russian people, but all Europeans.

By raising awareness of Memorial’s work in your respective countries and in meetings such as this one, I believe that you are playing an important role in establishing this pluralistic European historiography and memory. And we are very proud to accompany you, I am thinking of the Condorcet campus in particular, through our entire cultural network and education network in Europe.

Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, by paying tribute to Memorial’s Russian members, I would like to reiterate very clearly that we stand with all Russians who – in daring to demonstrate and daring to speak out publically – are opposing Vladimir Putin’s war.

We are aware of the risks they are taking.

We are aware of the violent repression to which they are subjected.

And we respect their courage.

Although we have taken, are taking and will take drastic measures to isolate Russia in the international arena and are exerting pressure on its economy and the members of its elite to obtain, to start with, a ceasefire in Ukraine, under no circumstances do we intend to break intellectual, academic and cultural ties that we share with Russian civil society and its forces for progress.

Undoubtedly this will unfortunately be increasingly difficult, but we will do everything in our power to preserve these ties. Until we can fully meet again.

At a time when Russia is closing itself off, I felt that this had to be said here.

I hope that this last message will be heard.

Thank you.

### France condemns in the strongest terms the strikes by the Russian armed forces against the Mariupol pediatric hospital

**March 9, 2022**

France condemns in the strongest terms the strikes by the Russian armed forces against the Mariupol pediatric hospital, which caused several victims, including a child. This is a massive and flagrant violation of international humanitarian law.

For the past ten days, the city of Mariupol and its 300,000 inhabitants have been under siege by the Russian armed forces and have been subjected to incessant shelling, which has caused the death of many civilians to date. The attack came after a ceasefire had been agreed to allow the evacuation of civilians.

Obligations to respect international humanitarian law are binding on all parties to an armed conflict. It is important that these violations of humanitarian law, potentially constituting war crimes, do not go unpunished and can be documented, particularly in the context of the investigation opened by the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

France reiterates its calls for an immediate ceasefire throughout Ukraine and for free and unhindered humanitarian access.

### Mme Marlène Schiappa, Minister Delegate for Citizenship, attached to the Minister of the Interior, launches the platform “I commit to Ukraine”

**Paris - March 8, 2022**

Today, March 8, Marlène Schiappa, Minister Delegate for Citizenship, attached to the Minister of the Interior, launched the platform “I commit to Ukraine” to help Ukrainian families fleeing the war against Ukraine and arriving in France.

“French women and men are showing huge generosity in helping Ukrainians who arrive in France,” said Marlène Schiappa. “To support them, we’ve created a dedicated platform to put their initiatives into practice with the help of the relevant voluntary organizations,” she added.

The platform, dedicated to welcoming Ukrainian families to France, can be accessed via the link parrainage.refugies.info [refugee sponsorship website] and enables all French citizens to offer services (accommodation, language courses, food aid, translation, interpreting, administrative help etc.). The platform links people up with the relevant voluntary organizations to provide support with procedures to help find or offer accommodation.

The platform also enables voluntary organizations to make themselves known and recruit volunteers to help them carry out their work, and also includes useful information for Ukrainians who have arrived in France.

The Minister Delegate will hold a press conference at the Interior Ministry (Place Beauvau Paris 8) at 10.45 a.m. on Thursday, March 10 to describe the mechanism set up to welcome Ukrainian refugees to France and review the monitoring of flows of displaced people arriving in France with those involved in taking them in (DIAIR, DGEF).

### France mobilizes to deliver emergency medical aid to victims of the conflict

**March 1, 2022**

In view of the humanitarian situation in Ukraine created by the Russian invasion of that country and in response to a request by the Ukrainian authorities, France has decided to put together a €100 million financial package to assist victims of the conflict.

In addition to financial support for NGOs and multilateral organizations, our assistance is in the form of emergency humanitarian aid.

Four trucks carrying an initial shipment of 33 tons of emergency aid arrived in Poland from France on Sunday evening, and the shipment was delivered to the Ukrainian authorities yesterday. The shipment, which came from the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Center and the stockpile of the Interior Ministry’s Civil Security Agency, is composed of items to provide shelter for displaced persons (500 family tents, 2,300 blankets, 1,000 hygiene kits, 2,000 floor mats and 300 sleeping bags).

A second shipment composed of eight tons of emergency medical supplies departed France today aboard two Polish civil security aircraft and will be delivered to the Ukrainian authorities. This shipment includes a "mobile clinic" with medicines and hospital equipment intended to reinforce emergency facilities; it is capable of treating up to 500 war-wounded. It also includes 36 containers of medication donated by Fondation Tulipe.

These two operations fall within the framework of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (EUCPM).

At the request of the Polish authorities, humanitarian support in the form of emergency medical aid will also be provided to Poland to help care for refugees fleeing Ukraine.

Other humanitarian aid operations for Ukraine are being considered.

### The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs activates the Local Government External Action Fund to pool initiatives and harness the exceptional outpouring of solidarity with the Ukrainian people at the regional level

**March 1, 2022**

As announced by Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs activated the Local Government External Action Fund (FACECO) to pool initiatives and harness the exceptional outpouring of solidarity with the Ukrainian people at the regional level.

This mechanism allows all local governments, regardless of their size, to make financial contributions, should they wish to do so. Combined within a fund managed by specialized teams from the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Center, these contributions help fund emergency humanitarian operations that meet the priority needs of victims of the conflict.

Local governments that wish to make financial contributions to FACECO will find a "how-to" guide on the Ministry’s France Diplomatie site: https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/politique-etrangere-de-la-france/action-exterieure-des-collectivites-territoriales/article/fonds-d-action-exterieure-des-collectivites-territoriales-faceco

An additional mechanism will be activated to receive contributions from businesses that want to get involved.

Given the tragic consequences of the Russian invasion, the humanitarian needs of Ukraine and neighboring countries are acute and long-term.

France will continue to mobilize its efforts in support of the Ukrainian people.

The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs will hold an information and coordination meeting with local governments in the very near future.

### Joint declaration by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of France, Germany and Poland

**Łódź - March 1, 2022**

On the occasion of the meeting of the “Weimar Triangle” in Łódź, we, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Germany, France and Poland condemn in the strongest possible words the unprovoked invasion of Ukraine by armed forces of the Russian Federation in a flagrant breach of UN Charter. We also condemn the involvement of Belarus in this aggression against Ukraine and call on Minsk to abide by its international obligations.

Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is the most serious threat to Euro-Atlantic security in decades. We deplore the tragic loss of life, enormous human suffering and destruction caused by Russia’s actions.

We demand Russian authorities to cease military operations immediately and unconditionally withdraw all forces and military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine.

We reiterate our steadfast support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders.

We welcome the swift, united and determined reaction of the European Union and all its Member States through the adoption of new and wide-ranging restrictive measures. These unprecedented sanctions, coordinated with our partners and allies, commensurate with the scale of the violations of international law and the founding principles of European security, will have profound and long-lasting consequences for Russia.

Poland, France and Germany welcomed unity and trust demonstrated by the Transatlantic community in the past weeks in seeking a diplomatic outcome. Our countries, together with other Allies, stand united to defend one another in accordance with Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Poland, France and Germany will continue to take all necessary measures to ensure the security and defense of all Allies. We have taken measures to strengthen our contribution to deterrence and defense posture in the eastern part of the Alliance and are prepared to respond to any contingencies. Our measures are and remain preventive, proportionate and non-escalatory.

We remain gravely concerned that Russian military aggression may endanger lives of Ukrainian people and our nationals who remain in Ukraine as well as the safety and security of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission’s personnel some of whom remain in Ukraine. We hold Russia responsible for their safety.

We acknowledge the European aspirations and the European choice of Ukraine. We express our readiness to support Ukraine, its government and its people in this existentially difficult moment, be it financially, economically, by providing military equipment and in the humanitarian dimension, , as well as by sending strong political signals at all possible levels bilaterally and in international organizations. In this regard we commend the adoption on 27 of February by the Council of the European Union of a decisions establishing a €500 million assistance measures under the European Peace Facility in support of Ukraine that will contribute to strengthening the capabilities and resilience of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.

We reaffirm the commitment of Poland, France and Germany to strengthening the political association and economic integration of Ukraine with the European Union and its internal market. We express our support for NATO’s open door policy as well as its political and practical cooperation with Ukraine in defense area in order to assist Ukraine in developing its capabilities and resilience. Our countries stand by the people of Ukraine and its democratically elected institutions and representatives.

France, Poland, and Germany, as countries currently playing the leading role respectively as the EU Presidency, OSCE Chairmanship, and G7 Presidency, share a special responsibility in maintaining peace, stability, and prosperity on the European continent. We underscore that diplomacy is still an appropriate way forward in the current security situation. We deplore Russia’s denial and rejection of all diplomatic efforts including in the OSCE. We re-affirm our position that the principles enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act and subsequent OSCE documents remain the fundament of the security architecture in Europe. In the OSCE area as elsewhere, nothing can justify resorting to armed violence and aggression against sovereign States to address geopolitical tensions.

### The French President spoke with the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, several times over the past few hours

**Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic**

_Paris - February 28, 2022_

The President of the French Republic spoke with the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, today, Monday, 28 February 2022.

The French President reiterated the international community’s demand to end the Russian offensive against Ukraine and reaffirmed the need to immediately establish a ceasefire.

With discussions starting between the Russian and Ukrainian delegations, the French President asked that the following points be respected on the ground:

*   stop all strikes and attacks on civilians and residential areas;
*   preserve all civilian infrastructure;
*   secure main roads, particularly in the south of Kyiv.

President Putin confirmed that he was willing to commit to these three points.

The French President demanded compliance with international humanitarian law and the protection of civilian populations, such as delivery of aid, in accordance with the resolution submitted by France to the United Nations Security Council.

The French President suggested to the Russian President that they remain in contact over the next few days to help prevent the situation from worsening. President Putin agreed.

### France calls for unhindered humanitarian access to Ukraine

**Communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Republic**

_Paris - February 27, 2022_

During his international telephone conversations linked to the Ukraine crisis, and particularly with the leaders of the countries in the region on Saturday 26 and Sunday 27 February, the French President and his interlocutors have made the same observation that it is necessary to work on conditions for the smooth transport of humanitarian aid to Ukraine.

On the basis of these discussions, France will promote a draft resolution at the United Nations Security Council tomorrow morning to guarantee unhindered humanitarian access, to address the urgent needs of the people remaining in Ukraine.

In this framework, in addition to emergency humanitarian action, France will call for a ceasefire, which must precede any peace talks.

### Interview given by Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, to _France Inter_ (excerpts)

**Paris - February 25, 2022**

(…)

What information on the ground do you have, right now, about what’s happening in Ukraine?

THE MINISTER – It’s all-out war. President Putin has chosen war, he’s chosen a massive offensive, he’s chosen to remove Ukraine from the map, and he conducts these offensives regularly, systematically, very vigorously. And today, in the east, the south and the capital, the threat is increasing. It’s also clear in all this that the Donbas issue was only a pretext: what Putin wanted was for Ukraine to submit; and he’ll apparently be continuing his offensive to the end, knowing that President Zelenskyy, yesterday, through President Macron, expressed the wish for the conflict to stop, the deaths to stop...

That’s been rejected outright…

…and for a minimum level of dialogue to be started, and Putin rejected that. So he’s continuing his offensive extremely firmly, carrying his intentions through to the end. It’s a dramatic turning point in history. With this offensive, the history of Europe in recent years is changing course.

Should we expect a short war? Can the Ukrainian resistance be swiftly crushed by Russian forces?

Yesterday I spoke to my colleague [Dmytro] Kuleba, Ukraine’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, who told me first of all of the Ukrainians’ determination to continue their resistance, but also of the action he was asking us to take: firstly, a request for humanitarian aid, and we’re going to mobilize to that end, we’ve already done so, and the European Union will continue it; a request for financial support, and that’s been decided, both by President Macron a few days ago and by the European Council yesterday evening; a request for support in terms of defence equipment; and we’re going to follow up these requests in order to assist…

Send what, for example?

I’m not going to go into detail here, it’s not desirable in terms of informing the adversary, but he asked us for a whole list of equipment, which we’re currently looking at, and we’re doing the best we can. And he also wanted there to be sanctions to try and stifle the way Russia functions.

There are rumours that Vladimir Putin wants to assassinate Ukrainian President Zelenskyy. Is this true? Are you getting the same feedback from your services?

I think President Zelenskyy’s security is a central factor in what’s happening now, and we’re in a position to help him if necessary, but it’s important for him to hold his position. I’m very struck by President Zelenskyy’s composure, his control over what he’s saying and the way he speaks to his people. I’m also very struck by the Ukrainian people’s courage and their determination to reject this occupation.

Help him if necessary: what does that mean?

We’ll take the measures that need to be taken.

Does that mean exfiltrating him if need be?

As I say, we’ll take the measures that need to be taken.

Among the direct consequences of the Russian attack, the first population movements, 100,000 people fled Ukraine yesterday – that’s an estimate. Are you anticipating significant population movements to Europe – displaced people, refugees – and if so, on what scale?

Yes, it’s possible; I don’t want to give any figures, but it’s clear that the pressure currently being exerted on Kyiv has led to significant population movements, in particular towards Poland, and obviously the Europeans will step up and show solidarity, taking in refugees, taking in displaced people, to put us all collectively in a position to welcome and support them. Those movements were discussed at the European Council last night; there will be a meeting of European Union interior ministers under our responsibility tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, to think about how we can show solidarity and welcome those refugees as effectively as possible.

(…) Last night you replied on this point: “Vladimir Putin must also understand that the Atlantic Alliance is a nuclear alliance”, end of quote. What exactly does that mean? What’s the exact meaning of your words?

It’s very simple: whenever there’s an intervention of this kind by President Putin – I’m thinking in particular of Crimea in 2014 –, he tries to frighten people, he says, “look at my muscles, I’m strong”, he tries to intimidate people, but he knows very well – and I repeat it here, as I said yesterday evening, no more and no less – that the Atlantic Alliance is also a nuclear alliance. There you are, full stop.

Which also shows its muscles?

He knows it, so they are, as it were, words to frighten people, but he’s well aware of the balance of power.

Things have to be explained, and I repeat the question about what exactly your remarks mean. When, like France, you’re Europe’s sole nuclear power, it changes everything.

Yes, I say that when President Putin says in his remarks – in particular in his announcement before the intervention in Ukraine – that he has major weapons, we reply quite simply: “so do we”.

Let’s get on to the area of sanctions. (…) Are you really sure they’ll be effective?

I’m not sure President Putin has appreciated the scale of the sanctions that were decided on yesterday, both by the Europeans and by our transatlantic partners, by President Biden in this case, last night. I’m not sure he’s appreciated the scale, because the aim of these sanctions is actually to paralyse the way Russia functions, stifle the way Russia functions, and strike at the heart of its major financial, economic and technological systems. And so the package of measures that has been announced is quite impressive, it’s never been seen. What was done at one point, after the invasion of Crimea, was one thing; now we’re looking at a massive process which will have consequences on Russia – very quickly – because there was a first set of measures taken by the European Union foreign ministers on Tuesday, when we met here in Paris, which was already very directly aimed at a number of banks, which applies immediately, and the package of measures decided on yesterday will apply very quickly, at least the financial part and the action against banks. So the process is huge, but it reflects the gravity of the situation.

As for France, it will be adding its own sanctions against Russian citizens. On this point, what’s being envisaged?

The President said last night that France would adopt measures regarding the property assets of a number of oligarchs who have the habit of visiting France; the measures will be drastic and tough and they’ll be notified…

What does that mean? Freezing their assets, banning them from the country? What does it mean?

It means freezing their assets, it means freezing the cheque books, it means [their] not being able to gain access to their property assets, it means [their] no longer being able to carry out commercial or economic activities, or indeed activities involving free movement in France; they’ll be extremely vigorous measures.

Why haven’t the Europeans banned Russian banks from the bank messaging system Swift, the so-called nervous system, in a way, a crucial cog in global finance? Why wasn’t that adopted yesterday?

Because we had to move fast and take drastic and demanding measures, like the measures we adopted in the financial sphere against 70% of Russian banks, which will no longer be able to financially refuel on the financial markets. That’s already huge; afterwards nothing is off the table, there will be other measures, other sanctions.

But we saw Germany and Italy, which took another line on the Swift issue.

No, because we had to move fast yesterday, and we had to immediately signal our unity on tough issues, and that was done.

But can you create Europe with two countries which, in a war situation, when the French President himself calls for the creation of a Europe that is a power – how can anyone understand that countries are not aligned at the very moment when there’s war in Europe?

The countries are totally aligned. I must disagree with what you say about European disunity. What’s struck me most since the beginning of this crisis has been European unity, and the speed with which the Europeans agree on adopting sanctions. The sanctions package decided on yesterday is on such a scale that it’s first of all benefited the European Union, and it will have decisive impacts on Russia; it will hurt very much.

Emmanuel Macron declared yesterday evening that Vladimir Putin had chosen to take us back to the age of empires and confrontation. We know now that Vladimir Putin is putting his threats into action, and this requires us to look at the future differently. Are you worried for countries such as Moldova and Georgia, countries which are basically in the same security vacuum as Ukraine was?

President Putin is reinventing history, he wants to recreate an empire, he wants to assert his power by every means, he’s in a kind of downward slide. Actually, for a few years we’ve witnessed – especially at the moment – a kind of threefold drift towards authoritarianism by President Putin. There’s a drift towards authoritarianism domestically; we should remember the Navalny affair, but also remember, today, that those who want to demonstrate in Russia against the war find themselves in jail. We must also remember that yesterday 170 journalists were banned from taking an initiative to protest against the war. There’s a drift towards authoritarianism domestically. There’s a drift towards authoritarianism externally, which began with Georgia in 2008 and continued with the action in Syria, which continued with Crimea, and now Ukraine; beforehand there was Belarus…

And now?

And there’s a drift, as well, towards authoritarianism in terms of interference, i.e. trying to throw the West off balance by various destabilizing actions. It’s this drift towards authoritarianism which is leading to the reconfiguration of history, the reinvention of history on the part of President Putin. (…)

But are you worried for countries such as Moldova and Georgia?

Yes, of course, we’re worried about what comes next, and this is why the adopted packet of measures is going to be absolutely decisive, including also for Russia’s arms industries. So it’s important now to bring these into effect as swiftly as possible.

But what do you think comes next, in light of what happened yesterday morning, namely a country crosses the border of a sovereign State with its military forces – does this change everything?

It changes everything, history has dramatically changed course; contrary, incidentally, to what President Putin may have thought, his actions have strengthened European unity and strengthened the unity of NATO. This afternoon there’s going to be a summit of NATO heads of State and government to consider the security measures to be taken vis-à-vis the Alliance’s countries which are vulnerable, because of their proximity to Russia – I’m thinking particularly of the action President Macron decided yesterday to step up our own presence in Estonia, to step up our presence in Romania. All this results in a kind of new robustness on the part of the European Union, and ultimately the allies, and this is the opposite effect Putin was looking for. But this affirmation of solidarity and firmness will have to be continued in the coming weeks.

Yesterday you described him as a cynic and dictator, this morning you’re describing the headlong rush towards authoritarianism; can Vladimir Putin still be stopped?

Listen, we’re doing everything to make that happen. I think he’s going to be the pariah of the international community; later on there’s going to be a meeting of the United Nations Security Council at which he’s going to find himself isolated; he won’t be able to go on being alone in the world, continuously being an aggressor and wanting to spread war as a means of governance.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy talked about a new iron curtain in Europe. We’re obviously talking about a Cold War again; are you talking in these terms?

It’s a new situation, it isn’t the same thing as the Cold War any more, because there was no war with the Cold War. What’s new is that there’s a war at the heart of Europe, and it’s in this sense that Vladimir Putin is a merchant of war. (…)

### The President of the Republic, Mr.Emmanuel Macron, addresses the French people

**Paris - February 24, 2022**

_[in French]_

### Statement by Mr.Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs

**February 24, 2022**

As the French President said this morning, France condemns in the strongest terms the military invasion of Ukraine launched by Russia overnight. It also condemns the use of Belarusian territory authorized by the Lukashenko regime to carry out this aggression against a sovereign country. This choice of war is a brutal violation of international law. It will bring immediate, massive consequences and a severe cost, as the Europeans have announced with their partners several times. I express my full solidarity with Ukraine’s democratically elected authorities and with the Ukrainian people at this difficult time. France will further strengthen its support for Ukraine, in all forms.

This morning a crisis unit was activated at the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs’ Crisis and Support Center. In conjunction with the crisis unit activated in Kyiv by our embassy, which is fully operational and focused on its task, it is making active efforts to coordinate support for French nationals who are still on Ukrainian territory at this time. This action will also serve to coordinate the various State departments involved in handling the situation. Advice will be passed on to the French community in real time, as the crisis we’re witnessing unfolds.
