Title: 

URL Source: https://www.brooklynpaper.com/wp-content/uploads/assets/pdf/25_26br.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 08 May 2024 11:17:34 GMT

Markdown Content:
Waterway Ferry at the Brooklyn Army Terminal and the ship was christened “The Brooklyn.” Markowitz spoke at the Monday press conference making official last week’s announcement that continua-tion of the free Sunset Park-to-Lower Manhattan ferry started just days after Sept. 11, had been secured under a six-month contract with the city’s largest ferry service provider. The city Economic Corporation signed a six-month, $1.5 million con-tract with NY Waterway on Tuesday, allowing the company to operate the ferry service from July 24 through the end of December under government subsidies. For 10 months, the city’s Depart-ment of Transportation has operated a free ferry service from Pier 4 at 58th 

WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

Our neighborhood’s independent voice 

Published weekly by Brooklyn Paper Publications Inc, 26 Court St., Brooklyn, NY 11242 Phone 718-834-9350 AD fax 718-834-1713 • N EWS fax 718-834-9278 © 2002 Brooklyn Paper Publications • 20 pages including 8 pages GO BROOKLYN • Vol.25, No. 26 BRG • July 1, 2002 • FREE 

# Happy Fourth! 

We’ve included a U.S. flag on page 11. Display it proudly. 

GOD BLESS AMERICA 

# TRAGEDY STRIKES TWICE 

Eltherios Kiladitis at the wake for his son, Stefanos, on Tuesday. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango Firefighters douse blaze that killed an entire family in building on Fort Hamilton Parkway. The Brooklyn Papers / Valerie Hodgson 

# DUI crash kills Ridge biker Dyker family dies in inferno Staten Island cop charged with drinking, running light Trapped by flames, 7 perish in Ft Ham P’kwy apartment 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

A Staten Island police officer faces manslaughter charges for allegedly driving under the influence of alco-hol when he ran a red light and plowed into a 21-year-old Bay Ridge man riding his motorcycle on Fort Hamilton Parkway. Stefanos Kiladitis, of 67th Street, was knocked off his bike and hurled through the air June 19 after off-duty police officer Victor Wilson allegedly made a left through a standing red light at 88th Street. Kiladitis never regained conscious and died after being taken off life support three days later. On Tuesday, Kiladitis’ mother, Kallaipi sat sobbing in front of her son’s casket. Overcome with grief, she could barely rise to hug the many family and friends paying their respects at his wake. Kallaipi Kiladitis was among the many mourners at the Dahill Funeral Home on 65th Street in Borough Park who simply asked aloud, “Why?” She and her husband, Eltherios, had made the gut-wrenching decision to re-move their son — known to his friends and family as “Little Steve” — from life support at Lutheran Medical Center Satur-day, three days after he was thrown from his Kawasaki ZX9 motorcycle by the ac-tions of an allegedly drunken cop. Kiladitis was heading west on Fort Hamilton Parkway around 10:30 pm last Wednesday when Wilson slammed into him with the driver’s side of his 1995 Chrysler Cirrus as he made a left turn from 88th Street. Eltherios Kiladitis told The Brooklyn Papers that the impact threw his son more than 50 feet from his motorcycle. He sus-tained what would prove to be fatal head 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Chris Theoharis stood across the street from what is left of his fire-gutted three-family house Tuesday while construction workers exam-ined the building for unstable frag-ments. He just stared. “It is unbelievable,” Theoharis said, and repeated at least three times before turning away. An entire family, the Nadeems, who lived for seven years in the third-floor apartment of Theoharis’ building on Fort Hamilton Parkway between Bay Ridge Avenue and 70th Street were trapped and killed Sunday when fire engulfed their apartment. The victims included Yasem-ine Nadeem, 30, her husband, Moham-mad, 44, and their five children: Abeka, 13; Romesa, 11; Bisma, 5; Nirma, 3; and 9-month-old Zanneb. The remains of six of the family mem-bers were found huddled together in a rear bedroom of the apartment, near a window leading to the fire escape, which, accord-ing to firefighters, had been blocked by flames. The seventh, 9-month-old Zan-neb, was found below the others on the second floor. According to published reports, family members had huddled around the youngest child in order to protect her from the flames. But when the floorboards gave way, Zanneb fell into the second-floor apartment where the fire had originally sparked from a grease fire. Fire Department officials said the June 23 blaze was accidentally ignited shortly before 2:30 pm by Muzamal Khawaja, who was frying chicken in the kitchen of her second-floor apartment. Once the oil caught fire, fire officials said, it quickly spread throughout the kitchen. After a 

Independence Week holiday 

The Brooklyn Papers’ offices will be closed for our annual Independence Week vacation, July 1-7, and The Papers will not publish next week. Our offices reopen Monday, July 8, and The Papers will pub-lish on Thursday, July 11. 

# Term-limit change may extend Marty Ferry christened Brooklyn style 

Borough President Marty Markowitz christens new ferry with a bottle of Brooklyn Lager as NY Waterway owners Arthur Imperatore and Arthur Imperatore Jr. watch the suds fly. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango Adham Deed, Nedel Abusheikh, Chetan Ogaleilf and Lauren Coyle display their honors bestowed by Councilman Marty Golden and Captain Dominick Colasuonno. 

# Honors for teens who chased killer 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Angela Coyle hardly knew what to say when her 17-year-old daughter Lauren called her from her cell phone to tell her she had just witnessed a murder on 86th Street in Bay Ridge. “I asked her if she was alright, and then I asked her if anybody did any-thing,” Coyle said. “Yes mom, we did,” Lauren Coyle answered. Lauren, along with three other Bay Ridge teenagers watched in horror as Ariel Garcia, 25, allegedly thrust a knife into the heart of 60-year-old Leona Rothman as she sat in front of her apartment building on 86th Street between Third and Fourth Avenues on June 16. Then they gave chase, pursu-ing the alleged murderer to the Fort Hamilton High School athletic field, where police apprehended him. On Sunday, Councilman Marty Gold-en presented City Council proclamations and mayoral certificates to the four teens outside the 68th Precinct stationhouse. “What you all did last Sunday is re-markable, and you deserve to be com-mended,” Golden said to the five stu-dents before giving them their awards. “A true sign of courage, bravery and concern for the community. You all im-mediately followed him…you instigat-ed a chase of the suspect and I com-mend you.” According to neighbors, hours be-fore Rothman was stabbed Garcia’s es-tranged wife had moved into her moth-er’s apartment, located in Rothman’s building, after a fight with her husband. The Daily News quoted building man-

# Mermaid madness 

“Hillbilly mermaids” Trish Dalton and Robin Adams are in appropriate attire for the annual Mermaid Parade on the Coney Island boardwalk Saturday. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

It took three tries, but on Borough President Marty Markowitz’s third whack, a bot-tle of Brooklyn Lager beer broke over the hull of a New York 

See TEENS on page 6 See FERRY on page 6 See TRAPPED on page 4 See DUI on page 10 

By Patrick Gallahue 

The Brooklyn Papers 

With political races, indictments and old rivalries spicing up the cur-rent City Council, a modification to the term limits law could extend the shelf life of seven council members capping an extraordinary year in City Hall. With the city budget settled, discus-sion among the council has turned to rethinking the policy that cleared the way for over two-thirds of the fresh-man membership. According to the existing law, coun-cilmembers are entitled to two terms in office, at least one of which must be a full, four-year period. But seven coun-cil members will be forced out under the current rules at the end of 2003, af-ter only six years in office, including the body’s most powerful member, Speaker Gifford Miller, as well as two of Brooklyn’s most media-prone dele-gates — for vastly different reasons — Marty Golden of Bay Ridge-Dyker Heights and Angel Rodriguez of Sun-set Park-Red Hook. Due to redistricting, the term begin-ning in 2004 will be a two-year term, and Miller sees that as an opportunity to rectify the seeming inequity, by let-ting those seven members run once more. The movement picked up some steam this week when Mayor Michael Bloomberg said in an interview that he would consider an amendment to the term-limits law. Bloomberg was quoted in the June 

See MARTY on page 6 

> The Brooklyn Papers  / Tom Callan

# INSIDE : SUMMER IN BROOKLYN INSIDE : SUMMER IN BROOKLYN For most New Yorkers, “Gotta Go to Mo’s” is just an annoying slogan we’ve heard too many times. But for Cyclones designated hitter Bobby Malek, it’s become a mantra. Earlier in the season, the Cyclones were plagued by a shortage of bats, one of the most basic pieces of equipment that a team pro-vides its players. Granted, ballplay-ers can be pretty picky about the lumber they bring to the plate, but even the easiest-going players were unsatisfied by the team’s poor selection of “Baumbats” — a durable-but-lifeless composite-wood bat that many hitters use only for batting practice. Malek didn’t want to use a Baumbat to make his profes-sional baseball debut, so he took matters into his own hands — and in doing so, revealed little-known secrets about how a minor-league bat rack is put together. It’s unknown to most fans, but some players — read high draft choices — have special deals with baseball bat manu-facturers (who are eager to latch onto a potential major-lea-guer early in his career). Others simply buy bats at a dis-count through their agent (who gets a good price thanks to his own deals with manufacturers). Still others buy bats wherever they feel comfortable. One of last year’s stars, Frank Corr, bought his distinctive orange bats at, of all places, Kmart. Malek was drafted in the fourth round this year — impres-sive to fans and sportswriters, but not impressive enough to earn him a lifetime of free lumber — and the bats he ordered through his agent had not arrived. With Opening Day draw-ing perilously closer, Malek took a long walk from the Poly-technic University dormitory where the Cyclones are staying and, fortunately for him, discovered the Fulton Mall. “I got lost walking around and ended up at this place called Modell’s,” said the Michigan native, clearly unfamil-iar with New York’s 113-year-old sporting goods institution. “I wandered in. But sporting goods stores aren’t like I re-member them. The entire ground floor was just uniforms and T-shirts. The actual sporting goods were downstairs.” Malek wasn’t surprised to find rack after rack of alu-minum bats, but he was surprised that there was only one garbage can half-filled with wooded bats — and most of them were for kids. “I said to the guy, ‘Do you have anything a little bigger?’” Malek recalled. “The salesman went in the back and brought out this Louisville Slugger.” It was an Alex Rodriguez model — which Malek considered to be a good omen since it fea-tured the burned-in signature of the Texas Rangers’ infielder who is the highest-paid player in the game. The next day, Malek took his A-Rod bat into the batting cage and promptly scattered souvenirs all over the KeySpan Park bleachers. After his explosive hitting clinic, fellow Cy-clones gathered around to admire the new bat. Later that night, in that first-ever at-bat, Malek lined an RBI single — and promptly retired the Modell’s-bought bat. “It’s my first pro at-bat, my first hit and my first RBI,” he said. “I’d hate to break it on some cheap grounder, so it’s re-tired — unless I get in a big slump.” A few days later, Malek’s bats arrived from his agent, so he sold his remaining A-Rod bat to infielder Brendan Mannix, who liked it so much that he went to Modell’s the next day and bought two more, cleaning out the store’s humble supply. It sounded like it was time for a fact-finding tour, so I headed for the Modell’s on Fulton Mall to find out whether workers there were even aware that their store was outfitting the New York-Penn League champions. “I’m amazed to hear that,” said manager Ganesh Persaud. “We’ve been selling Cyclones merchandise to fans, but I had no idea that we were selling equipment to the players.” Persaud said that 95 percent of the bats he sells are alu-minum — which explains why he stocks so few wood bats. (By the way, Cyclones souvenirs are as scarce at Modell’s as the timber. This reporter was appalled to find just two lonely, out-of-reach racks of Cyclone T-shirts in the furthest corner of the store, while Los Angeles Laker and Washing-ton Wizard jerseys — hello, not only are they out-of-town teams, but basketball season is OVER! — are in prime real estate up front.) Persaud vowed to stock more wooden bats if the demand keeps up. It doesn’t look likely; players’ favorite sticks are now starting to fill the bat rack and the Baumbats are once again reserved only for BP. But that doesn’t mean Malek has stopped playing “Let’s Make a Deal.” After recounting how he sold Mannix his spare A-Rod bat, Malek danced around the dugout in a near-ly new pair of Nike Air spikes. Another Modell’s purchase? “No, I bought ’em off Brett Harper for 10 bucks,” he said. “Hardly used!” 

Gersh Kuntzman is also a columnist for The New York Post and Newsweek.com. His Web site is www.gersh.tv 

2 AWP July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

# GARFIELD KITCHENSANDBATHSINC.

• Kohler • Sonia • Mobana • Toto • Franke Sinks • St. Thomas • Grohe • KWC • Corian • Margo Faucets of France Featuring... 

• Rich Made Custom Cabinetry • Prestige Cabinets • Claremont Fine Cabinetry 

266 Fifth Avenue at Garfield Place 

# (718) 783-2800 Plus – 

– Custom granite counter tops – Complete tile displays including computerized tile layout – Free kitchen layout and design – Unbelievable Quality and Incredible Prices 

# Brooklyn’s Newest Showroom Brooklyn’s Newest Showroom Open Monday through Saturday 

cupunture & Qi gong are both based on Qi (Life energy). By using a unique combination of Qi Gong teaching and Acupuncture treatment, I provide a more powerful & effective treatment that will save YOU money, suffering & time. First Time Patients Receive Expert Diagnosis & Acupuncture Treatment (Including these extra bonuses, valued at $275). But your first visit is only $125. Why? Because I want you to get well quicker. 

❑ Complimentary personal Qi Gong teaching, based on your health needs, to improve YOUR health quickly with more energy, balance, & relaxation. ($85 value) 

❑ A “Better Food” consultation, utilizing the principles of Chinese Medicine. ($50 value) 

❑ A FREE Qi Gong video tape to empower your well-being physically & spiritually. 

($70 value, first 3 patients daily) 

❑ Qi Gong Tui-Na - Similar to massage, but shorter, better and quicker results ($70 value) 

and Immediately Charge Your Energy Save YOUR Money, Suffering & Time 

## NOW! Rapidly Relieve your Pain 

 Back Pain 

 Sciatica 

 Arthritis 

 Neuralgia 

 Allergies 

 Asthma 

 Diabetes 

 Migraines 

Call 1-800-860-4051 now! 

19 West 34th St., #1018, NYC 

(bet. 5th & 6th Aves) 

66 Willoughby St., #2F, Brooklyn 

(bet. Lawrence & Bridge Sts) 

 PMS 

 Immune Disorders 

 Fibroids/Cysts 

 Stress 

 Depression 

 Fatigue 

 Impotence ... and more 

I dare not forget that many years ago when sick & injured, my family & I were treated poorly by doctors. Thus, I Dr. Warner Chen, absolutely commit 100% to treat YOU with my whole heart! 100% refund by the end of the first visit if not satisfied, because you will be treated with 100% respect. 

Grand Master 

Dr. Warner Chen 

Host of health talk shows World class Qi Gong teacher NYS Lic. Senior Acupuncturist & Chinese Herbal Expert Ph.D, NYU & Harvard trained Former Mt. Sinai Teacher 

I was pale and had palpitations and stomach problems. After learn-ing Dr. Chen’s Qi Gong methods, my health improved enormously. After having a bald spot for many years, my hair returned. My own mother did not recognize me and my friends were amazed. 

–S TUART L. NY F IRE DEPARTMENT 

I was suffering severely from arthritis. The first time I visited Dr. Chen I was using a walker and crying from the pain. After my sec-ond visit, I no longer needed a walker, but only a cane. After my third visit, I was smiling and I had no need for the cane. 

– J OSEPHINE QUEST BROOKLYN , NY 

Dr. Chen not only helped my back pain, but my allergy never occurred again! – D R. M ONICA S. BROOKLYN MEDICAL CENTER DIRECTOR Brooklyn Paper Readers: 20% OFF 1st visit (L IMITED OFFER )



> with Gersh Kuntzman

Ridin’theCyclonesRidin’theCyclones

# Need a bat? Go to Mo’s By Gersh Kutzman 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

Third baseman Brett Harper denies that he’s trying to start a fashion trend, but the hot-hit-ting Arizonan is never — no, really, NEVER — seen with-out two black patches under his eyes. It’s called “eye black.” Once an ashy powder that players spread under their eyes to lessen the glare of the sun as it bounced off their cheeks, eye black now consists of Band-Aid-like patches that are easy to apply and never run. No Cyclone has ever been as fond of eye black as Harper, so there was initial suspicion among the press corps that perhaps Harper had a rare skin condition that necessitated maximum glare reduction. But recently, Harper revealed to The Brooklyn Papers the true reason for his addiction to eye black. “It just looks cool,” he said. But Brett Harper has a lot more going for him than just being a fashion trend-setter. One of the few offensive bright spots on the team so far, Harper is the son of longtime major leaguer Brian Harper, a lifetime .300 hitter in his 16 major-league seasons and a member of the 1991 World Series-champion Minnesota Twins. Harper, who now manages the Anaheim Angels’ rookie-league team, was on hand for the Cyclones’ first two games and saw his son go 4-9 with 4 RBIs. The minor-leaguer said having his major-league dad around caused no stress. “There’s never any pressure with him,” Brett Harper said. “He’s never been negative to-

# DOWNs 

# &

# UPs UPs DOWNs 

# &

# For Harper, the eyes have it 

wards me or my playing. He’s been there as a player. He knows that you can’t get a hit every time up. No one’s ever done that.” Brett said he remembered watching his father as a child and “making a note of every-thing: how he swung on cer-tain counts, what he did with certain pitches, everything. I didn’t even ask too many questions, just watched. He’s helped me so much over the years.” 

By the Numbers 

They say that pitching wins ballgames, but during a four-game stretch last week, the Cyclones proved that hitting is a little more important some-times. During those 43 innings — starting with Thursday’s loss to the hated Staten Island Yankees and extending to Sunday night’s extra-inning heartbreaker with the Ab-erdeen Iron Birds — Cyclone pitchers racked up 53 strike-outs while yielding only seven walks. Yet the team lost three of those four games. “It is frustrating, of course, but at this level, the pitchers are learning that there are things they can control — making the pitches, fielding their position, keeping their team in the game — and things they can’t,” said Hall of Fame pitcher Jim Palmer, who threw out the ceremonial first pitch on Tuesday night. “So a stretch like that teaches them how to be persistent and do their job, which is the most important thing.” 

On the mend 

It’s not all fun and it’s defi-nitely not all games for some Cyclones. Tyler Davidson, an eighth-round pick out of the University of Washington, hadn’t even gotten his first Cyclone at-bat before injuring himself in batting practice last week. Now he’s the guy riding the pine with a thin, Rollerblade-style brace on his 

# WHO’S A BUM! The Paper’s Pick for Cyclones Player of the Week 

If he keeps this up, they’ll retire his number. Cyclones third baseman Edgar Rodriguez made an immediate impact last season when he hit the team’s first home run during opening day in Jamestown, NY. But an injury soon after left him out most of the season. Back with the ’Clones this sea-son, Rodriguez has picked up right were he left off, batting .400 with 2 HRs and 5 RBIs in the team’s opening eight games and earning himself the first of this year’s cov-eted Brooklyn Papers “Who’s A Bum” award. left wrist. At this level of the minors, you don’t get an MRI unless something doesn’t heal, so Davidson just has to wait and see. “This does suck, I must ad-mit,” he said. “I got injured before I even had a chance to play.” Meanwhile, Cyclones hold-

Cyclones third baseman Edgar Rodriguez hit two home runs on Monday night. 

over Tyler Beuerlein, who had yet to play a game because of his injured right elbow, re-turned in fine fashion, going 2-4 in Monday night’s 7-0 de-struction of the New Jersey Cardinals. He told The Brook-lyn Papers that he’ll be back on the field next week, a few weeks ahead of schedule. 

Readers of the New Yorker are ac-customed to erudite themes being de-picted on the magazine’s often esoteric cover. The War on Terror heats up in Afghanistan? The New Yorker has bal-let dancers on the front page. The presi-dent gets impeached? The New Yorker cover depicts two ducks flying over Central Park. Wildfires in Arizona? The immor-tal visage of monocle-wearer Eustace Tilly greets readers that week. But this week, when the magazine needed an image of summer, cover artist Peter de Seve took him-self out to the ballpark. This week’s cover featured a group of riders plunging down the first hill of the famed Cyclone roller coaster — all of them ter-rified, except for the lone Brooklyn Cyclone who is sitting near the back, poised to catch a fly ball hit out of Keyspan Park. So the question on everyone’s mind at the batting cage and in the Cyclones club-house was obvious: Who is that unflap-pable Cyclone with the corn-fed good looks and the curly blond hair poking out from under his cap? Speculation quickly centered on three possibilities — shaggy-haired catcher Jimmy Anderson, infielder Tyler Beuer-lein or shortstop Corey Ragsdale — until 

# Name that Clone 

Have you seen this man?: 

Is the cover boy Anderson, Ragsdale or Beuerlein? 

Cyclones manager Howard Johnson is-sued the definitive call: “Look at the hair,” he said. “It’s Anderson.” But Anderson said it couldn’t be him because the ballplayer on the cover — a painting called “Fair Ball” — is wearing a fielder’s mitt. “I don’t even have any-thing but catcher’s gloves,” he said. Unclear which Cyclone was the New Yorker cover boy, The Brooklyn Papers called de Seve at his Park Slope home. He promptly denied that he based the portrait on any one Cyclone player. “I couldn’t name a Brooklyn Cyclone if I had a bazooka to my head,” de Seve said. That wasn’t meant as a put-down of the area’s only professional team that won a championship last year. “I went to a game last year and found myself inspired by the whole gestalt of the thing — the ocean, the small stadium, the young, hopeful players,” de Seve continued. “I like my covers to be very specific to a place in New York City, so that’s why I chose Coney Island when I wanted an im-age of summer.” In the end, de Seve ruled out Anderson, Beuerlein or Ragsdale. “It’s not meant to be a specific player,” he said, “but merely someone who was acting with great as-surance, confidence and skill, someone who goes about his chosen profession with great aplomb.” Oh, so it’s infielder Chase Lambin, then? — Gersh Kuntzman 

> The New Yorker  / Peter de Seve The Brooklyn Papers  / Gary Thomas The Brooklyn Papers  / Gary Thomas
> The Brooklyn Papers  / Gary Thomas
> The Brooklyn Papers  / Gary Thomas

By Gersh Kuntzman 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

Yankees 4 Cyclones 1 

at Staten Island, Thurs., June 20 

Five Yankee pitchers shut down the Cyclone offense for the first time in the team’s three meetings. Starter Chien-Ming Wang gave up only an RBI dou-

# Cycs take four 

ble to Alhaji Turay in the first be-fore settling down to pitch five in-nings of three-hit ball. Cyclones starter Miguel Pinango was even better, holding the Yanks score-less through five. But in the Yank sixth, Gabe Lopez led off with a hard double and later scored on a groundout. The Yanks added an-other run later in the inning when the Cyclones couldn’t finish off a double-play. 

Cyclones 2 Iron Birds 1 

14 Ins, at Brooklyn, Fri., June 21 

The longest game in Cy-clones history ended positively, thanks to Edgar Rodriguez’s 14th-inning RBI single. But pri-marily, this game was about pitching. Wayne Ough allowed just one run on five hits through six innings, striking out 12. Un-fortunately, the Cyclones man-aged only two hits off Aberdeen starter David Farren. In the eighth, Rodriguez doubled and scored on second-baseman Chase Lambin’s double. Cy-clones relievers Ryan Olson, Tim McNab, Dave Lohrman and Omar Anez, who got the W, shut down the Iron Birds the rest of the way. In all, 21 Iron Birds were fanned in the win. 

Iron Birds 5 Cyclones 0 

at Brooklyn, Sat. June 22 

Aberdeen starter Nick Mc-Curdy dominated, pitching five no-hit innings before leaving the game because of his pitch count. By the time the Cyclones started hitting, they were al-ready behind by five, thanks to Mike Russel’s 3-5 night. Chad Bowen pitched 4 innings in his first start of the year, and al-lowed 2 earned runs on 7 hits, while striking out 6. 

Iron Birds 7 Cyclones 6 

11 in., at Brooklyn, Sun. June 23 

In their latest ugly loss, the Cyclones blew a late-inning two-run lead — and squandered an amazing, five-run fifth in-ning — in falling again to Cal Ripken’s Iron Birds. Despite giving up 4 runs, starting pitch-er Kevin Deaton was on the winning side after the ‘Clones rapped out six consecutive hits — capped by a Blake Whealy triple — in the fifth. Deaton (9K’s) was pulled after five and the Iron Birds chipped away at the lead with runs in the seventh and, unforgivably, the ninth against eventual loser Omar Anez. In the 11th, the Cyclones looked like they’d get out of a jam when catcher Abraham Ay-ala smartly fielded a bunt and fired to third for a forceout, but shortstop Corey Ragsdale didn’t call time out, allowing Patrick Gonzalez to sneak to an uncov-ered third base. He later scored on a sacrifice fly. 

Cyclones 7 Cardinals 0 

at New Jersey, Monday, June 24 

The E-Rod show had a com-mand performance as Edgar Ro-driguez continued his league-leading hitting with a solo homer in his first at-bat and then a three-run blast in his second. As a re-sult, Brooklyn racked up its first shutout of the year behind six strong innings by starter Yunior Cabrera (2-0, 0.82 ERA). Infield-er Chase Lambin also hit a two-run dinger in a game that saw the return of injured Cyclone holdover Tyler Beuerlein, who had two hits. Freshman phenoms Ender Chavez and Alhaji Turay also had two hits on the night. 

Cyclones 2 Cardinals 1 

at Brooklyn, Tues., June 25 

A classic pitcher’s duel was won in the bottom of the ninth thanks to Brett Harper’s RBI single. But the story of this game was the starting pitching of Miguel Pinango, who gave up just one unearned run, while striking out five in six innings. Ryan Olson (1-0, 0.00 ERA) got the win with three innings of near-perfect ball. The Cy-clones offense continued to stumble, smacking just four hits in the first eight innings. But a lead off single by catcher Jim-my Anderson and another sin-gle by Blake Whealy set up Harper’s ninth-inning heroics. 

Cyclones 5 Expos 4 

in Vermont, Wed. June 26 

Four Cyclone pitchers com-bined for 12 strikeouts and Chris Sherman survived a late Expos rally, holding them off to get the win. Shortstop Corey Ragsdale was 2-4 with two RBIs. July 1, 2002 THE BAY RIDGE PAPER 3THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

Miami 46" Round Table 

VS670004 (229405) 

# $29 88 

Ea. 

# Driving Down The Cost Of Home Improvement! 

## There's A New Home Depot In Your Neighborhood! Events Going On This Week At The Mill Basin Home Depot! 

Highback Armchair 

• Stackable for easy storage • Great for patios and decks (780807) 

# $997 

46" Pedestal Resin Table 

• Amazon green • Durable, all weather finish • Will not rust, crack, or fade • Pieces sold individually 52675078 (423993) 

# $39 88 

5 Position Folding Beach Chair 

• Multi-colored SC590-112-HB (100059) 

Ad Event # 40179 268-6/27-2 

# $24 88 

Ea. Ea. 

Beach Umbrella 

• Multi-colored UB74 (234311) 

# $19 98 Ea. QuickSet ® Gas Grill 

• 35,000 BTU, 340 sq. in. cooking area • Push button ignition, porcelain cooking grate • Plastic side shelves with tool hanger • LP tank included (623676) 

# $139 

## 2'x4' Flag Kit with 5' Pole and Bracket 99051 (694149) 

# $19 97 

Ea. 

Ea. 

Amazon Green Highback Armchair 

• Stackable for easy storage • Great for patios and decks (749516) 

Ea. 

# $997 *All gift cards will be sent to customers directly from Glidden ® or Behr ® . 10 gallon limit. See store for full details. †Free delivery offer valid 6/17/02 - 7/7/02 on any appliance purchase of $399 or more. Normal Depot Direct and EXPO ® Design Center delivery terms apply. Not available in all locations. Ask an associate for details. Prices good at the Mill Basin Home Depot only from 6/27/02 - 7/4/02. 

Prices good at the Mill Basin Home Depot only from 6/27/02 - 7/4/02 only! 

Regularly.... $39.88 Regularly.... $49.88 Table and 4 Chairs 

# $69 76 

Save $10 Save $10 

# FREE $6Home Depot Gift Card! 

*With any purchase of one (1) gallon Glidden ® Evermore ™interior/exterior or (1) gallon Behr ® Premium Plus ® interior/exterior paint or (1) gallon Behr ® exterior stain, between June 27 and July 7th, receive a FREE $6 Home Depot Gift Card by mail. 

# FREE Appliance Delivery! 

† On any purchase of $399 or more. Hurry in! Limited time offer. Offer valid June 17th - July 7th only. 

# FREE $50 Home Depot Gift Card! 

Receive a $50 Home Depot Gift Card when you buy a 9 or 12 year water heater and have it installed through Home Depot. See store for full details. Offer valid June 27th - July 31st only. 

# FREE Carpet Pad! 

Free carpet pad with purchase of any installed carpet product. See store for details. Offer valid June 10th - July 7th only. 

# FREE Hoover Vacuum or Steam Vacuum! ** 

With any flooring and installation purchase over $1500. **$129 value. Manufacturer mail in offer. Limit one per household. See store for details. 

Offer valid June 10th - July 7th only. 

# $1 million bail for Ferrari killer By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

A judge set bail at $1 mil-lion Thursday for an Israeli man living in Florida who allegedly tried to flee the scene of the crime after he struck and killed a pedestri-an on Fourth Avenue in Bay Ridge last April. Darninka Rachamin, 24, was indicted on charges in-cluding second-degree murder for allegedly killing Howard Mazariegos, of Gravesend, on April 19 while driving his sports car while drunk and at speeds of up to 100 miles an hour. He faces 25 years to life in prison if convicted. During his scheduled June 18 pre-trial hearing, Judge Guy Mangano ordered that Rach-amin return to court Thursday with documents including his passport, visa and other forms of identification. According to the Brooklyn district attorney’s office, Mangano had originally set Rachamin’s bail at $500,000 on June 18 and then revoked it after deciding Rachamin pre-sented a flight risk as a non-citi-zen. “He is not a citizen — he has been in the U.S. less than six months and so he presents a flight risk,” a DA spokesman said last week. On Thursday, Mangano also scheduled the motion process of the case to begin on Sept. 9, at which time Rachamin’s lawyer can ask for certain relief from the court before the trial begins. The charges against Rach-amin include second-degree murder, second-degree man-slaughter, operating a motor vehicle while ability was im-paired, operating a motor ve-hicle with defective head lamps, reckless driving, first-and second-degree reckless endangerment and violation of the maximum speed limit. Rachamin’s lawyer, Nor-man Rosen, of Rego Park, was retained by members of Rachamin’s family living in Brooklyn. Mazariegos, 28, was killed when Rachamin’s red Ferrari plowed into him at the intersec-tion of 99th Street and Fourth Avenue at 3 am, police said. The high-speed impact sent him hurtling through the air. Rachamin, according to po-lice, continued to drive the car southbound after hitting Maz-ariegos, until he crashed into a brick apartment building at 101st Street and Fourth Av-enue. He was reportedly under pursuit by police for speeding. He was apprehended as he tried to climb out of his crum-pled car through the sun roof by police in an Emergency Services Unit truck that had been traveling north on Fourth Avenue at 100th Street when the sports car raced past them at about 100 miles an hour in the opposite direction, accord-ing to the DA’s office. Now that it is clear that the DA will pursue the second-de-gree murder charge, Rosen is questioning, “Whether or not Brooklyn is developing a dou-ble standard.” “We just all have come through that media-heavy case of police officer [Joseph] Gray who was drunk and convicted for killing four people with his vehicle,” he said. “None of the charges were of second-degree murder. They don’t charge Gray with that. But they charge Darninka. I don’t know if we are developing a double standard in Brooklyn.” In May, Gray was convict-ed on four counts of vehicular manslaughter for a fatal acci-dent in which he hit four members of a Sunset Park family, killing all of them, af-ter a daylong drinking binge. Gray was sentenced to the maximum allowable sentence of five to 15 years by Judge Anne Feldman last week. A toxicologist testified that Gray’s alcohol-blood level would have been .23 at the time of the accident. Rosen said his client’s blood-alcohol was .05. “And that is a long ways from drunk,” Rosen said. “You don’t have a driver that has been charged with driving while intoxicated. He was not drunk. The blood serology that was obtained and the results indicate he was not drunk.” Rosen said that although Rachamin may have been “impaired,” — which is a vio-lation but not a crime by legal standards — his client was not “intoxicated.” “Drunk is .10, and my guy was a long ways from drunk,” Rosen said, adding that if Rachamin is convicted of sec-ond-degree murder charge, it will be clear that there is one law standard for police officers and another for ordinary citizens. But Brooklyn district attorney spokesman Jerry Schmetterer holds that the charges against Rachamin are fair and that Rachamin’s reckless speeding, in fact, does hold significant meaning in regards to his blood-alcohol level. “This guy was driving 100 miles an hour in city streets in an area where he should have known people would be in the street at that hour,” Schmetter-er said. “The facts for this case speak for themselves,” he added. “That the fact he was not drunk means that he was in complete control of his actions and he should have been total-ly aware of the danger he was causing to other people when he was said to be driving 100 miles per hour.” The victim, Mazariegos, was born in Central America and moved with his parents and two sisters to Gravesend when he was 8 years old. According to his younger sister, Ingrid, Mazariegos studied photogra-phy at the Fashion Institute of Technology and had been pur-suing a career as a freelance fashion photographer. “He was a great kid,” Ingrid told The Papers in April. “We are all pretty angry.” 

LEGAL NOTICE 

NOTICE is hereby given to parents/ guardians that District 20 will apply for the Reading Excellence Act (REA) Tutorial Assistance (TA) subgrant, which is due June 28, 2002. Parents of public school children in grades K-2 at P.S. 163, P.S. 164, or P.S. 179 are hereby given notice of their right to receive tutoring for their children, if their children are selected, based on district assessments and criteria, from tutoring providers outside their school through this subgrant, pend-ing funding. Parents of selected stu-dents will receive notification and details about tutoring opportunities Should you have any questions, you may call your school’s guidance coun-selor or Cathy Gustaitis, Director of Early Childhood Education, at (718) 759-4915, or Frank Capaldo, Director of Funded Programs, at (718) 759-4831. The focus of instruction will be on mastering phonemic awareness, systematic phonics, fluency, vocabu-lary, and reading comprehension. BR26 

The smashed Ferrari in front of the 68th Precinct. BP / FIle 4 BRG July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

# RIDGE BAY 

## Diner & Restaurant 

# 7404 5th Ave. 

Free Delivery • • 748-1858 

~ LUNCH: ALL WRAPS ~ 

Includes Dessert 

$4.95 + tax 

Personal Pan Oven Pizza $3.95 + tax 

Monday-Friday ~ BREAKFAST SPECIAL: 7-11AM ~ 

2 eggs, toast, homefries, juice, coffee or tea. Eat in only 

$1.95 + tax 

~ EARLY BIRD Dinner Special ~ 

Complete Dinner: Choice of 20 Entrees, Soup, Salad, Potato and Veg., Coffee or Tea & Dessert 

$8.95 + tax 

## AMERICAN HEARING CENTER 533 86th Street THE

# “WHAT?” 

If this is your first response ... you’re not alone. This is how approximately 28 million Americans who experience hearing loss respond. 

## What you can do 

Having your hearing checked by an audiologist can provide the answer you need. If you suspect you or someone you know may have a hearing problem, call today for a personal appointment for a FREE HEARING CONSULTATION. 

748-2630 / 745-5169 

# Mediterranean G • R • I • L • L

T u r k i s h C u i s i n e 

LUNCH SPECIAL 

Monday through Friday 11:30am - 3:30pm 

$4.50 

Choice of Soup OR Salad OR French Fries - GYRO SANDWICH -- FALAFEL SANDWICH -- CHICKEN SHISH SANDWICH -- GRILL CHICKEN SANDWICH -- CHICKEN ADANA SANDWICH -

Appetizers 

Hummus $3.00 Tabouleh $3.00 Babaghanouj $3.00 Fried Calamari $5.90 Stuffed Grape Leaves $3.00 Grilled Vegetables $3.00 

Platters 

Gyro $7.00 Lamb Shish $8.90 Chicken Shish $7.90 Grilled Boned Chicken $7.90 Baby Lamb Chops $13.90 Grilled Boneless Trout $9.90 Open 7 days 11am-11pm 

Free Delivery Catering 

9300 5th Ave. 238-8866 

## FAX SENDING & RECEIVING 921-6078 

# 745-5555 Marine Car Service 

# 9126 4th Ave. Fully Insured • 

Clean, Courteous & Reliable Limousines Available 

JFK $ 28 LaGuardia $ 28 Newark $ 30 

*Plus Tolls $5.00 Extra For Airport Pickups 

## Special Airport Rates 

# Brooklyn College 

Freshman and transfer applications for the fall semester are still being accepted. Brooklyn College will allow you to be the best, supporting you with outstanding academic programs and excellent advisement. Choose from more than one hundred majors and programs, including Accounting, Business, Computer Science, Education, Film, Health and Nutrition Sciences, and Theater. Brooklyn College offers affordable tuition, financial aid, and scholarship assistance. 

Brooklyn College 

The City University of New York 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11210 

(718) 951-5001 www.brooklyn.cuny.edu 

# To be the Best To be the Best 

# Think 

Financial aid for qualified students Day and evening classes Online courses available Transfer students welcome Job Placement assistance for all graduates 

HUMAN SERVICES 

wwwww

BUSINESS MANAGEMENT COMPUTER SCIENCE 

w

HEALTH SCIENCES EDUCATION LIBERAL ARTS & SCIENCES ESL CLASSES Graduate & Professional Programs (212)463-0400 ext.500 

## (718)265-6534 ext.1003 

BROOKLYN Bensonhurst, Brighton, Boro Park, Starrett City, Sunset Park, Kings Highway 

Other sites are located in Manhattan, Queens, Bronx 

MEDICAL CODING & BILLING CERTIFICATE (718)871-7292 PHYSICAL & OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY ASSISTANT PROGRAMS (718)265-6534 ext.1003 CISCO & MICROSOFT NETWORKING CERTIFICATES (718)265-6534 ext.1002 

Associate & Bachelor Degrees 

www.touro.edu 

MICROCOMPUTER SUPPORT TECHNICIAN (718)871-7292 

Don't miss a golden opportunity! 

The TIME is now to join us at TOURO where we are committed to academic excellence and personal attention! 

# Touro College 

CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS 

Open House 

July 11 at 6:30 p.m. 

Open House 

July 24 at 6:30 p.m. 

# Serial bank robber may be on the loose 

# Car-jacked baby is returned to her mom 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Police in Bensonhurst are on the lookout for a potential serial bank robber, after the third neighborhood bank in under three months was robbed Mon-day in a fashion that seems to belong to one unidentified man. At 2:20 pm on June 24, the Independence Community Bank at 1769 86th St. was robbed of an unknown amount of currency after a man described as 5-foot-10, wearing a white T-shirt, gray pants and a hat, passed a note to a teller demanding money and noting he was armed with a bomb. He was carrying some type of box. The Green Point Savings Bank at 2150 86th St., was robbed last Tuesday and a Green Point bank on New Utrecht Av-enue was robbed on April 25 — both involving an unfolding of events police said are similar to Monday’s robbery. “It looks like it is the same guy,” 62nd Precinct Police Offi-cer Michael Bannon said on Monday, noting Bensonhurst experienced a similar run of bank robberies a few years ago. “But he was caught,” Bannon said of the previous serial bandit. He said the suspect in the recent robberies makes a quick exit as soon as he has the cash in hand. “The tellers are taught not to play any games with him,” Ban-non said. The Green Point Savings Bank on 86th Street was robbed of more than $2,000 around 1 pm on June 18, after a man de-scribed as white and in his 40s told a bank teller he had a bomb. Police said the suspect passed a note to the teller that stated he had a bomb and included the words, “Do not say anything and nobody will get hurt.” Reportedly, the teller fol-lowed his directions and passed over at least $2,000 in cash. The bandit, who was also carrying a box, walked out of the bank af-ter receiving the money and fled in an unknown direction and by unknown means. “It looks like it might be that guy,” said Sgt. Peter Moy of the 62nd Precinct, noting that the man who robbed The Green Point bank, located at 7120 New Utrecht Avenue, fit the teller’s description in the latest robbery. That bank was robbed in a similar fashion at 11 am on April 25 when the bandit threat-ened to engage a bomb attached to his hip if he was not given cash. According to police, a man de-scribed by the female teller as white and 5-foot-11, approached the counter and passed a note stating he had a bomb on his hip. The teller reportedly gave the bank robber about $3,000 in cash. The suspect, with the cash tucked into his shirt, then fled on foot out of the bank, police said. “The policy is for them to comply with the demands of the robber,” said Thomas Mulligan, a senior investigator for Green Point Security. “The most im-portant thing is for the people to get out of the situation without injury.” “Both have the same descrip-tion and his motive is the same. We think it might be the same guy, but nothing is 100 percent,” Moy said of the two Green Point robberies. 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Police from the 68th Pre-cinct responded in full-force to a frantic mother’s phone call last Wednesday, after the woman reported her SUV had been stolen along with her 2-year-old daughter, who was strapped into a baby seat in the back. Ana Carpio Ishaq, 31, told police she left her car running as her daughter, Sumaira, slept in the back, while she quickly grabbed some things from her apartment on Dahlgren Place at 90th Street. In the minute Ishaq said she was gone, police say a car-jack-er climbed into the driver’s seat and took off. Ishaq called police around 3:30 pm. Police said the unknown sus-pect left the 1995 Toyota 4-Runner at 90th Street and Fort Hamilton Parkway with the air conditioner and motor still run-ning. Upon an ambulance crew’s examination of the child, she was handed over to her mother and father, police said. She was unharmed and nothing was tak-en from the vehicle. 

Hole in the wall 

At 10 pm on Friday, June 21, the owner of a store on 13th Av-enue at 77th Street received a phone call from his alarm com-pany alerting him of a possible break-in. Upon entering the store through the front door, the merchant found the rear wall air conditioner on the ground and nearly $4,000 in cash and 178 cartons of cigarettes valued at over $8,000 missing. Police said unknown sus-pects entered the store by re-moving the air conditioner and climbing through the hole in the wall. They exited in the same manner. Police have no sus-pects. 

Try, try again 

An apartment on 92nd Street at Third Avenue was ransacked around 9:45 am on June 19, po-lice reported. Unknown persons entered the apartment via the fire escape and turned the apart-ment upside down, removing numerous items. The perpetra-tors may have at first attempted to enter the apartment through the front door, police said, as they found a broken key in the keyhole. Jewelry reportedly val-ued at $1,850 and $600 in cash was stolen, along with a cam-corder reportedly worth $1,300 and an $80 radio. 

Familiar thieves 

Upon returning home from vacation around 3:30 pm on June 21, residents of a house on 95th Street at Third Avenue found that their home had been broken into and that even their car had been moved. Unknown persons entered the property and then proceeded to the St. Patrick’s Church park-ing lot, with apparent knowl-edge of where the family’s ve-hicle was parked while they were away. The burglars then took the vehicle for an un-known amount of time and parked it two spots to the left of where it had originally been parked. The car sustained damage and $256, a DVD, a Play Sta-tion game unit, house keys and the car’s alarm were all stolen. 

Bill collector 

While walking on 64th Street toward Fort Hamilton Parkway around 1:50 am on June 20, a man was approached by anoth-er man who demanded he pay him back. “Give me the $20 you owe me,” the suspect, who was not an acquaintance of the victim, demanded. In response to the odd re-quest, the victim told the man he did not owe him any money. It was then that the perpetrator lunged at the man, ripping a gold chain from his neck. The perpetrator fled in an unknown direction with the chain, valued at $150, and the cross pendent attached to it, valued at $50. 

Cabbie attack 

A cab driver, according to po-lice, attacked a 24-year-old man standing across the street from his car at 1:35 am on June 21 at the northeast corner of Fort Hamilton Parkway and 74th Street. After asking the victim what he was looking at, and hearing his reply of, “Nothing,” police said the cab driver got out of his vehicle, crossed the street, and hit him in the head with a steer-ing wheel lock. The victim sus-tained lacerations to his head. 

Bites mom 

An 18-year-old Bensonhurst man, was arrested around 11:30 pm on June 18 at his home on 23rd Avenue at 86th Street, after allegedly physically abusing his 42-year-old mother. Cops say the perpetrator struck his mother on the right arm and bit her right arm during a verbal dispute. 

Stroller snatch 

A woman shopping on Bay Ridge Parkway at 89th Street found that her purse had been stolen from her baby stroller around 4 pm on June 23, police said. The purse reportedly con-tained $70, credit cards and pieces of identification. Police have no suspects. 

## 62/68 Blotters 

failed attempt to put out the fire on her own, Khawaja ran from her home, leaving the door to her apartment open. The inferno, fire offi-cials said, exploded into the hallway and up to the third floor. “It traveled up those stairs,” one fire official said on Monday. “It would have definitely been held back by the door, had she shut it. At least it would have contained it in time for us to get there. “The biggest thing,” the official said, “is these people needed a way to escape and they didn’t.” The fire official said the blaze spread so quickly that the Nadeem family never had time to call 911, and Khawaja failed to do so in a timely manner. The 911 call was made by an employee working at the hardware store next door to the apartment building, who did so at the request of the frantic Khawaja, moments after she ran out of the burning house. By the time the first fire engine arrived at 2:36 pm, just three minutes after they got the call, flames had already swallowed an interior staircase leading from the second to the third floor. Fire officials on the scene said they could not find any smoke detectors in the apartment. According to the Fire Department, landlords are required to install smoke detectors at the top of each staircase and within each apartment. Whether or not Theoharis had installed smoke detectors, and in the right quantity, was yet to be determined pending further investigation. Fire officials refer violations concerning fire detectors to the city’s Department of Buildings. Khawaja reportedly told authorities she yelled up to the Nadeem family before running out of the building, but heard no answer. She assumed nobody was home. According to officials, 33 units, and approximately 138 fire fight-ers reported to the scene. Fire officials said numerous firefighters, a fire patrol officer, three police officers and an Emergency Medical Services worker sustained minor injuries while working at the scene. “It’s just carelessness,” Mayor Michael Bloomberg said on Sun-day. “This is a fire that could have been contained much earlier … It was nothing deliberate, just one of those terrible accidents that no-body can quite explain, but God.” Bloomberg consoled two cousins of the Nadeem family Sunday, who stood sobbing outside of the charred building. “They used to come into my store all of the time,” Saif Partapur-wala said on Tuesday, standing in front of his hardware store located next to the first floor of the burnt-out building. The business has been closed since Sunday due to smoke damage. “They had beautiful children,” he said. “They were a decent family.” Partapurwala and Theoharis — who with his brother has run an accounting business on the first floor of his building for 11 years — did not know when either building would reopen. Theoharis said he was not even sure if his 85-year-old building could be saved. 

# TRAPPED… 

Continued from page 1 

The Fire Department, in response to the grease fire that killed seven family members in a Fort Hamilton Parkway house, is urging residents to learn how to react to an out-of-control fire before it even begins. On Monday, fire officials said that if a fire is not brought under con-trol immediately, one should get themselves and their family out of the burning structure and call the Fire Department at 911. Other fire safety tips for dealing with grease fires included: • If an uncontainable fire breaks out, call 911 and upon leaving keep the door shut. Keeping the door shut contains the fire and smoke and keeps escape routes clear for evacuation for a longer period of time. • Check smoke detectors regularly. Fire officials suggest changing the batteries in smoke detectors when you change the clocks to and from Daylight Savings Time. • Know your escape route, and make sure every family member knows it as well. Fire officials suggest performing a fire drill every three months. • Turn off stove or other source of cooking heat and smother flames with a close-fitting pot lid or larger pan, if possible. • Use of an approved portable fire extinguisher is optional depending on the user’s ability and knowledge of such appliances. • Never throw water, baking soda or flour on a grease fire. • In case of an oven fire, close the oven door and turn off the oven. • Never touch or attempt to carry a flaming pot. The contents may spill, burn you and spread the fire. — Heather J. Wilson 

## What to do in case of fire The Bay Ridge Center for Older Adults 

# 5TH ANNUAL Golf Outing Friday July 26, 2002 

$1 15 cost per golfer includes: 

18 holes of golf w/ cart at the Dyker Beach Golf Course; continental breakfast; lunch; cocktail hour and dinner at Chadwick’s Restaurant, prizes. 

Discounts available for additional golfers in a foursome. 

Dinner Only available for $35. Available Sponsorships Options: 

Tiger Woods level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$500 Jack Nicklaus level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$250 Arnold Palmer level . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$175 Tom Watson level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$100 Fred Couples level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$50 

Sponsorships due by July 1 2th and provide display ad and green/tee credit. 

All proceeds will support services for community seniors. 

For more information or to register, please contact: 

The Bay Ridge Center for Older Adults 411 Ovington Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11209 (718) 748-0873 

# Come Celebrate Our Nation’s Independence 

# The Annual 4th of July Day Parade 

# Honoring 2002 Pro-Patria Award Recipient 

# City Councilman Marty Golden 

# and The Heroes and Victims of 9/11 

# Thursday, July 4, 2002 at 10 a.m. 

## Parade Begins at 3rd Avenue and 76th Street and Concludes with a Ceremony and Presentations at John Paul Jones Park located at 4th Avenue and 101st Street. 

## As the 

## Long Island Assembly, 4th Degree of the Knights of Columbus Hosts 

# FREE assembly & delivery! 

# POLSTEIN’S 7615 13th Avenue 718-232-5055 

## Hundreds of Grills and Acessories IN STOCK! 

# 4th of July extravaganza at Polsteins Call for Special Prices! For questions or comments call 800-492-3288 or email us at info@polsteins.com 

same day 2 hour 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Proponents of “Operation Dumpster” refuse to curb the issue. After a 5-3 vote turned it down in committee, and Community Board 10 voted 30-15 against it this month, community members, CB10 members and state Sen. Vincent Gentile have launched a petition drive to keep the issue alive. Operation Dumpster was designed by the city Department of Sanitation to manage excess refuse and trash resulting from over-flow Dumpsters left on sidewalks between scheduled trash pick-ups. It bans waste receptacles from being stored on the sidewalk on non-collection days and prohibits refuse from being left out over the weekends. Community Board 10 member Greg Ahl, a forerunner in the fight to establish the program in Bay Ridge and Dyker Heights, said in his June 17 plea to the board to pass the program, that san-itation issues were a prevalent concern among Bay Ridge mer-chants and residents that needed to be dealt with. According to board member Joanne Seminara, CB10 would not adopt the program in part because CB10 Chairman Steve Harrison acts upon board issues in accordance with what Coun-cilman Marty Golden wants. And Golden, she said, who owns the Bay Ridge Manor banquet hall, doesn’t want to deal with his own Dumpsters. Golden did not return calls seeking comment. Beginning on Monday, Gentile set up petition-signing stations at various Bay Ridge subway and bus stations. Within a couple of weeks, Gentile said, the petition will land on the desk of Sanita-tion Commissioner John Doherty, asking for the program to be established within the boundaries of CB10. “It seems to be a no-brainer to me,” Gentile said. “If it comes down to a cleaner street and dirty, smelly vermin-infested Dump-sters, which would you pick?” Gentile said he was aware of various board members’ senti-ments regarding Harrison’s dealings with Golden, against whom he is seeking re-election this November. “Certainly we have sent communication to [Harrison] explain-ing my position,” Gentile said. “Steve, unfortunately, has become very partisan by saying he is supporting my opponent in this race.” Harrison said before the June 12 Environmental committee meeting that it was premature to push initiatives like Operation Dumpster until the Sanitation commissioner could sit down with the board to discuss sanitation codes. But when Ahl got the Sanitation Department deputy director of public affairs, Henry Ehrdhardt, to come to the June 17 full board meeting to provide information on the program, Harrison did not mention his presence to board members once. “Obviously Steve did not want the board to hear any informa-tion concerning Operation Dumpster,” Ahl said last week. “So he just sat there.” “I introduced myself to the chair and said I was available for information,” Ehrdhardt told The Papers last week. “And that was it.” Ahl said that despite board politics, community activism could still push Operation Dumpster forward. “Just because the community board can’t see the correct an-swer does not mean we can give up,” Ahl said this week. “It just takes different methods.” The Sanitation Department maintains that a month’s advance notification has to be given through the press, elected officials, merchant groups and community organizations upon implemen-tation of the initiative by a community. This has to be followed by a two-week enforcement “warning” period beginning on July 9 for the program, which would start July 23 for all those com-munities that have signed on. The guidelines of the program include that: containers can not be stored on the sidewalk; refuse placed out for collection must be in tightly covered, leak proof containers or securely tied, heavy duty plastic bags; when placed out for collection, receptacles and the area around them must always be maintained in a neat, clean and closed condition; containers must be removed and properly stored after collection; containers must not be placed in the street for pickup; refuse may never be left out on non-collection days other than as indicated below. Commercial establishments, under the guidelines, may never keep their refuse on the sidewalk during the day and their con-tainers or dumpsters are to be kept inside or in the rear of the premises. If this is not feasible, alternative receptacles such as 65-to 90-gallon containers or heavy-duty plastic bags that can be rolled or carried out of the premises are to be considered. Residences under the program cannot place receptacles out for collection earlier than the day prior to collection from April through October. November through March, residential units may not place receptacles out for collection earlier than 5 pm on the day prior to collection. Non-compliance with these requirements may result in the is-suance of $50 to $250 summonses. Ahl noted that community groups that support implementation of the program include the Narrows Botanical Gardens, the Al-liance of Bay Ridge Block Associations and Gateways to Bay Ridge, all groups that have several members in common. 

# Ridgites fight for 

A Dumpster outside shop on Fifth Avenue at 90th Street. 

# ‘Dumpster ’The Brooklyn Papers  / Greg Mango July 1, 2002 BRG 5THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 6 BRG July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

21 Newsday as saying “Whether we should adjust the current law or not is something to look at down the road.” The Republican Golden has been the focus of considerable attention for his state Senate run against current Bay Ridge-Dyker Heights state Sen. Vincent Gentile. Rodriguez became fodder for the tabloids after he was indicted on charges of extortion and fraud. Should term limits be extended or demol-ished, it is conceivable that Rodriguez would be able to run for re-election while under in-dictment or possibly even after a conviction. Rodriguez stands accused of attempting to extort $50,000 and $1.5 million in Cobble Hill property from developer and former NYPD detective, Greg O’Connell, in ex-change for his approval of a controversial Fairway supermarket project in Red Hook. In all probability, Rodriguez’s case will be adjudicated before the 2003 elections. A sta-tus conference, which will presumably set a trial date, will be held on Aug. 9, and by all indications the intent is to move the case somewhat quickly. However, prolonged trials are not unheard of — O.J. Simpson’s took nine months and the case against Angelo Bruno, one of the infamous “Hillside Stran-glers” took two years and two days — and even if a deal were reached before trial there is no New York law barring a convicted per-son from seeking elected office. Naomi Bernstein, a spokeswoman for the city Board of Elections, said that as long as a people have “finished their servitude,” they are entitled to all the rights of a citizen of the state, which includes voting and running for office. A convicted felon, however, cannot run while on parole, probation or until the sen-tence is consummated. Rodriguez’s spokeswoman, Lynn Schul-man, said it was too early to determine if Ro-driguez would seek reelection, should it be possible, since a formal proposal has yet to be presented. As for Rodriguez’s position on the movement to overturn term limits, she said the councilman would have to study the for-mal proposal before making a determination. Golden, meanwhile, is in the midst of a heated and likely very expensive race against Gentile for the redrawn 22nd district which will include Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights, Ger-ritsen Beach and Marine Park. 

509 - 72nd St. 759-9334 

# FREE Pick-Up & Delivery 50¢ per pound 

Only Tide and Downy used! 

DRY CLEANING SPECIAL –

$2.50 per Item (pants, scarves, skirts, ties) Laundered Shirts $1.25 Commercial Accounts are welcome at a discounted price 

––– L a u n d r y S e r v i c e s ––– Same Day Service • Dry Cleaning • Wash Dry & Fold 

PANTS $2.50 JACKET $2.50 BLOUSE $2.50 SWEATER $2.50 SKIRT $2.50 2 PC SUIT $4.50 DRESS $5.00 D.C. SHIRT SPECIAL $1.75 

# Law Offices of Ursula A. Gangemi, P.C. 

## For an appointment call (718) 234-2244 1432 86th Street (corner of Bay 7th St.) 

# Ursula A. Gangemi Family Law • Personal Injury • Estates 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

In bad condition or not, the 86th Street R line sta-tion will not see any atten-tion paid to its paint-chipped walls and dimly lit staircases for another six years, Metropolitan Trans-portation Authority offi-cials told The Brooklyn Papers this week. “The 86th Street station is up for rehabilitation in 2008,” MTA spokeswoman Marisa Baldeo told The Papers. “I was told there is certain criteria they look for, and this is where the station fell in terms of re-pairs. It is set [to be repaired] for next period’s capital plan budget.” The next MTA capital plan budget begins in 2005 and budgets through 2008. But according to aspokesman for Councilman Marty Golden, the councilman will continue to push for the station’s repairs — regardless of any budget constraints. “It can’t wait till 2008, and this is one of the reasons why Marty is running for state Sen-ate,” said Golden aide Bill O’Reilley. “An effective state senator should have had mon-ey in the state capital budget to fix that stop and [Golden’s in-cumbent opponent for the Bay Ridge-Dyker Heights state Senate seat] Vincent Gentile totally dropped the ball on that. Money comes through Albany and it is up to state legislators to secure that.” Gentile is leaving his 23rd Senate District, which covers Brooklyn and Staten Island, to run against Golden for the re-drawn 22nd district, which many believe was specifically drawn for Golden by the senate GOP leadership, but which con-tains much of Gentile’s base. But Gentile contends the improvements — pushed by Golden or not — will not hap-pen until 2008. “They had a hot potato and now they are trying to toss it off to someone else. The fact remains that the MTA board and any capital improvements are voted upon by a majority of Republican appointees through the governor,” Gentile said. “Mr. Golden should have had his ducks in order before publicly announcing improve-ments that are not going to happen. Its sounds to me like he does not have the pull in the Republican party that he claims to have.” The denial of the 86th Street station repairs comes two weeks after the MTA an-nounced that three subway sta-tions in Brooklyn would re-ceive major renovations under a revamped list of projects. The Eastern Parkway 1 and 2 line station in Prospect Park, the West Eighth Street F and Q lines station in Coney Island and the Neptune Avenue F line station in Coney Island will all be revamped under a revital-ization project that totals near-ly $146 million and includes repairs to five Manhattan sta-tions, one Queens station and one Bronx station. Construc-tion is to begin this year and be completed by next April, MTA officials said. Just as CB10 members have asked be done for the 86th Street station at Fourth Avenue, those 10 stations will see anything from new stairways, lighting and tiles to platform repairs and turn-stile area fix-ups. O’Reilley said there is al-ways room for a change in any state agency’s plans if one lob-bies for a cause appropriately. In late May, Golden reported that he had received word from the MTA that requests for im-provements to the Bay Ridge Avenue station would be met. The 86th Street station’s needs mirror the Bay Ridge Avenue station’s needs that will now be addressed through various re-pairs by July 26. The community board re-ported a month ago, after mak-ing numerous requests for the improvements, that the 86th Street station’s condition was as defective as the MTA’s way of dealing with the communi-ty’s requests to fix it. Larry Stelter, of the board’s traffic and transportation com-mittee, said that the station has needed paint and new lighting, among other things, for many years. And although the board and community members have pressured the MTA to address the station, Stelter said last month that the agency has “done nothing but brush us off.” Golden designed a petition in early June in response to the numerous complaints he has received from the community concerning the 86th Street sta-tion, requesting a new coat of paint, improvements in the sta-tion lighting, repair of the tile walls, repair of the station in-frastructure including water leaks, and other enhancements. O’Reilley said Golden is waiting to secure 1,000 signa-tures before turning the peti-tion over to the MTA. “Marty will be out next week getting more [signa-tures],” he said. On May 22, Golden re-ceived a response to a letter he sent to MTA President Lawrence Reuter, regarding the need for improvements in the Bay Ridge Avenue train station. Reuter said improve-ments in lighting and cleanli-ness will be made. In Reuter’s letter to Golden, he wrote, “The station will re-ceive new fluorescent lighting on its street and platform stair-ways and in its mezzanine area. In addition, new emer-gency lighting will be installed on the platforms and in the mezzanine to ensure a means of safe exit in the event of a Con Edison power failure.” Stelter said the fact that the 86th Street station is in a re-gional shopping area and in a crowded district makes its con-ditions even the more serious. “It is a disgrace, and yet that station is heavily used. It has bare concrete walls and is bad-ly lit, and something needs to be done,” Stelter said. According to the MTA, on average 9,000 commuters use the 86th Street station daily. 

# No repair work on 86th St. ‘R’ station ’til 2008 

The Brooklyn Papers 

Alex Conti, the immediate past president of the Bay Ridge Community Council, had words of high praise for his 2001-2002 committee chairs and board of directors after a most unusual year. “The most amazing thing was that we actually had a fairly normal year and did the expected programs and events,” said Conti. “You can imagine the con-fusion and difficulty we ex-perienced when the very first board meeting of my presi-dency was cancelled, the evening of Sept. 11. But it turned out to be an enjoyable year, couldn’t have been that way with out the support of my fellow officers and com-mittee chairs, 30 to 40 peo-ple I could count on com-pletely.” Despite 9-11 and its linger-ing aftermath, the BRCC board was able to get the Hal-loween window-painting con-test underway by switching to posters rather than cancelling the event altogether. The annual track-and-field event, political candidates fo-rum in October, essay and photography contests, presi-dent’s luncheon, and police and fire department awards were presented as in prior years. “I’m especially proud of this year’s police, auxiliary police and fire awards,” Conti said. “Jane Kelly, our chairperson, did an outstand-ing job with the plaques, which were more ornate than in previous years, and we gave out more of them than usual.” The plaques were given as a tribute to 9-11 he-roes in the various depart-ments. No stranger to community involvement and charity work, Conti is president of the Colonial Club, second vice president of the Bay Ridge Lion’s Club, a board member of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, president of the St. Patrick’s Holy Name Society, incom-ing president of the Bay Ridge Men’s Club (which is celebrating 100 years), and president of two business de-velopment and networking groups in Manhattan (where his office at Northwestern Mutual Financial Network is located). 

# BRCC ex-prez looks back on past term 

Assisting critically ill chil-dren from other countries with life-saving surgery is another of Conti’s pet proj-ects. He’s been working with the Forum Children’s Foun-dation and the newly formed Worldwide Children’s Foun-dation (founded by North-western Mutual, which has already saved two children). And Conti is a director of the New York Cops Foundation, which provides scholarship funds to kids whose parents were killed in the line of duty. What’s Conti’s vision for the BRCC’s future? “The challenge for the community council is to con-tinue to change with the times while also maintaining our traditions. We need new people and new ideas, and need to include additional or-ganizations as members (we’re now at about 100). One example of change is our Web site, which is now three years old.” “It’s crucial to keep every-one involved, but to also bring in new people. We’ve been extremely fortunate to have Adelaide Kassenbrock as our historian for 22 years, and we need to look forward, have people in place 22 years from now and be-yond.” Conti is a lifelong Bay Ridgite, whose family is also still in the neighborhood. “The small, village-like feel of Bay Ridge is just great,” he said. “It’s very close knit. Bay Ridge has a lot of mecha-nisms in place to meet the needs and goals of the com-munity, and I’m very proud that I’ve been able to work with many of them.” 

Alex Conti BP / File 

ager Eugene Zaveloff as saying, “There might have been some bad blood” between Rothman and Garcia that stemmed from a time when Gar-cia had lived in the building with his wife and mother-in-law several years ago. The students from various local high schools and colleges, Coyle a St. Saviour High School graduate, Adham Deeb a Fort Hamilton High School graduate, 17, Chetan Ogale a Kingsbor-ough College student, 18, and Nedal Abusheikh a Fort Hamilton High School graduate, 17 saw Gar-cia approach Rothman. They noticed he was oddly dressed, wearing gloves, a mask and a heavy jack-et. As soon as Garcia’s knife hit Rothman’s chest, Coyle said the three boys started the chase while she ran to the fallen woman’s side. “I stopped long enough for her to tell me he stabbed her,” Coyle said, award in hand on Sun-day. “And then I ran.” The chase took the students three blocks down 86th Street, near a crowd of children, and eventual-ly to the athletic field — all the way throwing whatever they could find on the street at Garcia. It was at the high school that police were able to make an arrest, after being alerted to the incident by Coyle, who called 911 on her cell phone. Gar-cia was found on the fields with the alleged murder weapons still in his hand, police said. Garcia stabbed Rothman with two steak knives, police said. Reportedly, he never uttered a word to her. Rothman was pronounced dead at 9:05 pm, police said, at Lutheran Medical Center. She had sustained two stab wounds to her left arm and one to her left chest. “He kept turning around with the knives,” Angela Coyle said as she watched her daughter 

# TEENS …

Continued from page 1 

Street to the Whitehall Ferry Terminal in Lower Manhattan. The route was initiated on Sept. 17 after the attacks on the World Trade Center dis-abled the N and R subway lines. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has funded the service and promised to continue its operation through the end of 2002. It is then that New York Waterway will take over the service, offering two 300-pas-senger ferries from Pier 4 to Pier 11 in Lower Manhattan at the foot of Wall Street. Imperatore Jr. said on Monday that a fare would depend on the volume of ridership. “To make the ferry a continuous success, it may be necessary to provide a partial subsidy to bring the fare down,” he said. “But that is a po-litical decision.” The Brooklyn, a 149-passenger, 79-foot cata-maran boat, will not service the Manhattan to Brooklyn route on a regular basis, said NY Wa-terway President Arthur Imperatore Jr. Instead, two newer and larger 300-passenger ferries will. The trip from Brooklyn to Manhattan takes about 12 minutes. Ferries depart the Brooklyn Army Terminal every 30 minutes between 6 am and 10 pm, Monday through Friday. Ferries de-part Pier 11 every 30 minutes between 6:30 am and 10:30 am and between 3:30 pm and 7:30 pm. The ferry will make 18 trips a day from Brooklyn. It will not run on the weekends. Borough Park Councilman Simcha Felder gave the ferry a go Monday, trying out the route from Manhattan to the Brooklyn ceremony. “It was delicious,” Felder said. “The seats are luxurious, and the place is sparkling clean. I look forward to being a part of this.” Markowitz looked at the docked ferry Mon-day and then to Imperatore and his father, Arthur Imperatore — the founder of the company — and boasted, “I am pleased to welcome you to the major leagues.” “Here in Brooklyn, can you think of a more beautiful shoreline?” Markowitz said. “I am de-lighted this is another piece in advancing our waterways … When they try [the ferry], they are going to fall in love with it.” Markowitz congratulated the Imperatores on Monday, as did Felder, Bay Ridge Councilman Marty Golden and Rep. Vito Fossella, Sunset Park Assemblyman Felix Ortiz and Benson-hurst-Borough Park state Sen. Seymour Lach-man before all boarded the ferry for its official naming. The two ferries will slightly change their route to Pier 11 so that NY Waterway can offer its pas-sengers easy transfers to its ferries that run from Pier 11 to the Upper East Side and Jersey City in New Jersey. In early May, Fossella and Golden offered the pitch of using city subsidiaries to cover the costs of a private operator to assume the control of the ferry route. According to EDC spokeswoman Lynn Rasic, three bids were submitted. The NY Waterway offer of $1.5 million was the lowest. A free ferry bus shuttle to Pier 4 at 58th Street came to a halt earlier this month. The shuttle service could not secure monies for its continued operation because FEMA could only afford to fund the ferry itself, said DOT spokesman Tom Cocola. According to Cocola, Golden is working on securing a bus route that would take passengers to the ferry from within Brooklyn. The Brooklyn Army Terminal also offers free parking for com-muters. The ferry terminal, at First Avenue and 58th Street, is currently served by the B11 bus. New York Waterway, the largest, private-owned ferry service in the country, owns 30 boats and charters an additional 13. Smith said the company’s ferries range in size from 100-passenger to 400-passenger ships. In its nine months of operation, the ferry has drawn between 1,000 and 2,000 passengers dai-ly. At a Feb. 21 Bay Ridge Town Hall meeting, nearly 200 people attended to show their support for the continuance of the free ferry. Ridgites comprise the largest ridership on the free ferry service. New York Waterway is also looking into the feasibility of offering a ferry from somewhere in Floyd Bennett Field in Sheepshead Bay to Man-hattan. Although such a ferry is only an idea right now, Imperatore Jr. said it would help re-lieve traffic on the Belt Parkway. talk with the other three students at Sunday’s award ceremony. “He never said anything, but he kept turning around with those knives.” Abusheikh said a knife-wielding Garcia went after him at one point during the chase. “He was cursing in Spanish, but I couldn’t un-derstand him,” the teen said. Abusheikh and Ogale said they never expected to be recognized for Sunday’s happenings. “I just thought we’d get a pat on the back and then leave,” Ogale said. Instead, all four said they have received con-stant pats on the back and community recogni-tion since the incident. “I don’t deserve this, though,” Abusheikh said. “It happened and I was there. We are all a big family in this neighborhood and everyone has to look out for one another.” Garcia was arraigned on June 17 and stands charged with murder in the second degree and possession of a weapon in the fourth degree. His lawyer, Steven Chaikin, said an indictment was handed down on June 24. Tenants standing outside of the 86th Street building said they did not know whether or not marital problems might have had anything to do with Garcia’s attack on Rothman. “She was liked by some and not by others,” said one woman who lives in the building. “We don’t really know what happened. The police have not told us anything.” According to Marisol, a resident of the 86th Street building who would not give her last name, Rothman always sat on the stoop or stood inside the locked doors of the building so that she could start-up conversations with tenants as they passed by. “I just moved in on Saturday,” Marisol said two days after the murder. “She showed me my apart-ment at the end of May. She used to screen the ten-ants here. I hear different things from different peo-ple about her. But to me, she was great.” 

# FERRY …

Continued from page 1 

# MARTY …

Continued from page 1 

See LIMITS on page 8 8 BRG July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

As reported in The Brooklyn Papers in April it has already been speculated that the greater urgency to win is on Golden be-cause he was due to be term-lim-ited out of office in 2003. Should Golden lose the race, an exten-sion would not only allow him to run for re-election but he would have the momentum of a senatorial campaign, estimated to exceed $800,000, behind him, making him a practically unbeat-able candidate in a council race. Asked this week if he would run for another term in the council should he lose the sena-torial run, Golden quipped, “I’ll be in the Senate on Jan. 1, so the question of running for City Council is not even an option. Vinnie Gentile may want to look at it though.” Perennial Golden council challenger Joanne Seminara, a Democrat who lost to Golden in the general election last No-vember, would not go as far as to say Golden’s senate-cam-paign momentum and war chest would automatically preclude her own future campaign plans. “I certainly would not say, at this time, that I wouldn’t do it,” Seminara, a lawyer and mem-ber of Community Board 10 told The Papers this week. “I am planning to run in the future, and, of course, I have to weigh all the relevant information when I make my decision. But I am preparing to run.” Regardless, of the possible political advantages that ending term limits may bring, Golden is against the prospect. “I understand there is amovement afoot to overturn term limits,” he said. “The peo-ple voted twice … and if the City Council has plans to over-turn that they should take it back to the people.” Depending on the mayor and the council itself, a vote on term limits could be taken in either the council or by referendum, as it was originally passed thanks, in no small part, to cosmetics millionaire Ronald Lauder’s well-financed campaign. The current law regarding term limits allows each member one full term, leaving seven members on the employment 

# $17 95 per person TEL 718.491.0662 • FAX 718.491.0848 • 

Mon-Thurs:11:30am-11:00pm; Fri & Sat:11:30am-mid; Sun:12:30pm-11:00pm 

JAPANESE RESTAURANT – Dine In & Take Out – 

ALL YOU CAN EAT SUSHI – DINE IN ONLY – 

Daily News 

    

TATAMI ROOM Available - Call for Reservations 

68-19 3rd Ave. BROOKLYN bet. 68th & Bayridge Ave. 

FAST FREE delivery by car - $10min. 

APPETIZERS – Teriyaki, Tempura & Noodles 

If you find your meal not satisfying, tell us and it’s on the house! 

Houses For Sale / New Jersey 

For Rent / Brooklyn 

Apartments, Sublets & Roommates 

BROWSE & LIST FREE! All Cities & Areas! 

www.Sublet.com 

Studios;1-2 Bdrms; $800-2000 

1-877-FOR-RENT R49 

5th Ave/Park Slope 

All Newly Renovted 1 BR apt., LR with French doors, Sep. Dining Area, Large Closets in Bedroom and Kitchen, Great Sunlight, Hardwood Floors, All New Appliances, 1 Block From N and R Trains, We Love Pets! Call 718-768-5400 Ext. 13. NO FEE! $1,300. W26 

Clean, bright 1BR Park Slope Apt. with sep. LR, DR & Kitchen. Great Closets, Hardwood Floors, Yes to Pets! 1 Block to N/R Trains. NO FEE, $1,100, 718-768-5400, Ext. 13. W26 

To Share / Brooklyn 

Red Hook Share 

Avail. July 1st. 2 BR in 3BR duplex ($525 & $600/mo.) or 1 BR & office/studio $850. 10 min. to F train/Boro Hall. Dan – (917) 783-6318 . W26 

Park Slope 5th Ave/10th St. Sunny 18x11 bedroom with study, ceiling fan, 2 closets, French doors. Separate phone line. In beautiful 2 bedroom duplex with garden. 1 block from subway. For responsible woman, clean, quiet non-smoker. $1400 mo. including utilities. Washer/dryer. (718) 496-8934 .Available Aug. 1st. L26 

Office Space Available 

Greenwood 

24th St. bet. 3rd & 4th Aves. Newly renovated. 600 sq.ft. 1 block from R train. $1200 monthly, heat included. (718) 499-6056 . R28 

Downtown Bklyn 

Retail/office space on Court Street approx. 800 sq.ft. Available 1st week of August. Prime location. $3000 monthly. No fee. (718) 596-4314 . L25 

COMMERCIAL SPACE 

APARTMENTS/SUBLETS & ROOMMATES 

List Sublets/Rooms FREE Browse Listings FREE 

www.thesublet.com 

All cities & areas Manhattan/Bklyn/Queens 

201-265-7900 J25-15 

## APARTMENTS HOUSES FOR SALE 

> N15

Making Real Estate Real Easy.™ 

Call COLDWELL BANKER MID PLAZA 3350 Nostrand Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11229 718-646-3600 • www.coldwellbanker.com 

Bay Ridge OPEN HOUSE Sun, June 30, Noon-2pm 61 Oliver St. Apt. #3T . Studio co-op, EIK with win-dow, low maint. excel cond. Asking $79,000. ASK FOR CATHERINE. REF #CF323. 

Bensonhurst OPEN HOUSE Sun, June 30, Noon-2pm 139 Bay 20th St. Apt. #3. MIL, 2BRs, 1-1/2 bath co-op, full kitchen, terrace w/view of Verr. Bridge. Wash/Dry in apt. Parking, low maint. Asking $199,000. ASK FOR ANTHONY FRANZESE. REF. #AF005. 

> R32

## Visit us at 

> R25

For Sale / Brooklyn 

Canarsie 

Sale by owner. 2 family with fin-ished basement. Mint condition. Country setting. Fruit trees in backyard. 2 car garage. $350k. Only qualified & serious buyers. 

(718) 272-1460. R24 

For Sale / NYS 

## Catskills, NY 

Ideal getaway! 

• Skiing • Hiking • Fishing 

Located between Windham & Hunter. Very private snug home, sits on approx. 2 acre slope. Perennial gardens, meadow surrounded by evergreen forest bordering state land. Bubbling seasonal stream. 2 bedrooms – 1 with sliders onto a wrap around deck & stairs in the solar heated above ground pool. Livingroom has woodstove, large eat-in-kitchen with bay windows. Lots of closets, full walk out basement, with woodstove – was an artist studio. Electric baseboard heating. huge 3 season porch – windows & streams. Must sell. By owner. Asking $152,000. 

Call (845) 339-7432 

> R27

For Sale / Pennsylvania 

Hemlock Farms, PA 

3 Bdrm, 2-1/2 bath, LR w/FPl, DR, KT, Sun porch, deck, 2 car garage. By owner. $175K. 

(570) 775-9361 W25 

## HOUSES 

# LIMITS …

Continued from page 6 

the coming weeks but nobody has talked about it in any specif-ic way yet.” DeBlasio, with former assem-blyman and current Bedford-Stuyvesant Councilman Al Vann, were members of the Brooklyn delegation rumored to have eyed the speakership in 2001. Rodriguez, however, with the benefit of one term under his belt, had been the county Demo-cratic committee’s choice for speaker last year. Although the unity of the delegation eventual-ly fractured and several mem-bers, DeBlasio among them, threw their support behind Harlem Councilman Bill Perkins, when Perkins dropped out, the members went with the eventual winner, Miller, of Man-hattan’s Upper-East Side. Having the incumbent speak-er term-limited out of office could give the borough an op-portune chance to bring the sec-ond most powerful position in the city to Brooklyn, though De-Blasio was less inclined to dis-cuss that prospect in relationship to the term limits debate. “It’s too early to figure out what it means for all the people in the council,” he said. “We first have to figure out what is the right policy.” On his own position he said, “I am certainly open on the question of whether we should amend the law to take into account the members that were not allowed to serve eight years. It seems very clear that the law was made to create an eight-year time span. “More broadly, I think we should be very careful not to di-minish term limits in any signif-icant way,” he said. “The new City Council is a fine example of why term limits work in this time and place. We have a very active and engaged group of legislators and that is because of term limits and, of course, cam-paign finance reform.” line come 2003. There will be another election in 2005, and another in 2009, giving those elected in 2001, a full eight-year term should they successfully hold their seats. Those elected in 1997, such as Golden and Rodriguez, will have a truncated term, unless the law is reconsidered. Exactly what factors of the term limits law will be debated — whether to amend the law to allow the class of ’97 to run again in 2003, or to abolish the practice altogether — will like-ly be formed as the issue comes into focus. “Its too early,” said freshman Park Slope Councilman Bill DeBlasio. “Obviously we passed the budget on Friday. That was where everyone’s fo-cus was. This will be an issue in 

By Heather J. Wilson 

The Brooklyn Papers 

A group of college-aged environmentalists con-demned recycling cutbacks and questioned the intelli-gence of new measures that push toward old methods of dealing with trash, includ-ing incineration, during a rally Saturday at a decom-missioned Gravesend incin-erator. The youth group, named ROC for Revitalizing our Community, protested at the Southwest Brooklyn Incinera-tor site on June 22 in response to cuts in recycling agreed to last Wednesday by city offi-cials. It was decided that recy-cling pickups of plastic and glass would be suspended starting July 1. The budget agreement between Mayor Michael Bloomberg and City Council leaders will, however, allow continued collection of metal and paper for recycling. According to ROC Presi-dent Mark Treyger, 24, there 

# Protestors to Bloomberg: Don’t burn us with stacks 

are a lot of young people who are well-informed of the cur-rent waste issues who do not want to share their own incin-eration horror stories with their children. “We here about the dangers of incineration and this is an is-sue concerning our health,” Treyger said. Treyger and Beth Portalatin, 18, the event coordinator for the group, said around 100 people rallied at Saturday’s event. Joining ROC was As-semblyman Bill Colton, the lo-cal political leader of the move to stop the city from reactivat-ing the incinerator, who offers his office space for the group’s meetings, as well as Council-man Marty Golden and state Sen. Vincent Gentile, who are locked in a battle for the re-drawn Bay Ridge-Dyker Heights state Senate seat. The incinerator is located on a piece of property that juts out of Gravesend Bay between Bay 41st Street and 25th Av-enue near the Nellie Bly Amusement Park. “I have family in the area and nobody wants this thing reopened. Even if recycling is costly, we have to deal with it very thoughtfully. In terms of the rally, people responded very well. We got the point across,” Treyger said. Portalatin said that without knowing the politics behind the debate over waste manage-ment, she knows the fight against incineration in the place where she grew up should be a strong one. “Brooklyn is where I live and this is a horrible idea,” she said. “That is all I need to know.” The debate began in Febru-ary, when Bloomberg first pro-posed in his $42 billion munic-ipal budget that all recycling except paper cease. He project-ed it would save New York City more than $50 million a year at a time when saving was vital. Because a significant amount of waste material was ending up in the city’s general waste stream anyway, the mayor argued that the addi-tional cost of separate pickups was unwarranted. Under the compromise council leaders agreed to last week, it was decided that glass collections would be suspend-ed for two years and plastic products for one year. A task force to study ways of making the discarded materials more marketable was also created. But according to Colton, the feasibility of the Bensonhurst incinerators being put back into use as a way to deal with the city’s growing garbage cri-sis continues to be more likely than a lot of residents would like to believe. According to Colton, chair-man of the state’s Legislative Commission on Solid Waste Management, the Southwest Brooklyn Incinerator, which has been shut down since 1991, could find its motors running again if more options are not presented for dealing with the city’s waste. Wednes-day’s decision to cut down on recycling, Colton said this week, was a push in the wrong direction. “I am afraid six months down the line someone at the Department of Sanitation is going to say, ‘We are not get-ting full loads in those blue 

bags anymore, so how about we discontinue them,’” Colton said. “Somebody down the line is going to begin to say, ‘We can’t export our garbage because it is costing us too much. What we need to do is find another way to dispose of it. If the landfill does not work, what we have to do is incinerate it.’” 

Bensonhurst Assemblyman Bill Colton speaks at Saturday’s rally near the Southwest Brooklyn Incinerator site. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango July 1, 2002 BRG 9THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

# Instead of Counting Sheep, Start Getting a Good Night’s Sleep. 

Your nightmare of sleep problems can be solved close to home, at Victory Memorial’s new state-of-the art 

ADVANCED SLEEP TESTING CENTER 

if you suffer from such symptoms as: 

 Insomnia or Snoring 

 Gasping or choking during sleep 

 Excessive tossing, turning and leg movements 

 Waking up tired or with morning headache 

 Falling asleep during the day at inappropriate times 

 Grinding teeth during sleep 

 Sleep talking or sleep walking 

Our new ADVANCED SLEEP TESTING CENTER utilizes high-tech equipment and is under the medical directorship of board certified sleep specialists. 

# 718-567-1681 

VICTORY MEMORIAL HOSPITAL 699 92nd Street, Brooklyn, NY 11228 

Internet: www.vmhny.org “The hospital that cares.” 

# PSYCHOTHERAPY 

Exclusively for Treatment of Varicose Veins of All Sizes. Spiders and Facial Spiders. Leg Ulcers. 

17 years experience 

National clientele 

9920 Fourth Ave., Room 305 (718) 748-2659 

(Bet. 99th & 100th Sts.) http://www.majlessi@cureveins.com 

## Before Before After After Brooklyn Vein-Laser Center 

# PROSTATE PROBLEMS ?

Have a weak urine flow? Often feel a sudden urge to urinate? Have difficulty starting urination? If you answered YES to any of these questions you may benefit from the TherMatrx microwave thermotherapy treatment now being offered by Dr. Francis E. Florio, M.D. This treatment for enlarged prostate is done in the physician’s office and does not involve surgery. Call us now for a preliminary screening. 

# (718) 238-1818 Dr. Francis E. Florio, M.D. 

355 Ovington Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11209 www.thermatrx.com 

# $25 for one month 

Enjoy 31 days of unlimited aerobic and water aerobic classes, unlimited swims in the lap pool and unlimited workouts in the complete fitness center. All for $25. of Brooklyn 

30 Third Ave. @ Atlantic Ave. (718) 875-1190 ext. 225 Open to men and women, 18 or older. Limit one per person. Thirty-one days must be consecutive. For security purposes, photo id is required. 

But Hurry, you must start your one month pass by July 31, 2002 Stop by the 4th Floor Fitness Center Today!! 

This is the second of two columns on traveling with children. 

Face it. A vacation with kids is work. “I don’t think of our trips as a vacation,” says a mother of three who has gotten a lot of mileage out of an attitude ad-justment. “I call our trips ‘fun family adventures.’ They are gifts to the family, memory makers.” With a daughter, 9, and two sons, 4 and 6, the mother finds that realistic expectations, a team spirit and flexibility are as vital as the detailed check-list she starts weeks before each summer trip. What’s realistic? These as-sumptions guide the choices of this mother of three and other sensible travelers: Kids fall apart when they’re tired and hungry, feel yucky after too much junk, and whine when they’ve been confined too long. Push children too much one day and they’re liable to regress the next. But parents often find that when they anticipate their kids’ basic needs, instead of just reacting to meltdowns, their trips are less stressful. To-ward that goal, here are some sanity-saving ideas: • Give each child some con-trol over his own comfort with a pillow and blanket, and his own backpack with water or juice, not-so-messy snacks (such as pretzels and raisins), small toys and books. •Instead of restaurants on the road, opt for picnics at parks or 

# Travel tips II 

rest stops. “Picnics are more fun,” says the mother of an 18-month-old boy and a baby. “The last thing a child wants is to be strapped in a high chair after spending hours in a car seat.” Picnic supplies also come in handy for a simple breakfast in your motel room. • One mom keeps her son and daughter busy on trips each summer with “car cub-bies,” boxes full of inexpen-sive odds and ends, such as joke books, pipe cleaners, masking tape, pads of colorful paper and travel-size games. • Books on tape that appeal to a variety of ages, such as “Harry Potter” (Bantam Books Audio, 1999), also help pass the time on long car trips. • Popular but more expen-sive options: Televisions, hand-held computer games, laptops and CD players with head-phones keep kids occupied. A pilot’s wife who flies of-ten with her two kids, 8 and 10, has come up with some of her own no-cost games: • “While walking through the airport or waiting at a gate, the kids see how many other people they can get to smile by smiling at them,” she says. “It passes the time, and puts smiles on weary travelers.” •She also plays a game where each child closes his eyes, then describes what mom’s wearing. “The child can spot you more easily in a crowded airport if he takes note of what you have on,” she says. •She uses travel time to help her children memorize things they should know, such as mom and dad’s cell-phone numbers. The mother dresses her kids in matching, brightly colored shirts so it’s easier to keep up with them, and uses a fanny pack instead of a purse to keep her hands free. She orders bev-erages for her kids that are clear, such as water or Sprite, because the spills aren’t as no-ticeable as colas or chocolate milk. Each child brings a fa-vorite pillowcase, and stuffs it with two airplane pillows on board. And whether the fami-ly’s traveling by plane or car, plastic grocery bags and moist towelettes are must-have items. 

Can you help? 

Q. “My 11-year-old was diag-nosed with bipolar disorder at age 9 and ADHD at 6. He’s on med-ication, has had counseling and has been in many programs through the school system, but nothing seems to help. What other options are there?” — a mother 

If you have tips or a question, call our toll-free hotline any time at (800) 827-1092. 

Parent-to-Parent 

By Betsy Flagler 

# Jewish daughters 

By Debra Nussbaum Cohen 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

More than 75 people crowded into the living room of the Prospect Heights brownstone of Sarah Kahn Glass and Jonathan Glass. They were there to cele-brate the arrival of Abigail Rina, the couple’s second daughter, with a ceremony called a simchat bat, Hebrew for “celebration of a daugh-ter.” In a ritual led by her parents and her uncle, who is a rabbi, baby Abby was ceremonially ushered into her family, com-munity and the Jewish people, making her one of a growing number of Jewish girls whose births or adoptions are marked with a welcoming ceremony. “If we were going to have a boy and have this big event for him,” said Kahn Glass, referring to the ritual male circumcision, or bris milah, 

“then we wanted to be able to do the same for our daugh-ters. It says that boys and girls are equal.” 

Simchat bat ceremonies “are a trend” in liberal Jewish communities, according to Rabbi Carie Carter, spiritual leader of the Conservative-Egalitarian Park Slope Jewish Center at Eighth Avenue and 14th Street. “People are very interested in finding ways to welcome their baby girls,” said Carter. “It validates the birth of girls as well as boys. And I find it very empowering for the Jew-ish people as a whole.” It has long been the custom for Jewish boys to receive their Hebrew name at the time of their circumcision, eight days after birth; girls were tra-ditionally named sooner — during synagogue services at the first reading of the Torah 

after their birth, accompanied by prayers for the good health and well being of both mother and daughter. In recent decades, as Con-

Jonathan Glass with his wife, Sarah, and daughters Han-nah, 3, and Abigail, 5 months, celebrated a “simchat bat, ”

or “celebration of a daughter. ” The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 

servative as well as Reform synagogues adopted an egali-tarian approach to Jewish life, with men and women taking equal religious roles, there was a desire to create a ritual for baby girls that carries the same religious weight and sense of purpose as their brothers’ brit. 

The first simchat bat rituals were created in the early 1970s by rabbis and new parents. Slowly, they have become nearly universal in some seg-ments of the Jewish communi-ty. And though they vary wide-ly in specific content, each 

simchat bat reflecting the fami-ly’s own personality, they often share a similar format, and em-ploy many of the same sym-bols, which are heavy with Jewish spiritual meaning. 

No longer unusual 

Having a simchat bat, said Carter, “was unusual only five or six years ago. But now it 

## ‘Simchat bat ’

## greets girls 

seems expected.” The female welcoming cer-emonies are sometimes called 

brit bat, meaning “a daugh-ter’s covenant,” or simchat hachnassat la brit, meaning “celebration of entry into the covenant.” Though they can be held in a synagogue, most are con-ducted at home. To start hers, baby Abby Kahn Glass was carried down-stairs, into the living room, in the arms of her grandfather, who then passed her to her grandmother, who gave the baby to her other grandmother, then father, and she ended up in the arms of her mother. Her uncle welcomed the friends and family members present, and then the ceremony began, with blessings and prayers recited by the new par-ents. Each of them then lit a candle, and they read short pas-sages about the significance of light. “We read passages about light being the first of God’s creations, and talked about how Abby has already brought light into our lives. Then we prayed that God’s radiance will continue to shine upon her,” said Kahn Glass. 

Baby Ora brings light 

The simchat bat of Ora Ehrlich also focused on light — the English translation of the Hebrew ora — and on the sim-ilarities between a baby and the Torah. A baby is like a Torah scroll in many ways, says her father, Eddy Ehrlich: “Both are swaddled and cradled, carried carefully, dec-orated and called perfect. The Torah is seen as the communi-ty’s legacy, as are our children. And the unfurling of the Torah scroll is like the unfurling of life.” He and his wife Yvonne Brechbuhler welcomed Ora with a ceremony woven into Saturday morning services at the Park Slope Jewish Center when she was 2 months old. “It was obvious that we needed to do something” to celebrate her arrival, said Ehrlich. So he developed a rit-ual integrating his new daugh-ter and the part of the service when the Torah is read. 

Her own Torah 

He and Yvonne crafted a “wimpel,” the long sash used to wrap the Torah scroll once it is rolled up, just for Ora. They took white satin and, with fabric paint, wrote on it the phrase sung in the syna-gogue when the Torah is being taken out and put back into the ark, adapting it from “Torah, Torah” to “Torah Ora,” which means “Ora’s Torah” or the “Light of the Torah.” After she was named and blessed, they wrapped baby Ora in the “wimpel” and pa-raded her around the sanctuary behind the Torah, which is carried through to let people admire, touch and kiss the holy document which has been so central to Jewish life. Ora’s “wimpel” was used to wrap one of the synagogue’s Torahs for several months af-ter her “simchat bat.” For Vera Titunik and Ken Birnbaum, holding the ceremo-ny for their daughter was a way to link her to the generations of family members before her, and to make a statement about her Jewish identity. They had one at home when their daughter Maggie, now 7, was a month old; they held a simchat bat for her new baby sister, Penelope —named Puah in Hebrew — in their Park Slope home on June 15. Family members and close friends came to their house for Maggie’s, which was led by Rabbi Ellen Lippman of Park Slope’s unafiliated Congrega-tion Kolot Chayenu. The rabbi lit candles as a symbol of the covenant between God and the Jewish people, and offered blessings to Maggie, who was given the Hebrew name Bluma Rakhel. Through naming her, says Titunik, she and her husband talked about their grandmoth-ers, after whom Maggie was named, and a connection backward in time, and forward through the baby, was estab-lished. 

Memories 

Though Titunik never knew her father’s mother, “I talked about my memories of him talking about her. “When I was growing up, he talked about how he got all these recipes from her, for kasha [buckwheat], that his mother taught him how to make. So now when I make kasha I think about him teach-ing me. Talking about it made me feel like I had this link to his mother who I knew that he loved, even though I’d never met her,” she says. It’s also a statement about being connected to other Jews now. 

INDIVIDUAL & COUPLES THERAPY 

Issues of depression, anxiety, trust, and obsession often cloud our think-ing & relationships. Work with askilled, experienced therapist to understand what ’s happening and to make changes. 

Bklyn & NY Offices Low Fee • Dr. B. Rapp (718) 638-0718 R18/24 

The Park Slope Offices of 

PSYCHOTHERAPY FOR PROFESSIONALS 

...when you need a referral to an estab-lished clinical psychologist in private practice. Specializing in crisis manage-ment, midlife issues, career direction, relationship problems. Empathic, insightful, confidential. Extended hours available. 

718-398-2015 W49 R44 

## OVERCOME FEAR • Flying • Subways • Failure/Success • Driving • Phoning • Public Speaking Short Term Therapy, Long Term Results 

FREE CONSULTATION 

Nelson S. Howe M.A., C.E.T. 718-783-3389 R48 

Are You in Emotional Pain? Are You Having Trouble in Your Relationships? Are You Experiencing Loss? Depression? Anxiety? WE CAN HELP! 121 Prospect Place, Park Slope 718 622 4142 R31 

FEMINIST PSYCHOTHERAPY individuals/couples/children 

specializing in the reduction of stress, relationship crisis & school problems for persons of all lifestyles. 

DR. GEORGINE GORRA, D.S.W. Doctor of Social Work 718-783-8247 Parking • Ins. Reimb. 

> R50

Mind-Body Health Issues JOANNE HEITH 

MA fitness CSW Psychotherapist 

Anxiety • Depression Chronic Illness 

718-707-1588 NY State Licensed R27 

P S Y C H O T H E R A P Y 

Child, Couple, & Adult Problem Assessment Long & Short Term Treatment 

Specializing In Life Style Adjustments, Relationships, Anxiety, Fear, Depression, Childhood Trauma, Marriage Counseling, Divorce & Recovery. 

(718) 788-4510 Insurance or fee accepted 

> R31

PSYCHOTHERAPY FOR WOMEN 

Experienced empathic therapist 

• Depression • Anxiety • Addiction • Sexual Identity • Relationships 

Sandra Siegal, MSW, CSW 

Park Slope and Manhattan loc 

718-369-1632 R31 

LESBIAN THERAPISTS REFERRAL NETWORK 

LTRN provides experienced psychotherapists for the needs of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgender. 

Individual • Couple • Group • Family (212) 206-1589 www.Lesbiantherapist.com R23 

A Smoking Cessation Program 8 Group Sessions Learn to QuitNow 

through the process of 

Behavior Modification 

No Patch, No Gum, No Pacifiers 

Call for an appointment. 

QuitNow - 718-403-0244 Penny Schwartz pentap@aol.com 

> R20

# QuitNow 

# Baby boom? 9 months after 9-11 

New York Methodist Hospital 

On June 11, exactly nine months after the Sept. 11 attacks, Tashema Mallory gave birth to abeautiful seven pound baby girl named Briana at New York Methodist Hospital. Mallory said, “I feel like I’m bringing in a new life for someone who lost theirs.” There has been much debate over whether the Sept. 11 at-tacks will give rise to a baby boom over the next couple of months. The number of births at the Birthing Center at New York Methodist Hospital has grown over the last year, but that may be due to its expanded facilities and family-friendly services. It won’t be possible to tell whether or not there will be a baby boom until next year. The Department of Health won’t even have the numbers for last year’s crop until this December of January. Anecdotal evidence suggests there will be an increase in the number of babies born in the next few months. Both Dr. Yael Fuchs and Dr. Fayez Guirguis, obstetricians at New York Methodist, report that several patients have told them that the events of Sept. 11 influenced their decision to have a child. “My office is expecting twice as many births this July and August than last year,” said Dr. Guirguis. Erika Brown-Campbell, PhD, psychotherapist at New York Methodist and an expect-ed mother, believes that while the Sept. 11 attacks may have factored into many people’s de-cision to have, or not to have, a baby, it may not actually affect the number of babies born. “Depending on where people are in their lives, the event could encourage of discourage them from having a baby,” she said. Dr. Rebecca Shiffman, vice chair of obstetrics and gynecol-ogy at New York Methodist, agreed, saying that, in the end, “I think it may balance out.” 

# PARENT 10 BRG July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

injuries. Friends of Kiladitis said at Tuesday’s wake that he lost consciousness as soon as he was hit. “I got opinions from other doctors,” the grieving fa-ther said. “I even got a Methodist [Hospital] brain surgeon to give me a second opinion. After the light went out on the machine, and we walked out, he was pronounced dead.” Wilson, a 12-year police department veteran, plead-ed not guilty to vehicular assault, reckless endanger-ment and operating a car while under the influence of alcohol. A blood-alcohol content of .05 or higher indi-cates a person is “under the influence,” while a level of .10 or higher is considered “intoxicated,” DA officials said. He was released on $10,000 bail following his ar-raignment in Brooklyn criminal court last Thursday. Now, prosecutors are seeking an upgrade of the charges to include vehicular manslaughter. The more serious crime is punishable by up to 15 years in prison, according to the Brooklyn district attor-ney’s office. Wilson has been suspended for 30 days without pay. He could be the first officer to be dismissed from the force under a new policy that mandates officers con-victed of causing serious injury while driving under the influence, be fired. Mayor Michael Bloomberg had not commented publicly on the accident as this went to press. The policy is a result of recent incidents in which off-duty officers have been arrested on drunken driving charges, capped by the recent case in which a Sunset Park cop was convicted of killing four family members with his vehicle after a day-long drinking binge. Last August, former cop Joseph Gray struck and killed eight-months pregnant Maria Herrera, 23; her sister Dilcia Pena, 16; and Herrera’s 4-year-old son, Andy as they tried to cross Third Avenue. Herrera’s un-born child died within 24 hours of the accident follow-ing an emergency caesarian section. In May, Gray was convicted on all four counts of ve-hicular manslaughter. The 15-year police veteran had been assigned to the 72nd Precinct in Sunset Park at the time of the accident. He resigned shortly after to avoid departmental dismissal. Gray, who admitted to spend-ing an entire day drinking with fellow officers before heading to the precinct for his shift, was sentenced to the maximum allowable sentence of five to 15 years. During the trial, a toxicologist testified that Gray’s blood-alcohol level would have been .23 at the time of the accident, more than twice the legal limit of .10. According to police, Wilson failed a field sobriety test after hitting Kiladitis. He then refused to take a Breathalyzer test. The field sobriety test, taken 90 min-utes after the crash, reportedly indicated that Wilson’s blood-alcohol level was .11. Wilson’s attorney, Brian Wellsome, could not be reached for comment. “Alcohol is a legal gun,” Eltherios Kiladitis told The Papers while staring at his son’s open steel casket on Tuesday. Stefanos Kiladitis, a Fort Hamilton High School graduate, received his auto mechanic’s license from Apex Technical School in 2000. He turned 21 on June 16, Father’s Day, Eltherios noted. The family had been busy buying soda, food and decorations and checking RSVPs for a planned surprise birthday party set for Saturday. “And all of the sudden, instead we were planning a funeral,” Eltherios said. As Eltherios hugged family members and friends at the wake, Kiladitis’ brother, John, sat stone-faced and silent in a corner chair in the funeral home lobby. Kiladitis and his brother had shared a first-floor apartment in the 67th Street building their father owns in Bay Ridge. “I can’t even talk to him right now, he is just so …,” said Anthony Kostandi, 25, unable to find the words to describe the pain his best friend’s brother endured. “We are taking it day by day. I still don’t believe it hap-pened.” Kostandi said he could still remember seeing Kiladi-tis launched from his motorcycle after Wilson’s car hit him. He, Kiladitis and two other friends were all riding their motorcycles together on Fort Hamilton Parkway when the tragedy unfolded, he said. While one called 911 from his cell phone, Kostandi said he held Kiladi-tis’ hand. “And I kept telling him to open his eyes,” Kostandi said. “I was telling him to squeeze my hand.” But Kiladitis did not move. Now, Kostandi and more than 30 of Kiladitis’ friends will board their bikes and ride for one final time, he said, in the funeral proces-sion to Green-Wood Cemetery on Wednesday. “We won’t be riding our bikes anymore,” Kostandi said. “Not after tomorrow.” The death of his high school buddy and the circum-stances surrounding it hit Kostandi particularly hard. He had recently enrolled in the 68th Precinct auxiliary program to begin training to become a police officer. Now, he said, the title would forever be tainted in his eyes. “I am so angry,” Kostandi said. “Nobody from that precinct [the 120th] gave their condolences.” Kostandi’s real anger, he said, stemmed from the way in which police on the scene allegedly treated Wil-son. After he left to follow Kiladitis to the hospital, Ko-standi said, his friends kept him informed from the ac-cident scene via their two-way Nextel radios. “They told me they were giving [Wilson] water,” Kostandi said. Denise Mauriello, a friend of Kiladitis, called the tragedy “heartbreaking.” “I would hope people could trust the police,” she said. “It is sick that this person, after the Gray trial and the fact that he has an 11-year-old son, did this.” Wilson lives on Staten Island with his wife and their 11-year-old son. According to the Brooklyn district attorney’s office, Wilson has no prior criminal record. Eltherios Kiladitis said his son was wearing a helmet at the time of the accident and rode his bike cautiously with his friends on a normal basis. “They took short rides. He bought the bike for fun,” Eltherios said, noting his son only bought the bike four months ago and had only recently secured his motorcy-cle license, registration and insurance. Police said Kila-ditis was wearing a Department of Transportation-ap-proved helmet. “He went and got everything on his own and he showed me. It was all in his wallet,” the father said, pulling the worn leather wallet from his pocket. “I keep it with me now,” he said. “He will always be with me.” Kiladitis’ funeral was held Wednesday morning in the Kimisis Theotokou Greek Orthodox Church on 18th Street in Sunset Park. He was buried in Green-Wood Cemetery. 

# DUI …

Continued from page 1 

A police car drives past memorial set up by friends of Stefanos Kiladitis on Fort Hamilton Parkway. 

> The Brooklyn Papers  / Greg Mango

# IN ITALY , where the most popu-lar chewing gum is named “Brooklyn” — complete with a logo of the Brooklyn Bridge — life truly is beautiful. You’ll find no pizza slices there, only a small, uncut pie. And spag-hetti, which originally was brought from the East by Marco Polo, is served without a spoon and tends to be more like noodles. Both were relatively unknown to northern Ital-ian diets until the 1960s. The over-powering gourmet delight, though, is the multi-flavored gelato. This spring, I toured the provinces and rolling hills of Um-bria and Tuscany north of Rome rel-ishing a feast for the eye, mind and spirit. There I discovered a country that thrived centuries before the Greeks and Romans even existed. The inhabitants think as if they still occupied independent city-states. This rivalry remains particularly sharp in language and sports. “Polit-ically correct” remains an unknown quality, particularly when sports ri-valry enters the picture. Like Brooklynites who consider their allegiance to the borough stronger than any ties to the city or state — think Dodgers — Italians follow their home teams with a fierce, illogical loyalty. They prefer to cheer on a foreign team than en-courage a rival neighbor. In Umbrian towns, pageantry re-mains closely identified with me-dieval festivals. Competition against a neighboring community results in beautiful handmade costumes, me-dieval jousting, fierce crossbow contests and noisy parades. Siena is the site for the famous “Palio,” a 10-horse, bareback race. Churches overpower the cultural life in their enormity, splendor and majesty. In Assisi, where I stayed, 54 churches cater to a population of barely 25,000. While Roman Catholicism is the dominant reli-gion, few strictly adhere to Church dogma, as evidenced by the nation-al, below-zero-growth birthrate. The Romans brought grandeur and creativity to the country with plumbing and judicial systems, but they never invented the computer: their numerical system had no zero. It took the Arabic world — which also introduced chess — to accom-plish that concept. But then the Ro-man Empire collapsed, defeated by the Germanic Vandals in the 5th century, and the Church assumed religious, political and military su-periority in the vacuum. When corruption from the pow-er absolute seeped into the Church, a young, rich, playboy from Assisi surrendered his wealth and worked to rebuild the country physically, intellectually and morally. His giv-en name was John but his French mother greatly influenced him. In Italian, the word for “French” was “Francesco,” which became his adopted name. The stories of St. Francis taming animals had more to do with moral fables related to his taming of politicians and ag-gressive church authorities. The town of Assisi remains col-orful and vibrant, even after the devastating earthquake a couple of years ago. As in Tuscany, the food is fresh and tasty and the people earthy and gentle. Other rich sec-tions of Italy lie in the northeast, while heavy industry remains in the northwest around Milan. The odd-est group of Italians comes from the Dolomite region, a land former-ly owned by Austria, who, with their Tyrolean hats and accents, re-main more Germanic than Italian. The rich center of culture re-mains in Florence dominated by the Duomo, the Palazzo Vecchio and the Ponte Vecchio, the colorful market bridge. A secret passage-way runs from the palace across the bridge to the cathedral, built so royalty would not have to mingle with the masses. A relatively new country, Italy has resisted cohesiveness. Although brought together in the 1870s by Garibaldi under the Savoy family, the Vatican did not recognize Italy as a nation until the 1920s. Before World War II, they united under Mussolini and the Fascists, but Ital-ians never adopted the viciousness of the Nazis. Many Jews from Yu-goslavia and other eastern European countries found a haven in Italy, who accepted them as citizens until the Italian surrender and the country’s occupation by Hitler’s army. It was then that the Italian partisan move-ment grew as allied troops fought their way up “the deadly boot.” After the war, poverty and starva-tion grew as documented in many classic Italian films of that era. America, on the other hand, pro-duced films such as “Roman Holi-day,” now enjoying its 50th anniver-sary. Italy countered with “La Dolce Vita” and Hollywood returned “Three Coins in the Fountain.” More than 300,000 Brooklynites claim Italian heritage. Many came from Sicily, home of the pizza. To-day, the island remains an attractive, ideal resort, except in the summer heat. Umbrian and Tuscan names run through our vocabulary: Spoleto with its music festival; chianti, a much-maligned quality red wine; Pisa, whose tower has been opened after its dangerous lean was correct-ed; Perugia and its chocolates. Even the Coliseum received new respect after the film “Gladiator.” In Tuscany, the eerie skyline of San Gimignano haunted me, awalled city popularly nicknamed “Medieval Manhattan,” complete with miniature twin towers. Italy remains physically far from Brooklyn — although Rome is the same latitude as New York City — but its history and beauty holds a fascination for tourists everywhere. 

John Manbeck was Brooklyn’s official historian from 1993-2001 .

# ANNIVERSARIES and other milestones are coming with great frequency this summer. At summer’s end, we’ll be entering our 25th year at The Brooklyn Papers. Beginning as a bi-weekly feature-oriented tabloid for Downtown office workers, we evolved into the borough’s premier, news -orient-ed, independent newspapers. I’m still asked, often, how do we do it. How, 50 weeks a year, we produce and distribute — for free — tens of thousands of newspapers in more than adozen neighborhoods. We’ve been repeatedly imitated, but qualitatively never duplicated. • • • As always, July 4th is a dou-ble holiday for my wife and I — it’s both Independence Day and our anniversary. We chose Independence Day for our wedding for its symbolism and color — and because we knew we could get away from the office since The Brooklyn Papers don’t publish July 4 week. In these last 13 years, we’ve been together vir-tually all the time — Celia, of course, is The Papers’ publish-er, I’m the president, and nei-ther job is a 9-to-5er. • • • 

# THIS WEEK also marks the 10th anniversary of my mother’s passing. On a Valentine’s Day, 18 years before her death, she stood before a coalition of Brooklyn civic leaders in the Borough Hall courtroom; her partnership in the creation of the Brooklyn Civic Leadership Coalition was to be the culmi-nation of one of many dreams my mother had of making the world a better place, the real-ization of the Hebrew mandate 

tikun olam (heal the world) .

She was always fighting to make things right. Before the chaos wrought by decentralization, she was aschool secretary at St. Clair McKelway Junior High School in Ocean Hill-Brownsville, where her work rarely seemed to end at 3 pm. She’d take proj-ects home, organizing her of-fice and helping the children, and working to unite the city’s school secretaries in a profes-sional organization. When she was assigned to Board of Education headquar-ters Downtown, she saw the bu-reaucracy, the waste, the ineffici-encies—and she was constantly devising ways to overcome the odds in her department, to make the system work for the schools, for the children. During her Valentine’s Day speech at Borough Hall, she suffered a stroke and fell into a coma that lasted six months. In her remaining 18 years, some of her old spirit re-mained, but the old energy and ability to overcome were gone. In her 75 years, she touched many people in and beyond her extended family. But fami-ly was always central. As a child growing up in East New York during the De-pression, she’d submit poems and short essays to Elsie Jean, a columnist for the Brooklyn Dai-ly Times. Among the many that were published, this was my mother’s favorite: 

FAMILY TREE 

A tree takes pride in sturdy roots, Its branches tower high, Each fresh new shoot augments its strength And storms and winds defy Men and women likewise grow, Midst blossoms or in weeds, Depending on the quality Of long implanted seeds Are you a man or woman Close to the honored roots? Or are you a twiglet, One of the newer shoots? Whatever your age in life may be, Whatever your place upon the tree, Remember you are a vital part, And in the family tree, close to its heart. • • • 

# THE ANNIVERSARY no one will forget is Sept. 11. After last year’s tragedy, The Brooklyn Papers pub-lished an American flag, which found its way into windows throughout Brooklyn. In honor of Independence Day, we’re again including a flag in this week’s paper. Dis-play it with pride. Independence Day does not commemorate Sept. 11 or the fight against terrorism. It’s about America; with all her flaws — with all our flaws — she’s worthy of our love. 

EdWeintrob@BrooklynPapers. com 

ED WEINTROB LETTERS 

# Anniversary summer Op-Dumpster not right for Ridge 

JOHN MANBECK 

HISTORICALLY SPEAKING 

# Historic tour of Italy 

Salesman, 86th Street near Dyker Park. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mangp Jerry Abramowitz 

# B’KL YN VIEWPOINTS 

To the editor: As the chairman of Community Board 10 [Bay Ridge], I reply to the remarks of board members [Greg] Ahl and [Joanne] Seminara-Lehu criticizing CB10’s recent handling of “Operation Dumpster” (“Board 10 trashes Operation Dumpster,” June 24). This program would decrease dumpsters in our neighborhood, but increase the use of commercial garbage cans and commer-cial garbage bags. The board overwhelmingly rejected the program by a vote of 30-15. Among other things. many on the board are concerned that additional garbage cans and plastic bags will be leakier, smellier, noisier, uglier and attract more rats than the dumpsters they replace. These board members are unwilling to sign on to the program without additional information, directly from Sanitation Com-missioner Doherty, allaying their fears. That information should be forthcoming in the fall. Ahl and Seminara-Lehu fully argued their case to the board or committee six times over the past four months. Despite their baseless accusations of sti-fled arguments and manipulated rules, the lopsided vote indicates that the proponents of Operation Dumpster simply did not pro-vide the information necessary to make their case at this time. —Stephen Harrison Chairman, Community Board 10 

SEND US A LETTER 

Here’s how to send a letter for publication. • By E-Mail: Letters@BrooklynPapers.com 

• By Fax: (718) 834-9278. • By regular mail : Letters,The Brooklyn Papers, 26 Court St., Brooklyn, NY 11242. 

Please sign your correspondence and include your address and phone number for verification. Letters may be edited for space and clarity. 

# OK, YOU ’D JUST better believe me on this — George Pataki is running for vice president of the United States. We know Pataki wants to be president and we know that if he’s the veep, he’ll be in position to run for the top job. Within the minor political league known as Al-bany, that is the GAPW, or Generally Ac-cepted Political Wisdom. Obviously, you cannot tell George that he can’t be vice president. Why would he believe that any more than he believed that he couldn’t be governor? The polls have him beating his potential political third-term gubernatorial rivals by 30 points. Pataki has a lot going for him. The cur-rent vice president, Dick Cheney, has a bum ticker and may not want to run again. The Republicans are not doing well in the Northeast and Pataki would make a good drawing card at a time when it looks like the Democrats are about to commit politi-cal suicide by nominating Al Gore (or someone worse). The governor’s folks must be thinking that if Pataki could put New York in play for the Republicans, he would rise to the top of the contenders list. But wait just one little minute. First, there is the small matter of trust. You see, George Pataki has a reputation for muscling his mentors aside. Just ask state Sen. Mary Goodhue. She’s the one he turned on and ran against in his state Sen-ate race. The folks in the White House are no patsies. They play real hard ball. Will they trust him to be the No. 2? George W. did not get to be president without having a hell of a political machine. Pataki is surrounded by a retinue of han-dlers. What that second spot calls for is a supporter, not a rival for power. People in the White House must have reservations about putting Pataki in place for that reason. He’ll have to do very well in the com-ing gubernatorial election in order to con-vince everyone he can bring home the votes for Bush. Since New York is such a Democratic state, there is every possibility that the polling numbers will narrow dur-ing the election cycle, particularly if Carl McCall is the candidate and energizes the thousands of active state Democrats who support him and overwhelmingly made him the candidate of the state Democratic Party at their convention. Then there is Thomas Golisano, who is going to spend millions against Pataki in minor party primaries. He’ll spread the message that no matter how often Pataki says things are better in upstate New York, he is prevaricating. Not a night goes by that the upstate TV stations don’t chronicle the drain of major jobs north of Yonkers. So, while Pataki might be harboring thoughts of going to Washington and bringing his team, including Al D’Amato and Zenia Mucha with him, he had better wait to count his chickens, at least until a couple of them hatch. 

Alan S. Chartock is the executive pub-lisher of the Legislative Gazette. 

# Pataki after Albany ALAN S. CHARTOCK                

> •PARK SLOPE GROUP : Park Slope Paper, Windsor Terrace Edition, Sunset Park Paper
> •DOWNTOWN GROUP : Brooklyn Heights Paper, Downtown News, Carroll Gardens-Cobble Hill Paper, Fort Greene-Clinton Hill Paper
> •BAY RIDGE GROUP : Bay Ridge Paper, Bensonhurst Paper.
> •MIDWOOD GROUP : Midwood, Kensington and Ocean Parkway Papers.
> COMPOSITION OWNERSHIP: Entire contents copyright 2002 Brook-lyn Paper Publications Inc. All ads and other content prepared by our staff, including ART WORK, DESIGN and COPY, remain the sole prop-erty of The Brooklyn Papers and may not be reproduced elsewhere without the Publisher ’s written permission.
> ADVERTISING: Subject to Terms Governing Acceptance of Advertising published in our latest rate card.
> EDITORIAL CONTRIBUTIONS: The Brooklyn Papers assumes no re-sponsibility for unsolicited materials. Articles, story ideas, letters, photog-raphy, and all other materials delivered to The Brooklyn Papers, whether or not solicited by Publisher or Publisher ’s agent and whether or not they contain restrictions on publication or use, will be treated as un-conditionally assigned for publication and copyright purposes, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Publisher prior to publication. All sub-missions become the property of The Brooklyn Papers and will not be returned; submissions may be edited and may be published or otherwise reused in any medium by or with permission of The Brooklyn Papers.
> CIRCULATION: Net figures, based on period norms.
> MAIL SUBSCRIPTIONS: Including First Class postage: $100 per year per weekly paper ($300 for one copy of one paper from each different Group), prepaid. Foreign orders higher. Back issues, when available, per copy —last eight weeks, $1; earlier this year, $2; last year, $5; earlier years, $10. Add $2 per copy postage and handling. All orders prepaid.
> EMPLOYMENT: From time to time, candidates may be considered for current and future positions. Letters of inquiry for editorial positions should be addressed to the Managing Editor; inquiries for other posi-tions should be addressed to the Publisher, specifying position.
> MEMBER: National Newspaper Association, Independent Free Papers of America, Free Community Papers of NY, Brooklyn Chamber of Com-merce.

26 Court St, Suite 506, Brooklyn NY 11242 (718) 834-9350 Published weekly, 50 times a year, by Brooklyn Paper Publications Inc. Established 1978. Copyright 2002. PUBLISHER: Celia Weintrob (ext 104)                           

> PRESIDENT: Ed Weintrob (ext 105)
> MANAGING EDITOR: Neil Sloane (ext 119)
> FEATURES EDITOR: Lisa J. Curtis (ext 131)
> SENIOR EDITOR & PRODUCTION MANAGER:
> Vince DiMiceli (ext 125)
> STAFF REPORTERS :Patrick Gallahue (ext 123),
> Heather J. Wilson (ext 122)
> ADVERTISING STAFF: Laurel Dagrosa (ext 110),
> Susan Littman (ext 116), Nancy McGrath (ext 112),
> Allen Nilson (ext 114), Roxanne West (ext 111)
> PRODUCTION STAFF
> Art Director: Leah Mitch (ext 127),
> Ad Designer: Kevin Takasato (ext 126),
> Receptionist: Tiffany Small (ext 101)
> OFFICE MANAGER: Teresa Addair (ext 117)

## Catholic response 

To the editor: I write as a concerned Catholic in response to Theresa Folan’s letter headlined “Ryan’s right” (June 17). The current malaise in the Catholic Church, with its sexual misconduct, financial mismanagement and widespread corruption, has some solutions. First, the Catholic Church in America should announce days of prayer, fasting and programs of discernment for bishops, priests and laity alike to know who Christ is. Second, there should be a complete revi-sion of the education system for candidates for the Catholic priesthood. Are they sexually mature and well-integrated human beings? Third, there should be lay leadership pro-grams, and financial training for the clergy and laity in leadership positions in churches. Fourth, there should be discernment pro-grams for prophetic offices in the Church for lay person and cleric alike. Ms. Folan’s solution of withholding monetary contributions to the Church ob-fuscates her role as a practicing Catholic. As a certified social worker, she could offer her services to instruct the ignorant. The bishops, priests, deacons and laity would be a good first step. The media prints the news. We, the peo-ple, Christian and non-Christian are to act upon it. Hopefully, for the greater glory of God. — James Steele,Gowanus 

## No honor for Tubman 

To the editor: It is surprising that any activists want too name a street for Harriet Tubman (“Brawl over Fulton St.,” June 24). What sort of “honor” would that be? Ms. Tubman, born in Maryland, was active in the East, leading an estimated 300 escapees from the South to free locations. During the Civil War, she remained in South Carolina, aiding the Union forces. Later, she lived for many years in Auburn, New York. Any connection to Brooklyn is not men-tioned in standard short biographies, but naturally the leading abolitionists knew of her work. She lived until 1913. A statue, or several statues would truly honor Harriet Tubman. That would be the way to honor a great leader, rather than renaming a dusty busi-ness street. She deserves better! 

— H.R. Redding, Brooklyn THE BROOKLYN PAPERS  • www.BrooklynPapers.com  • July 1, 2002 12 BRG July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM By Lisa J. Curtis 

The Brooklyn Papers 

# Let this year be the one in which you truly embrace and enjoy summer’s pleasures. Forsake that air-condi-tioned cool to explore the natural beauty that Brooklyn — yes Brooklyn — affords in unexpected places. For instance, you may have already known that Pros-pect Park offers an excellent slate of performances at the band shell, and there’s no better place to go for a picnic, but did you know the park is also an important habitat for animals and birds? The new Audu-bon Center, which opened at the Prospect Park Boat-house on April 26, is now offering electric boat tours, for just $3, of the Lullwater and 60-acre Prospect Lake. With its phragmites — tall grasses along the shores — providing prime real estate for birds looking to nest, there’s a lot to spot on these birding boat tours. The center’s executive director, Cheryl Bartholow, explained that the boathouse is “positioned on low water, which is the best nesting area for birds” and the quiet, captained electric boat doesn’t disturb the birds while it allows visitors to get a clos-er peek at them. On Friday, we boarded The Indepen-dence to see what birds the lake was at-tracting. (The center’s director of educa-tion, Glenn Phillips, said, “The earlier the better” to see the greatest amount of bird activity, but the boat ride has charm any time of day.) We took our seats on The Indepen-dence’s mahogany bench, under the green-and-white striped canopy, and it was easy to feel like a tourist in a dreamy, quieter ver-sion of Venice as the boat smoothly glid-ed away from the dock, leaving be-hind its stately patio and cafe. Captain Pierre Vautravers helmed the 30-foot fantail craft for the half-hour tour. As we pulled away from the dock, we saw a black crown heron rooting around for snails by the boathouse. “It’s hard to believe you’re in Brooklyn on some parts of the ride,” said Bartholow. As The Independence glided under the Lullwater Bridge we were instructed to look up to see that the bridge’s cast-iron underside was decorated for the pleasure of boaters. New to the park is the rustic arbor with bench seating and a “beach” that is visible from the boat. (You won’t find sand on this “beach”; the term is park lingo for a cement slope going down to the water.) On the surface of the water, we passed a seasonal crop of duckweed, flowering prim-rose and water shield with yellow blossoms. There are also small areas of the lake fenced in with chicken wire to keep in barley straw, a natural way to minimize algae in the wa-ter, explained Phillips. “It releases hydrogen peroxide, which reduces algae and it’s even better for fish,” he said. (The water of manmade Prospect Lake is “New York City tap water,” ex-plained Bartholow.) The hotter it gets, she said, the more visible the turtles are as they surface to sun themselves on logs. Phillips pointed out a lone red-eared pond turtle, an offspring of a presumably abandoned pet. “[Turtles] live as long as people,” said Phillips. “These have chased away the na-tive painted turtle. People shouldn’t have turtles as pets. They don’t stay little enough to be kept in kitchens.” A white mute swan glided by, and then, around a bend, we saw a mother duck and her ducklings scooting along the shore. Phillips guessed that those ducklings must be less than a week old. “Ducklings are precocious; they can swim from the moment they’re born,” he said. Phillips explained that birds are shy in the summer because they’re nesting. “Mallards, wood duck and Canadian geese breed here,” he said. 

The Brooklyn Papers’ essential guide to the Borough of Kings (718) 834-9350 • July 1, 2002 

# P’Park Audubon Center invites you to watch the birdie 

# Free Fridays This summer, when you’re exhausted and staggering home from work along Seventh Avenue in Park Slope on a Friday night, don’t forget to look around and see where all that mu-sic’s coming from. The Brooklyn Conservatory of Music and the Park Slope Chamber of Commerce will present free garden concerts every Friday from July 12 to Aug. 30, from 5 pm to 7 pm, at the conser-vatory garden, 58 Seventh Ave. at Lincoln Place. The series kicks off on July 12 with Greg Erickson’s Tri-Bone-Al performing classical brass music. The rest of the series features jazz. New this year, says Jen-nifer Newell, executive di-rector of the conservatory, is a bonus concert on Aug. 9 by the Jambalaya Brass Band who’ll be performing their special brand of New Or-leans jazz in front of Carvel and Mojo Cafe on Third Street at Seventh Avenue. Performing simultaneously at the conserva-tory will be bassist Eric Lemon and his quartet. Newell says the Jambalaya Band “is the biggest and one of the favorites every year. The bands that perform are usually faculty member-based. Jambalaya’s leader is saxophonist Rick Frank — head of the preschool program.” To start your weekend off right, don’t miss these free com-munity concerts. For a complete schedule of bands, call (718) 622-3300. 

— Lisa J. Curtis 

# French kisses Series is a rare showcase of the latest films from France 

By Marian Masone 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

# After our own films, French cinema appears to be the most popular in the United States — or at least in this city. From July 10 through July 14 (ending, appropriately, on Bastille Day) BAMcinematek will present “New French Con-nection,” a selection of the latest crop of French films that have yet to find U.S. distributors. There are a number of means by which French films try to find distribution in the United States, their largest foreign market. Producers make deals even before films are finished for some of the better-known directors. But more likely, they’ll present their films in festivals and markets. The Cannes festival is, of course, the largest and most likely tar-get. If you can’t get your film into one of the sections of the festival itself, you can always have market screenings of your movie, where the actual buying and selling of film rights takes place. But even using these kinds of venues doesn’t always work — at least not right away — so institutions like the BAMcin-ematek organize mini-festivals. And who knows? Perhaps these films could finally find distribution and then be shown throughout the country. The slate at BAM is a small one — just five works — which makes it possible to see every film. One might think that films that haven’t found a distributor for a wide release would be first features, say, or films by unknowns. But the five filmmakers represented in this series have many films under their collective belt. Philippe Garrel, who attained cult status a few years back, has trouble finding distributors, so his films (“The Birth of Love” and “The Inner Scar” among them) aren’t widely known. However, his work is visually crisp and intellectually rigorous, and at BAM you can see his 2001 film “Wild Inno-cence.” In this film, Francois, a young director who is suffering from the drug overdose death of his wife, decides to make an anti-drug film as a memorial to her, and also as a way of working out his own grief. But first he has to get financing, and the struggle is as difficult as one might expect. Finally, af-ter running into an odd producer, he cuts a deal. Ironically he has to move heroin for this guy in order to make his anti-drug film. And his actresses don’t help matters by snorting the stuff in between takes. It’s a serious film, and very accessible. Shot in pristine black-and-white by Jean-Luc Godard’s main director of pho-tography, Raoul Coutard, the film is reminiscent of the origi-nal French New Wave, without being derivative. Characters deconstruct love and relationships in a recognizable way, and drug issues aren’t dealt with in a black-and-white manner. This film was shown in the market section of last month’s Cannes festival, but so far no U.S. distributors have shown in-terest. Also shown in the market was Jean-Francois Stevenin’s “Mischka.” This is a 2002 film, but it couldn’t be shown in any of the official sections of the festival because it had pre-viously screened in the Rotterdam Film Festival, and the ma-

Boat tours leave the Audubon Center at the Prospect Park Boathouse Wednesday-Thursday, from 1 pm to 5 pm, and Friday-Sun-day, from 10 am to 5 pm. Tickets are $3. Binoculars are suggested. The boathouse is near the entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue. For information about hours and pro-grams, visit www.prospectparkaudubon.org or call (718) 287-3400. 

Pedal boats , which seat four, can be rent-ed from Kate’s Corner, near the Wollman Rink. An adult must accompany children under 16 years. Rides are $10 an hour with a $10 de-posit, weekends and holidays, from noon to 5 pm, Thursday-Friday, from 11 am to 4 pm. For further information, call (718) 282-7789. The Brooklyn Bird Club hosts its “ Intro-duction to Bird Watching ” walking tours every Saturday and Sunday, from 10 am to 11:30 am, led by volunteers. 

T O U R M U S I C C I N E M A D I N I N G PAG E G O 2 - 3 

## Where to fill your picnic basket & more 

T H E AT E R PAG E G O 5 

## Enjoy ‘King Stag’ under the stars 

EVENTS CALENDAR: GO 6 BROOKLYN CLASSIFIEDS: GO 8 

I N S I D E 

See BIRDS on page GO 4 See FRENCH on page GO 4

345 Court Street (at Union Street) 718-852-5015 

Open 7 days for lunch and dinner • Free Valet Parking • 

Visit our website www.MarcoPoloRistorante.com 

# Marco Polo R I S T O R A N T E 

Pioneer of the fine restaurant movement in Brooklyn 

Classic, Elegant Italian Cuisine Still one of the best restaurants in Brooklyn! 

• Banquet Room Available for Holiday Parties • Enclosed Sidewalk Cafe • Full Mahogany Bar • Live Piano - Wed, Fri & Sat eves • Fine Wine List 

# Eat up this view! 

Our lovely rooftop garden, with it’s extraordinary view and great Mexican food will have you returning to Alma again & again... 

187 Columbia St. 

(DeGraw/Sackett) • C ARROLL GARDENS 

• 643-5400 

Serving Dinner • Open 7 days 

# SUMMER IN BROOKLYN SUMMER IN BROOKLYN 

We're open Thursday, July 4th from 9:30am - 6pm! Make your own Fireworks! We're up to 60% off!* 

627 5th Ave. (at 17th St.) • Park Slope www.aarons.com • Free Parking • (718) 768-5400 STORE HOURS FOR JULY: Mon-Sat 9:30am-6pm AARON’S 

*Selected spring merchandise. 

# Swan lake Swan lake 

Brooklyn safari : (Top) Prospect Park pa-trons on the Independence head to-wards Prospect Lake to look for birds. The lake is frequently visited by the great egret (at left) and is home to swans (above). The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 2 July 1, 2002 

Alma 

187 Columbia St. at Degraw Street, (718) 643-5400. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $10-$18. 

While the authentic, “non-Americanized ”

Mexican food served at Alma is amazing, it is the setting that will take your breath away. Dine on the rooftop garden, which seats 40, and you ’ll have Manhattan ’sskyline at your tabletop. Indoor seating is also available, and the comfortable, rus-tic, wood interior, handmade chairs and hand-blown glass hanging lamps will make Alma ’s downstairs a popular desti-nation as well. Their tamales have been boasted the finest in the city, handmade daily in a daz-zling variety. Fish of the day is often a dish made from soft-shell crabs or scal-lops. Ancho relleno , a large poblano pepper stuffed with shredded pork, raisins and peppers is a classic. A breast of duck is grilled and served with a roast-ed peanut and tomato sauce with apuree of sweet potato. 

Barracuda Seafood Restaurant & Bar 

7026 Third Ave. at 71st Street, (718) 833-3759. (AmEx, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $12.95-$21.95. «

Owner Willy Boroden attributes his broad knowledge of fish to his upbring-ing near the Black Sea, where he ate fish every day and learned how to select the best catch through touch, smell and appearance. Three times a week, Boroden goes to the Fulton Fish Market where he buys the fresh fish that are then broiled, pan-fried, grilled or blackened by chef Mike. Food is served in a relaxed atmosphere — a dark interior with an eight-seat bar, a dining area and a lounge with two large sofas and a huge sus-pended TV. Free valet parking Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights. 

Chez Oskar 

211 DeKalb Ave. at Adelphi Street, (718) 852-6250. (Visa, MC, DC, AmEx) Average entree: $8-$20. «

Chez Oskar offers some of the best French bistro fare — with hints of the Caribbean — in Brooklyn. And what goes better with delicious French staples than a bottle of wine from an affordable list? Whether you choose the escargot or the steak frites, the flour-less chocolate cake is a perfect ending. Brunch is served Saturdays and Sundays from 11 am to 4:30 pm. Sidewalk cafe seats available. 

Cobble Grill 

212 DeGraw St. at Henry Street, (718) 422-0099, www.cobblegrill.com. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $6.95-$9.95. 

This friendly cafe, with its tables in front and colorful, inviting front doors, can whip up a mean grilled sandwich, salad or burg-er. Try the seared tuna salad, served on greens, grilled fennel, clementines, red onion and black olives, or the over-stuffed grilled cheese sandwich, with roasted red peppers, artichoke hearts, fontina cheese and grilled mushrooms. Another tasty choice is ginger-braised short ribs on brioche, served with apple-fennel slaw. Burgers come plain or dressed up, like the 

“Man Burger ” (A-1 Steak Sauce, Swiss cheese, mushrooms, lettuce and tomato), the saga blue cheese burger and the bar-becue burger. In addition to the Rice Krispies treats, blondies and chunky muf-fin-top brownies, Cobble Grill offers a daily dessert special. Open seven days a week, from noon to 10 pm. 

Cono & Sons O’Pescatore 

301 Graham Ave. at Ainslee Street, (718) 388-0168. (AmEx, DC, MC, Visa) Entrees: $8.95-$29.95. 

Your first impression of Cono & Sons O’Pescatore will be a light, airy feeling, evoked by glimmering white tablecloths with napkins pointing heavenward, black lacquered chairs and a beautiful tile floor. As the name suggests, this is the place for serious seafood and Italian cuisine enthu-siasts. Signature dishes include the Contadina, a mouthwatering mixture of veal, sausage, beef and chicken, prepared with peppers, mushrooms and potatoes ($39.99 for two or more) and the tornido di pesci — clams, shrimps, mussels, whiting, squid and filet of sole served with rice (also $39.95, for at least two people). Plenty of offerings, like homemade cavatelli, veal chops alla Cono, shrimp fra diavolo and fried scal-lops. Cappuccino and a traditional Italian dessert (cheesecake, spumoni and more) wrap things up nicely. 

Copper 

243 Degraw St. at Clinton Street, (718) 797-2017. (AmEx, DC, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $10-$17. «

Owners Robyn Cuccio and Reina Heyer have made this recent addition to Carroll Gardens feel like a cozy but modern bed-and-breakfast restaurant. Copper has cobblestone floors, mahogany walls, Tiffany lamps, copper cappuccino mak-ers, and a creative menu. Chef Cuccio calls her dishes “Brooklyn fusion, ”

because she combines foods from all over the world to make unique and deli-cious meals. The moderately priced entrees come in large portions, whether it is the caramelized fish, toasted barley and mint or the mahi-mahi. 

Cranberry Cafe 

9506 Fourth Ave. at 95th Street, (718) 833-7979, www.cranberrycafe.com (AmEx, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $11-$25. «

Owner Christine McDonald is a former pastry chef at Manhattan ’s Le Cirque 2000, and her cafe features her freshly baked croissants, Danishes, breads and wonderful pastries. McDonald also does an excellent job with her American mod-erne or fusion cuisine in a menu that includes French onion soup, Italian bruschetta, Asian shrimp dumplings and marinated New York strip steak. The cafe is also a good place to gather for coffee, wine, snack or dessert — cheesecake, pecan pie or homemade chocolate ice cream. 

Eamonn’s 

174 Montague St. at Court Street, (718) 596-4969. (AmEx, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $9.95-$16.95. 

Eamonn ’s simply has it all: a decor that is timeless, comfortable and beautiful, an enclosed sidewalk cafe, an active and friendly bar, an upstairs dining room that can accommodate private parties up to 50, and something on the menu that everyone will like. You ’ll find a large selection of salads (including seafood Waldorf, classic Caesar, and grilled por-tobello), five pasta dishes (including a ravioli du jour and penne with grilled chicken), sandwiches (try the turkey club or the fried fillet of sole), hearty entrees (like the pan-roasted rack of lamb and the sesame-crusted filet of swordfish), and Eamonn ’s “traditional fare ” (Irish sausage and mashed potatoes with onion gravy or chicken pot pie). Follow any of these up with Irish coffee (or Irish tea!), and dare to choose the Key lime pie or the brandied chocolate hazel-nut cake. They ’ve got an excellent prix fixe dinner selection for $16.95, which includes soup or salad, entree special, dessert and coffee. Brunch at Eamonn ’sruns from 11 am to 3:30 pm every Saturday and Sunday, and is priced at $9.95 to $14.95 depending on choice of entree (and includes unlimited Champagne, bloody Marys or mimosas). 

Gage & Tollner 

372 Fulton St. at Jay Street, (718) 875-5181, www.GageandTollner.com (AmEx, Visa, MC) Entrees: $14.95-$26.95 

Gage & Tollner, an atmospheric Brooklyn 

# DINING AROUND BROOKLYN 

# New Hope 

You can’t walk far in picturesquely industrial Red Hook without hitting a diner. But until last Friday, you could roam the main drag without crossing paths with a Culinary Insti-tute-trained chef. Then Chef Dianna Munz opened Hope & Anchor at 347 Van Brunt St. at Wolcott Street. The restaurant was born of a friendship formed at Munz’s Smith Street restaurant, Paninoteca. Regular cus-tomer Gary Rego convinced Munz to locate her next ven-ture in his artsy neighborhood. The two joined forces to purchase the space, and Munz’s father-in-law helped de-sign the chic dining room. The name Hope & Anchor is inspired by the flag of Rego’s native Rhode Island. The new American menu melds diner and bistro. Din-er standards may cost a buck more than at nearby greasy spoons (and they don’t have meatloaf), but for the first time on Van Brunt Street, balsamic vinegar and calves’ livers make an appearance — with an espresso drink or cocktail to wash them down. All-day breakfast options like pancakes and chorizo hash and eggs are joined at 11 am by salads, sandwiches and a snack menu featuring the likes of wings and clam cakes — “a Rhode Island favorite.” Dinner entrees include herb roast-ed chicken, rock shrimp lasagna and cauliflower ravioli. Choose between homemade donut holes, a slice of pie or chocolate pudding icebox cake to complete the experience. Hope & Anchor’s full bar also serves wines by the bot-tle or glass. Call (718) 237-0276 to confirm hours or for delivery. Visa, MasterCard, American Express and Dis-cover are accepted. Entrees: $9-$12. — Zoe Singer 

WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM THE BROOKLYN PAPERS 

« = Full review available at www.BrooklynPapers.com. 

Abbreviation Key: AmEx= American Express, DC= Diner’s Club, Disc= Discover Card, MC= MasterCard, Visa= Visa Card 

The Most Spectacular View of the Manhattan Skyline and Brooklyn Bridge 

# Pete’s Downtown 2 Water Street • Brooklyn, New York 

A Landmark Restaurant – Four Generations of Service Since 1894 

Lunch Tuesday thru Friday • Dinner: Tuesday thru Sunday 

“Exceptional Italian Fare and Warm Service” 

Party Rooms For All Occasions. Special Luncheon Menu for Organizations and Dinner Parties 

FREE PARKING • 858-3510 • PetesDownTown.com 

Escape For Lunch, Dinner or Hide Away Join us at the Bar or for Dinner • Outside Cafe Seating 

95th & 4th • • (718) 833-7979 

Pre-Fixe Dinner: Sun 4:30pm Catering on and off premises 

# Club Cranberry Lecture Every Tuesday Serving Lunch & Dinner Tuesday-Sunday 

# Cranberry Cafe Cranberry Cafe A Village Feel in the of Bay Ridge! 

# CHEZ OSKAR Le Funky French Bistrot de Brooklyn 

Tel: 718-852-6250 211 Dekalb Ave. (corner of Adelphi St.) Brooklyn NY 11205 

## Open Seven Days a Week Weekdays: Lunch & Dinner Weekends: Brunch & Dinner 

Village Voice: “Best Rive Gauche Bistrot” 

NY Magazine: “Best Fort Greene Takeout & Delivery” 

NY Press: “Probably the Best and Certainly the Most Reliable” 

# The Best Irish Pub Enjoy Eamonn’s for a drink, lunch or dinner 

# Pre-fixe dinner – $16.95 

includes soup or salad, entrée special, dessert & coffee 4pm-midnight 

Brunch - $9.95-14.95 Sat & Sun, 11am-3:30pm, unlimited champagne, Bloody Marys or Mimosas Private Party Room Catering Available On & Off Premises Take Out • Free Local Delivery 

174 Montague St. 

BKLYN HEIGHTS 

Open 7 days • 596-4969 

> The Brooklyn Papers  / Tom Callan

Chill out: Tuk Tuk restaurant at 204 Smith St. offers three scoops of cool Thai ice cream (coconut, palm nut and litchee) with “happy cookies ” and fresh berries. BP / Greg Mango landmark that dates back to 1879, fea-tures arched mirrors, red velvet wall cov-erings and brass, gas-lit chandeliers. Restaurateur Joseph Chirico took over in 1995, and completely restored the interi-or to its original splendor. Whether you love a great steak or you ’re a seafood fan, Gage & Tollner has what you ’re craving with old-fashioned, top-notch service. By the time the dessert cart is rolled to your table, you ’ll be making plans for your next visit. Free valet parking. 

Gingko Leaf 

788A Union St. at Sixth Avenue, (718) 399-9876. (MC, Visa, AmEx) Lunch: $8-$19. «

Designed by artist Toshio Sasaki, Gingko Leaf ’s outdoor garden cafe offers aserene atmosphere and traditional Japanese meals. Whether seated near a waterfall or beside the new sushi bar extension, there is plenty to enjoy at Gingko Leaf. The cafe serves obento boxes at lunch (containing various combi-nations of shrimp, eel, soup, tempura, garden salad and fresh fruits), as well as a variety of platters, soups and their spe-cialty, dumplings. Sushi chef Yugi Sano, who is originally from Tokyo, prepares sushi in the tradi-tional style, Edo Mae, [ “Tokyo style ”]. With over 20 different types of fish, Sano is an expert in preparing everything from 

guke don (a marinated tuna) to sayari 

(Japanese mackerel). Also a recent addi-tion, the sake bar offers three types of pure rice sake, all made in different areas of Japan. Gingko Leaf also offers a Sunday brunch from 11: 30 am to 4 pm with a special menu including “dinosaur ” crispy shrimp and a fried “banana boat. ”

Inaka Sushi House 

236 Seventh Ave. at Fourth Street, (718) 499-7856. (AmEx, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $9.60-$16.50. 

The making of those beautiful little works of art called sushi is so fascinating many people will prefer sitting at the bar where owner Joanne Wu ’s cadre of superb sushi chefs work their magic. Others may pre-fer the comfort of Inaka ’s dining room. Either way, a good idea for beginners is to order the nine-piece sushi deluxe box, which contains yellow tail, salmon, mack-erel, fan fish roll, crab meat, white fish in several varieties, shrimp and tuna roll. Sushi can also be ordered a la carte and in more modest combinations. Teriyaki fans will find Inaka ’s dishes expertly sea-soned and melt-in-your-mouth tender. 

Isobel 

60 Henry St. at Cranberry Street, www.isobelnyc.com, (718) 243-2010, (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $16-$24. 

The Moorish/Old World feel of Isobel is enhanced by the rough-hewn tables (handcrafted from antique barn wood by one of the owners) and wrought-iron lighting fixtures. The French Mediter-ranean menu includes wild striped bass ($20) served in a morel mushroom sauce with creme fraiche, and accompanied by baby spring vegetables and fingerling potatoes. Another option is the double-cut pork chop ($18) with baby leeks, sauteed vegetables and apple polenta in a prune sauce. Organic ingredients are used wherever possible, allowing for heightened flavors. Weekend brunch at Isobel offers unusual choices like the Cuban (pressed pork) sandwich and Spanish omelet with chori-zo, in addition to standards like French toast, eggs Benedict and eggs Floren-tine. You ’ll find the active bar doesn ’tinterfere with a relaxing dinner, because the space is divided into three areas —

one is a secluded dining room perfect for small private parties. 

Kino 

1 Main St. at Plymouth Street, (718) 243-9815 (MC, Visa, AmEx) Entrees: $17-$22. «

This spacious DUMBO restaurant boasts a wonderful view of Manhattan and some terrific new talent. New owner Courtney McKenna has brought in chef Frank Debons, formerly of Raoul ’s, pastry chef Scott Russell (from One If By Land, Two If By Sea), and general manager Jeff Davila from Sambuca to make sure your experi-ence at Kino is stellar. You ’ll find Italian fare with a hint of Swiss influence, and a number of French dishes on the menu. Try the saffron risotto frutte di mare ,swimming with calamari, sea scallops and shrimp with sauteed watercress and cher-ry tomatoes, or Debons ’ aged sirloin au poivre. And where else can you enjoy a sumptuous all-you-can-eat buffet brunch on Sunday for $18? The evening skyline view is panoramic and romantic and those looking for a hopping bar scene should note that happy hour starts every night at 7 pm, and means 2-for-1 drinks. Jazz is happen-ing every Friday and Saturday at 8 pm, and Thursday is karaoke night. 

Las Tres Palmas 

121 Livingston St. at Adams Street, (718) 624-9565. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $5.95-$27.95. 

Lovers of this Spanish and American for-mer Court Street mainstay of, despair not! Las Tres Palmas has just reopened, and is serving their hearty, simple and sat-isfying food in beautifully renovated new surroundings. Slake your after-work thirst with a drink in the full bar, under a ceiling painted like a sunny sky (complete with an occasional cloud). Happy hour is Monday through Friday, from 5 pm to 7 pm. Take $1 off your draft beers, or get your second drink for half price. Then stay for dinner. Chicken and rice, the perenni-al favorite, is only $7.25, or for a fuller appetite, try the paella, a rich mix of clams, lobster, octopus and shrimp in rice ($25.95 for one, $35.95 for two). There ’salso fried pork chops, baked chicken, and don ’t forget a side order of fried plan-tains. 

Lichee Nut 

162 Montague St. at Clinton Street, downstairs, (718) 522-5565. (AmEx, DC, MC, Visa) Entrees: $6-$12. 

This 21-year-old Brooklyn Heights Chinese restaurant has had several loca-tions, owners and chefs, but throughout has maintained the high quality that keeps customers coming back. Owner Jerry Shen has dedicated himself to keeping the restaurant ’s fare authentical-ly Chinese. Chef Eric Wu cooks in both Szechuan and Cantonese styles and pre-pares a broad spectrum of dishes that include Cantonese-style beef short ribs and the house special — a generous plate of jumbo shrimp sauteed with Chinese vegetables and lichee nuts — which, by the way, are not nuts at all, but sweet and succulent fruit. 

Liquors 

219 DeKalb Ave. at Clermont Avenue, (718) 488-7700. (Visa, MC) Entrees: $10-$16. 

While Liquors does have a cozy bar and lounge area, a reputation for wicked moji-tos, and a select wine list, this “Afro-Diaspora ” influenced restaurant took its name from the sign left by the previous tenant. 

“We thought it was beautiful and worthy of keeping, ” says manager Christian Dennery. The bohemian space, with its weathered walls creates a warm and com-forting feeling. You can enjoy your meal inside, or in the garden, which Dennery describes as being, “like a verandah, cov-ered on top but very open, which seats about 40. ”

The grilled mahi mahi, covered with a spicy brown sugar glaze and served with maple sweet potato puree, is an excellent choice at $15. Equally beguiling is the Nile perch with calalou (a green veg-etable often used in West African cook-ing), in a lemon shallot confit. Chef Gerard Kiki, from Benin, lets the flavors of his homeland shine though. Visit often, the DJs on Saturday and the live bands on Sunday change every week 

Long Tan 

196 Fifth Ave. at Union Street, (718) 622-8444. (MC, Visa) Entrees: $8-$16. «

Serving Thai food, Long Tan is a friendly and relaxed restaurant where comfy cushions in vibrant colors line the open, white dining room. Paper lanterns hang around the room and a large window overlooks a garden area with outdoor seating. For appetizers, Long Tan offers a crab-and-mango summer roll, which is a deli-cate wrap of fresh cilantro and crabmeat. Other appetizers include the fish cakes with kaffir lime, vegetarian spring rolls and shrimp and lichee spring rolls. For entrees, the restaurant ’s signature dishes include a yellow curry of butternut squash, three-flavored snapper and duck with tamarind sauce. Long Tan is plan-ning to offer a brunch menu soon. At Long Tan ’s red bar, sassy cocktails make drinking here an original experi-ence. The wines all come from Australia and New Zealand, making the restaurant a favorite spot for wine enthusiasts. 

Marco Polo Ristorante 

345 Court St. at Union Street, (718) 852-5015, www.marcopoloristorante.com (Amex, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $13-$24. «

One of Brooklyn ’s most elegant dining rooms, Marco Polo boasts valet parking, a formally dressed and knowledgeable wait staff and a sophisticated menu that reflects the taste of its owner, Joe Chirico, a veteran restaurateur. Marco Polo has a menu that includes an array of hot and cold appetizers, soups, salads, pasta, fish, chicken, veal, steaks and chops prepared by chef Francesco Insingo. The dessert wagon offers pas-tries, cakes, tortes, fruits, sorbet and gelato. Marco Polo is open for lunch and dinner. 

Michael ’s

2929 Avenue R at Nostrand Avenue, (718) 998-7851, www.michaelsofbrook-lyn.com (AmEx, Carte Blanche, DC, Disc, MC, Visa) Entrees: $17-$30. «

Over 35 years ago, Michael Cacace opened a small pizzeria with three tables and a takeout window. Today, his sons, Fred and John, preside over an elegant restaurant with a spacious dining room with linen-covered tables. A pianist plays every night on a baby grand. The hot seafood antipasto for two includes grilled octopus, calamari orre-ganato, shrimp scampi, baked clams and mussels marinara. A delicious cabernet sauce accompanies juicy rack of lamb. Located on a quiet street, Michael ’smight be one of Brooklyn ’s hidden treas-ures if the word hadn ’t gotten out years ago — mostly from satisfied customers who return from all over the metropoli-tan area. Michael ’s pastry shop and ice cream parlor are located across the street. 

Mo-Bay Restaurant 

112 DeKalb Ave. at Ashland Place, (718) 246-2800. www.mobayrestau-rant.com. (MC, Disc, AmEx, Visa) Entrees: $7-$15.75. «

If Caribbean, soul and vegetarian food are what you fancy, then Mo-Bay restau-rant is the place tonight. Mo-Bay ’s interi-or is upscale yet relaxing and the fresh-cut flowers and reggae music give the place a cool, island vibe. Popular dishes include the curried coconut salmon, pan-blackened chicken and oxtail stew. For vegetarians, the brown-stewed veg-gie chicken, curry veggie chicken and barbecue veggie chili are so delicious —

you won ’t miss the meat. The dessert menu offers bread pudding with rum sauce and Mo-Bay ’s famous “rummy rum cake ” — soaked in three types of rum and served warm with vanilla ice cream — a slice of heaven. 

Nino ’s

215 Union St. at Clinton Street, (718) 858-5370, www.ninosonunion.com. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $14-$21. 

The flawless interior of this fine Italian restaurant is a clue to the exquisite meal you will enjoy here. Just as the finest materials attract the eye (fireplace, gor-geous wine rack, terra cotta planters, rich Florentine silk chairs, gentle pastel walls, Speilglau stemware, terrazzo gran-ite flooring), the food is prepared from the finest of ingredients. A chicken scarpariello, prepared in lemon juice, garlic and white wine is magnificent, and the penne vodka is out of this world. The family style portions are huge, but the wise Nino ’s patron will not pass up the profiteroles, an absolute delight! Be on the lookout for Nino ’s upcoming 

“Winemakers Dinners, ” featuring wines specially paired with five courses, hosted by manager Anthony Catanzaro. 

Pearl Room 

8201 Third Ave. at 82nd Street, (718) 833-6666. (AmEx, MC, Visa) Entrees: $16-$24. 

Diners who haven ’t been to this Bay Ridge eatery recently will be pleased with extensive renovations — an expanded dining room with a suspended ceiling that seems to float, slate floors, pillars and terra cotta restrooms. The dining is casual and the cuisine is continental, with an emphasis on fresh fish and seafood. Sesame swordfish, fresh lobster and crab cakes are popular dishes. But Pearl Room also serves filet mignon, shell steaks, chicken and veal dishes, salads and pas-tas. The most popular dessert is the fried ice cream. Garden and sidewalk cafe seats available. 

Pete ’s Downtown 

2 Water St. at Cadman Plaza West, (718) 858-3510, www.PetesDowntown.com (AmEx, MC, DC, Visa) Entrees: $14.95-$24.95. 

Come early to ensure a table with a divine view (available at both the outside cafe or inside the restaurant). The back-drop of the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan skyline off Fulton Landing sets the stage for a wonderful meal. Try the pork chops stuffed with prosciutto, mozzarella and basil, topped with aMarsala wine sauce, served with a veg-etable and potato rosette, an interesting fried potato basket, filled with creamy mashed potato. There ’s also a warm goat cheese salad, with seasonal greens and walnut vinaigrette, and linguine portofino, fresh salmon with plum toma-toes, red onions, arugula and extra-vir-gin olive oil. Not only is this a “landmark restaurant ” due to its extraordinary loca-tion at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, but four generations of Thristinos have been serving up great food here since 1894. Free parking is available, as is the private party room, to reserve for your upcom-ing special occasion. Open for lunch and dinner. 

P. J. Hanley ’s Tavern 

449 Court St. at Fourth Place, (718) 834-8223. (Visa, MC, AmEx, DC, Disc) Entrees: $9-$15. 

Step back in time and enjoy cocktails or a wholesome meal in Brooklyn ’s oldest bar, circa 1874, according to Debbie Hanley. (Originally a Norwegian bar, it ’sbeen called P.J. Hanley ’s for the last 60 years, with only four owners in its 128 years.) The atmosphere is warm and wel-coming, with its mahogany bar, huge marble columns and railing, mosaic tiled floor, original tin ceilings and walls. Dine at the bar, sit in the spacious dining room, or eat al fresco in the lovely out-door beer garden, surrounded by twin-kling lights. The menu is what you ’d expect from a classic Irish pub: hearty comfort food. There are terrific hamburgers and pork chops, plus daily fish, pasta and chicken specials. Every Tuesday night you can order a complete prime rib dinner for $9.95! The food is simply prepared, beautifully presented, reasonably priced, with generous portions and superb taste. There is something on the menu for everyone. Available for private parties. Lunch is served Thursday, Friday and Saturday, and dinner is served daily starting at 5 pm. 

Sol 

229 DeKalb Ave. at Clermont Avenue, (718) 222-1510. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees: $10.95-$17.95. 

Caribbean and Latin cuisine is the name of the game at this warm and sunny restaurant that lives up to its name. In addition to an enticing array of tapas, the Sol Elixirs are not to be missed. The frozen mango margarita is heavenly on a hot summer night, or try the exotic moji-to (Myers Rum, muddled mint and lime, brown sugar, lime juice and seltzer), or the “vida loca ” (vodka, raspberry puck-ers, muddled ginger, lime juice). Then on to dinner, with a new menu: cold gazpa-cho ’s a good starter, followed by sauteed mahi mahi with couscous and raisins in a light seafood and tomato sauce with bok choy. The mushroom paella is chock-full of fresh vegetable, seafood and rice, reminiscent of a nice risotto. Warm apple tart or coconut flan are suggested for dessert. 

Sakana Aji 

347 Seventh Ave. at 10th Street, (718) 369-3039. (Visa, MC, Amex, Disc) Entrees: $9.95-$45.95. 

While cozy, with its seven tables and six seats at the sushi bar, Sakana Aji also does a lively takeout and delivery busi-ness in Park Slope. Checkerboard rice-paper panels line the corner windows for a secluded feel while you enjoy the chef ’s special rolls, like the tiger roll (tuna and cucumber with shrimp and avocado on top), Coney Island roll (whitefish, scal-lions, gobo and saba), and the Sakana roll (yellowtail and tuna with smoked salmon). You can choose from bento meals, dozens of appetizers, and incred-ibly fresh and delicious sushi. Open seven days for lunch and dinner. 

Sushi Time 

78 Clark St. at Henry Street, (718) 625-9893. Entrees: $5-$18. 

This fine Brooklyn Heights sushi bar and Japanese restaurant provides an exten-sive menu of the healthy and delicious, from white tuna with scallion to wasabi tobiko. The most popular dishes include the Chilean sea bass, tempura and the Unaju, which is broiled eel with Japanese pickles on a bed of sushi rice. Other favorites are the house special rolls, which include a kamikaze roll with spicy tuna and scallions, a wasabi roll with tuna, salmon, avocado and cucum-ber, a dragon roll with crabmeat, cucum-ber and eel, among others. The quaint restaurant with Japanese decor also serves an all-you-can-eat sushi special for $19. Bento boxes are another option if you want to try a vari-ety of items on the menu. Bento is served with hijiki, seaweed salad, a shu-mai roll and your choice of an entree. For first-timers, traditional dishes such as chicken teriyaki, vegetable tempura or tofu may be your cup of tea. Sake, beer and wine are also available. 

Tuk Tuk 

204 Smith St. at Baltic Street, (718) 222-5598. (Cash only) Entrees: $7-$9. «

Smith Street restaurant Tuk Tuk, opened by Anuwat “Nu ” Morakotjantachote, serves up authentic Thai food. Tuk Tuk offers wines and imported beers. The cozy restaurant seats about 30. Tuk Tuk is named for the ubiquitous three-wheeled vehicle in Thailand — akin to a taxi — which makes the “tuk tuk tuk ”

sound. Tuk Tuk plans to feature jazz band per-formances on Friday and Saturday nights and Sunday afternoons, and a live cook-ing show at the bar – featuring fun to watch demonstrations of hard to make dishes. 

2 Fifteen Cucina Napolitan 

215 Columbia St. at Union Street, (718) 858-2960, www.2fifteen.com. (Visa, MC, Amex, DC) Entrees: $13-$24.50. 

The ivy green and powder blue motif of 2 Fifteen Cucina starts with the walls, is picked up in the table linen, and makes a beautiful crescendo in the large painting of the Bay of Naples on a wall. Family style, classic Italian cooking is what they serve up to the delight of their patrons. In addition to creative dinner specials every evening, the homemade fettuccini, with grilled shrimp and sun-dried tomatoes, served in a basil cream sauce is out of this world. Another crowd-pleaser is the veal Champagne, covered in a cream sauce with sliced mushrooms. Enjoy the tradi-tional Italian desserts like tartufo and gelato, or finish off with the creamy Italian toasted almond cake. 

Two Steps Down 

240 DeKalb Ave. at Vanderbilt Avenue, (718) 399-2020, www.twostepsdown.com. (Visa, MC, AmEx) Entrees $12.95-$29.95. 

Opened 33 years ago, this exquisite seafood restaurant may very well be why other fine restaurants have flocked to Fort Greene. This cozy, bi-level eatery can seat up to 75, between the ground floor, upstairs and garden deck overlooking the backyard. Inside, you ’ll find exposed brick walls adorned with lots of artwork — the colors of berries and grapes contrasting with white tablecloths. And the food! Louisiana gumbo contains mussels, clams, shrimps, scallops and oysters. The base is roux, and then corn and okra are added. The gumbo is served with yellow rice and a garden salad. The blackened medley is spiced and seared salmon, cat-fish and tuna, topped with a black bean and corn salsa. Sweet endings include sweet potato cake with cinnamon gelato, and bread pudding with rum sauce. July 1, 2002 3WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM THE BROOKLYN PAPERS 

By Tina Barry 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

# It’s been going on for years. This thing I’ve got with Al. That’s Al Fresco. Al Fresco the picnic guy. We met in a park. I was a teenager. He was older. He cut a fine figure standing there holding a basket. “What’s that in your hand?” I want-ed to know. “It’s a picnic basket, lady, just a pic-nic basket,” he said, then strolled away. I caught up with Al later that day. His face looked greasy and a few crumbs clung to the corner of his mouth. “It’s you,” he said. “Yeah, it’s me,” I said. “Three hours older and just as hungry.” Instead of his hand, he offered me a drumstick. “Go on,” he said. “If this isn’t the best chicken you’ve ever had then my name’s not Al Fresco.” I took one bite. Then another. “That’s damn good chicken,” I said. Al smiled. “I knew you were my kind of dame.” Every summer I get a postcard from Al. Kilimanjaro. Nepal. The Great Wall of China. “Here’s to more picnics, baby,” he writes. His cards are never signed, but I know they’re his by the greasy thumbprint. Here are a few Al-worthy items from delis, gourmet shops and cafes near Prospect Park, as well as the Greenmarket, which I would put in my picnic basket for the next time he wan-ders into my life. 

Adam’s mark 

Adam Loparnos bought the Prospect Avenue Deli in Windsor Terrace two years ago and my gastronomically de-prived neighborhood thanks him. All the takeout dishes are made daily on the premises. The chicken cutlet, pounded thin, crisp at the edges and just salty enough, makes great picnic fare. His macaroni and cheese is about as close to the boxed kind as a home-baked apple pie is to a Hostess snack cake. His egg custards, creamy and just sweet enough, come in tiny, old-fash-ioned foil cups. On Saturdays, you can see people leaving the deli with one of Loparnos’ breakfast sandwiches — eggs and house-made corned beef is the neigh-borhood favorite. When I asked him which brand of coffee he uses for his rich, iced brew he hesitated and said, “Um, I buy it from a neighborhood guy.” Al would approve of Adam. He likes a man who knows when to keep his mouth shut. 

Greenmarket gourmand 

I can see Al strolling through the Grand Army Plaza Greenmarket. Pana-ma hat tilted just so, starched white shirt, baggy pants. I’d take him to Buon Pane and Focaccia Inc. Each morning, owner Barbara Olson bakes her fabulous breads and they’re still warm when she unloads her truck. Her round loaves with the vegetable toppings are great for a picnic — the bread is chewy and dense and the top-pings — I’m a fan of the moist egg-plant, hummus and artichoke — will give your picnic a little je ne sais quoi. We’d buy one of her round breads and one of her crusty sourdough loaves and then head over to the Cato Corner Farm’s booth for a piece of their all-natural, artisanal cheese. Elizabeth MacAlister and Mark Gillman produce their cheeses on a farm in Connecticut. Their Black Ledge Cheddar is very sharp, nutty and firm. Al loves sweets so I’d take him to Bread Alone. Their baked goods are made without preservatives and taste like they just emerged from a loving mother’s oven. Cranberry walnut or chocolate chip hazelnut scones are somewhere between a moist cookie bar and a crumbly scone, and their lemon poppy seed pound cake is delicately lemon flavored. 

French feast 

Pack a picnic basket with delicacies from Chez Isabelle and let your senses transport you to Paris. The aroma of butter, sugar and cheese that floats out the cheerful yellow door of owner Is-abelle Dubois’ tiny shop is reason enough to visit this charming patisserie. Her quiches are sublime. Sold in slices, the crusts ooze butter and the fill-ings — spinach with goat cheese, a hearty mushroom, ham and Swiss or fresh asparagus and ham — are to di-eters what Hustler Magazine is to teenage boys. Ditto for the tuna, goat cheese and caper pain bagna sandwich and the oven-warmed croque monsieur — a croissant filled with ham, Swiss and a splash of bechamel (white) sauce or the croque madame — turkey, Swiss and bechamel sauce. Dubois’ fresh fruit tarts are heavenly, and so are her cookies. But it’s the pear bread pudding, creamy and heavy with ripe fruit, that would bring Al to his knees. 

One-stop shopping 

Nalie Elsebaie took over D’Vine Taste in Park Slope a year ago, and ever since, she and her brothers have been delighting the neighborhood with their Lebanese delicacies. In the back kitchen I watched one brother roll grape leaves around fragrant, lemony rice filling. Every imaginable olive, firm and perfect, is sold here; the green Mexican olives in harissa paste pack a wallop. Salads like artichokes with long stems in olive oil or pickled garlic with cornichons seem light years away from coleslaw and maca-roni salad. Two of Elsebaie’s savory lamb pies made with ground lamb and spices in a soft bread triangle or her tangy spinach and feta cheese pies with a cold glass of wine could make me for-get picnics past. (With the exception of my picnic with Al of course.) 

Cafe trimmings 

Al’s a steak and bourbon kind of guy, so he’d probably pass on Naidre Miller’s vegan pizza or her egg salad made with soy mayonnaise. His loss. Both are tasty and the egg salad has chopped scallions that give the salad crunch and spiciness. Naidre’s enormous prosciutto and smoked mozzarella (ham and cheese to Al) on peasant bread is the kind of butch sandwich he’d savor. The baked goods in Naidre’s cafe come from well-known purveyors like Eli’s and Ecce Panis. I’d see more of Al if I served him the blueberry angel’s food cake with a cup of Naidre’s house blend iced cof-fee. 

# Basket cases Shops near the park that will pack your picnic with flavor 

Moveable feast: Let Prospect Avenue Deli fill your picnic basket with (clockwise from top left) fresh fruit salad, egg custard, sandwiches and chicken cutlets. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 

“Classic roots meets contempo reggae culture” – The Village Voice 

FRI ✦ JULY 5 ✦ 7:30 

LINCOLN CENTER JAZZ ORCHESTRA 

with 

SUN ✦ JUNE 30 ✦ 2:00 

KREYOL FESTIVAL 

All-day festival of Haitian Konpa music, culture and a Kreyol marketplace with food, clothing and crafts Presented in Collaboration with 

FRI ✦ JUNE 28 ✦ 7:30 

Canadian singer/songwriter 

## TABOU COMBO 

SAT ✦ JULY 6 ✦ 7:30 

# reggae cowboys Reggae meets Country & Western 

# EVERTON BLENDER 

## WYNTON MARSALIS “The finest active big band” – Orange County Register 

> Emeline Michele

BOUKMAN EKSPERYANS 2 S W E E T LUTHER WRIGHT AND THE WRONGS Bluegrass re-imagining of Pink Floyd’s THE WALL    

> Co Sponsors Additional Promotional Partners Newspaper Partner Celebrate Brooklyn! is a program of Hotel Partner Radio Partner Major Media Sponsor Latin Music Series Sponsor Presented in partnership with Celebrate Brooklyn! is supported in part by public funds from the

FRIDAY ✦ JULY 12 ✦ 7:30 

# YO LA TENGO “Beloved institution of the indie community” – Spin 

EVERTON SYLVESTER & SEARCHING FOR BANJO Flammable verse over funky grooves 

SATURDAY ✦ JULY 13 ✦ 2:00 

AFRICAN FESTIVAL FEMI KUTI/ HASSAN HAKMOUN/ ROKIA TRAORÉ/ WUNMI/ COCO SUKALI 

All-day festival with superstars from Nigeria, Mali, Morocco, Congo and an African marketplace with food, clothing and crafts. Presented in Collaboration with the Museum for African Art 

ethereal thai food For menu and special events, visit our website at www.long-tan.com 

# LONG TAN BAR • RESTAURANT heavenly cocktails Take out and delivery 5:30-Midnight 196 FIFTH AVENUE BROOKLYN NY 11217 t:718.622.8444 

One Main Street (off Front St.) • DUMBO, Brooklyn 

Open 7 days for Lunch and Dinner • (718) 243-9815 • kinoresto@aol.com 

RESTO • BAR 

“ON THE WATERFRONT” HAPPY HOUR 5-7pm EVERYDAY Drinks (two for one) $3 Drafts Everyday, All Night Special events, private & corporate ask for Jean-François 

# Spectacular Food and Views! 

LIVE JAZZ: Friday and Saturday nights and ask about our DOO-WOP Night, SALSA Night and HOSPITALITY night! 

# Fine French Mediterranean Fare 

Enjoy our spacious, casually elegant dining & bar space dinner Mon-Thurs: 5:30-11pm Fri & Sat: 5:30-midnight Sun: 5:30-10pm weekend brunch Sat & Sun: 11am-3pm 

60 Henry Street (corner Cranberry St.) BROOKLYN HEIGHTS • www.isobelnyc.com • 718.243.2010 

# Dine Al Fresco 

in our beautiful Beer Garden amidst twinkling lights! Available for private parties Lunch served Thurs, Fri & Sat only 

OPEN 7 D AYS •

#       

P.J.HANLEY’STAVERNTHE OLDEST BAR IN BROOKLYN 

449 Court St. • Carroll Gardens 718-834-8223 

Fax: 718-797-4057 

M U S I C & S P O R T S •F I NEFOOD•PRIVATEPARTIES

# Picnic goods 

Chez Isabelle , 427 Seventh Ave. between 14th and 15th streets in Park Slope, (718) 832-0127. 

D’Vine Taste , 150 Seventh Ave. between Garfield and Carroll streets in Park Slope, (718) 369-9548. 

The Greenmarket , Grand Army Plaza between Prospect Park West and Eastern Park-way at the northwest entrance to Prospect Park is held every Saturday from 8 am to 4 pm. For information, call (212) 477-3220 or e-mail www.cenyc.org. 

Naidre’s , 384 Seventh Ave. between 11th and 12th streets in Park Slope, (718) 965-7585. 

The Prospect Avenue Deli ,1269 Prospect Ave. between Reeve Place and Greenwood Avenue in Windsor Terrace, (718) 871-2117. 

## Grilled Sandwiches, Burgers, Salads 

212 DeGraw St. (corner Henry St.) COBBLE HILL • 422-0099 

Open 7 days: noon - 10pm • www.cobblegrill.com • Take Out • Free Delivery 

# cobble grill Orioles, noticeable for their black heads and orange bodies, are some of the most special birds that breed in the park, Phillips noted. “They nest in the tops of trees near water. We saw a pair nest-ing in the Lullwater,” he said. Visitors to the center can see an enormous replica of an oriole’s nest inside the center, and climb inside to sit on the eggs. The Audubon Center is planning to put cameras on various birds’ nests so visitors can watch their activity on monitors, said Phillips. From the boat, one of the most spectacular birds we caught sight of was the tall, white egret, posing beneath a low-hanging branch. “The egret is the symbol of the Audubon Society,” said Phillips. “They were almost hunted to extinction because women used to put their feath-ers in their hats.” The elegant bird seemed un-fazed by our excitement and the quiet boat. “It’s a frequent visitor here,” he said. “We provide lots of food by keeping the lake clean for fish and frogs.” Then we saw a double-breast-ed cormorant — which eluded our cameras by diving beneath the lake’s surface over and over again, resurfacing briefly with her dark feathers glistening in the sun. This shy bird also kept her distance from the boat, and binoculars would have come in handy. On our way back to the boathouse we were able to get much closer to a rare sight — a green heron. Puzzled by the name, we looked at Captain Pierre who acknowledged it’s misleading. “Only in a certain light does it really look green — a dusty green,” he said. The park’s varied habitat makes it an important stopover point for migratory birds, and as a result, it has been desig-nated an “important bird area” by Audubon New York, ac-cording to Chuck Remington, director of education for the organization. More than 200 species of birds were spotted in Prospect Park last year, includ-ing 61 rare migratory birds and resident species. Upon disembarking the boat, with a hand from Captain Pierre, we noticed the queue was already full with the next 14 passengers ready to hop on. Because the tours sell out quickly — especially on weekends — tickets to a boat tour should be purchased as soon as you get to the boat-

4 July 1, 2002 WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM THE BROOKLYN PAPERS 

# Serving fine Italian Cuisine 

Parking is available. Dine in or take out. 

DON’T MISS THESE WEEKDAY SPECIALS! Mondays: Receive a complimentary appetizer with purchase of an entree 

Tuesdays: Wine lover’s night – Any bottled wine on list 1/2 price 

Thursdays: Martini Madness – ALL martinis $1.00 All specials valid 5pm to 10pm excluding holidays 

# Cono’s Opescatoré 

301 Graham Avenue (cor. Ainslie St.) 

Williamsburg • • Open 7 days 11am-11pm 

(718) 388-0168 

372 Fulton St. (off Jay St.) (718) 875-5181 DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN 

Complimentary Valet Parking • www.gageandtollner.com 

# Gage & Tollner 

Brooklyn’s Famous Landmark Restaurant (Established 1879) 

Proudly Serving Patrons Under The Gas-Lit Chandeliers for The Past 123 Years 

Have an Unforgettable Evening with our 

* * * * * * * Oven Roasted Stuffed Quails 

Served with Shredded Duck and Wild Mushrooms; Oven-Roasted and served with Corn-Crusted Soft Polenta and Créme of Cassis; topped with Chiffon of Fried Leeks. 

* * * * * * * 

# 347 7th Ave. (cor. 10th St.) 

HOURS: Tues-Fri: 4-11:30pm; Sat: 1-11:30pm; Sun: 1-10:30pm 

Free Delivery ($10 min) Tel: (718) 369-3039 • 

FRESH FISH PREPARED DAILY 

Uni (Sea Urchin) 

Tuna Salmon Amaebi (Sweet Shrimp) 

Usuzukuri (Thinly Sliced Fluke) 

Spicy Girl Roll Coney Island Roll Crazy Roll (Spicy Yellow Tail) 

Chef’s Special Sashimi House Special Tuna Sashimi Spicy Tuna Tartar Sashimi Teriyaki Sushi Tempura Natto TASTE OF FISH 

788a union st. (betw. 6th & 7th aves) park slope, brooklyn • 718.399.9876 e-mail: gingko21@aol.com fax: 399-9432 

authentic japanese cuisine and boutique OUR NEW SUSHI BAR & SAKE BAR ARE NOW OPEN! Enjoy the largest selection of sake and freshest sushi in Brooklyn prepared by our highly-skilled Japanese sushi chef. Private parties available in our beautiful bamboo garden. the gingko leaf cafe lunch: 11:30am - 4pm; dinner: 6:00pm - 11pm; closed mondays 

# Michael’s RESTAURANT 

2929 Avenue R (at Nostrand Ave.) • (718) 998-7851 www.michaelsofbrooklyn.com •

## Elegantly Casual – Not Stuffy 

Serving your Family & Friends since 1964. Parties for up to 200 -----Enjoy piano music nightly -----Park in our private lot -----Pastry & Espresso? Visit our Pastry Shoppe 

MEAT & POULTRY FRESH CUT DAILY 

162 Smith St. (bet. Wycoff & Bergen) • (718) 855-2641 • Open: Mon-Sat 8am-7pm 

FEATURING: PREMIUM Gold Angus Beef 

# bar-b-que headquarters! meat market Satisfying customers for over 40 years! 

❏ Homemade Sausages 

> (chicken, veal, turkey, pork)

❏ Having a Pig Roast? 

WE’VE GOT THE PIGS! 

❏ Aged Steaks (Porterhouse, London Broil, T-bone, Shell Steaks) 

❏ Prepared Shish Kabobs 

❏ Bell & Evans Poultry 

❏ Marinated Meats 

❏ Prepared Hamburgers 

jor festivals in Europe (Cannes, Berlin, Venice, etc.) are very strict about premiering work. “Mischka” is an older-generation road movie. When Mischka, a diffi-cult old guy, is accidentally left be-hind at a highway rest stop by his family, he manages to take his own journey with a ragtag group of travel-ers. These include a rock ‘n’ roller, a runaway and a male nurse who’s left his salad days behind. While they seem a disparate group — surprise, surprise — they all bond and become a new sort of family. While it has its humorous side as well as its sweet side, “Mischka” is predictable and borders on cliche with its slate of stock characters. Two films shown last year in the main competition in Cannes can fi-nally be seen here. Catherine Corsini (“The New Eve”) crafted a thinking person’s psychological thriller in “Re-play” (“La Repetition”). Two women, Nathalie (played by the always stun-ning Emmanuelle Beart) and Louise (Pascale Bussieres) are best friends, but Louise’s affections come danger-ously close to obsession. After she tries to kill herself in a jealous rage, they have no contact for 10 years — until they meet acciden-tally. Now Louise’s love for her for-mer friend has definitely crossed the line, and mind games become the main currency. It’s not a scary film, but an emotionally tense one. What makes it so intriguing is the psycho-logical and emotional dependency of Beart’s character, which allows the manipulations to occur — and not just by Louise. Here, as in Garrel’s film, there are recognizable characters, which allow us to insert ourselves there and let the film get a real hold on our senses. Cedric Kahn’s (“Too Much Happi-ness,” “L’ennui”) film “Roberto Suc-co” is another example of a film that was selected for the competition in Cannes in 2001 but has yet to find a distributor. This is a classic policier ,the true story of a very unstable Ital-ian criminal who went on a crime spree in France for no apparent reason in the 1980s. The title character is played by Stefano Cassetti, a non-pro-fessional, and he gives a chilling per-formance. While it’s hard to under-stand why he commits these crimes — which include robbery, kidnapping and murder — Kahn presents Succo in a very straightforward manner, and he also follows the police investiga-tors on the case in the same fashion. The film moves from cops to crook again and again until they meet in a climax that’s emotional for the police as well as their prey. Finally, Marion Vernoux (“Nobody Loves Me”) is represented with a charming story of crossed paths, and lives that are connected in unexpected ways. “A Hell of a Day” (“Reines d’un Jour”) assembles a large cast of not too happy urbanites: there’s the photographer pregnant from a one-night stand at a wedding, and the groom who’s the father, whose sister is unfulfilled in her marriage and is trying to have an affair with a club owner whose wife has had a fender bender with the photographer — well, it goes on and on. Each story line is witty, and each could stand on its own. But it’s the intricate balance of lives intersecting that makes the film such a treat. And performances by the likes of Jane Birkin and Serge Lopez only add to the enjoyment. This could be your only chance to see it, as well as all the others, if distribution deals continue to elude these talented French directors. 

“New French Connection, ” a se-ries of new French films, will be shown at BAMcinematek (30 Lafayette Ave. at Ashland Place) from July 10-July 14. Ad-mission is $9, $6 seniors and students with a valid ID (Monday –Thursday, ex-cept holidays). For screening dates and times, call (718) 636-4100. 

C I N E M A 

# FRENCH... Continued from page GO 1 

“Chooses its cheeses carefully – and there are gems” – NY Times 100 cheeses, prepared foods and staples. 

Tax Free Discount Cigarettes 

Cartons start at just $11 

All major brands plus many value brands. 

Full line of chew, cigars, snuff and pipe tobacco. 

Call Toll Free 1-877-234-2447 Or visit our website at: www.senecasmokes.com SENECA SMOKES 

> W31

# COPPER COPPER BROOKLYN FUSION www.CopperRestaurant.com 

243 Degraw Street (corner Clinton) 

• R ESTAURANT • C ATERING • (718) 797-2017 Closed Tues; Mon-Fri 6pm-close; Sat/Sun Brunch 10-3pm & Dinner 6-close 

## MONDAY NIGHT DINNER AT COPPER Enjoy a complimentary glass of wine that will match your meal (like a glass of merlot with your cedar-roasted salmon). 

## What ’s the best thing to happen to Monday Nights in Brooklyn? 

Over a barrel: “Robert Succo, ” the true story of an Italian criminal who went on a crime spree in 1980s France, will be shown July 12-14 as part of the “New French Connection ” series at BAMcinematek. 

house. We were advised to while away the time until the next tour began inside the cen-ter, which offers an array of displays and interactive ex-hibits to help visitors refine their bird-spotting skills and attune their senses. (Even the center’s French doors have bird songs that are triggered by motion detectors when you open them.) After a tour, visitors can use the center’s identification software on the six new com-puters, or reference the field guides, to learn more about the birds they’ve spotted. There are so many birds to discover in Prospect Park, one boat tour this summer won’t be enough. But the next time you visit the park, you’ll be able to appreciate — and pos-sibly identify — a few more of its feathered inhabitants. 

Make way for ducklings: On Friday, visitors to Prospect Lake spotted a black crown night heron (at left) and a mallard with her new ducklings (above). Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 

# BIRDS... Continued from page GO 1 

# Native cultures 

On Saturday, Native American artists, performers and educators celebrated the ninth annual Gateway to Nations Native American Heritage Celebration at Floyd Bennett Field in Marine Park. The event was produced by the Redhawk Indian Arts Council and featured The Aztec Fire Dancers (at left). Others joined in for the “men’s fancy war danc-ing” (above) — spinning to a lightning-fast drumbeat. The event brought together all generations of fami-lies (at right) in celebration of native culture. Visitors enjoyed the live bird of prey exhibit, me-chanical bull-riding contest, petting zoo and pony rides. For more information about the Redhawk Indian Arts Council, call (718) 686-9297. All photos The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango The 2002 Citywide Big Blue Handball Championship was held the weekend of June 14, attracting 1,200 entrants. The contest takes its name from the soft, blue racquetball that city players smack against a 16-foot by 20-foot wall. On Saturday, contestants competed at Lincoln Terrace Park, on Buffalo Avenue at East New York Avenue, and at Asser Levy Park, on West Fifth Street at Surf Avenue in Coney Island. In Coney Island, William Polanco (far left) lost to Cesar Sala in the men’s open singles semifinal match. Sala, the 2001 small-ball world champion, was favored to win by the noisy crowd, but was later defeated by Ray Lopez in the finals. (Bottom right) Lopez poses with his medal. The series was sponsored by the city Department of Parks and Recreation in cooperation with the New York Hand-ball Alliance and the U.S. Handball Association. The competition offered $3,000 in total prize money. There are 673 handball courts in Brooklyn where you can practice your technique for next year’s tourney, in-cluding McCarren Park, Bayard at Leonard streets (16 courts); Com-modore Barry Park, Flushing Avenue and North Elliot Place (8 courts); McLaughlin Park, Tillary and Jay streets (2 courts); Red Hook Park, Lor-raine and Clinton streets (8 courts); Sunset Park, Sixth Avenue at 41st Street (3 courts); Dyker Beach Park, Bay Eighth Street at Cropsey Avenue (12 courts); and Shore Road Park, 95th Street at Shore Road (6 courts). For a complete listing of Brooklyn handball courts, visit www.nyc.gov/parks on the Web. 

July 1, 2002 5

By Paulanne Simmons 

for The Brooklyn Papers 

# Add to the list of summer pleas-ures weekend performances in Prospect Park by the LITE Com-pany. Adam Melnick, artistic director of the LITE Company, first produced Carlo Gozzi’s fantasy romance “The King Stag” in 1998. He says he’s been “interested in revisiting the pro-duction ever since.” This summer his hopes will be fulfilled. The LITE Company’s new produc-tion will be at various Prospect Park locations from July 6 through Aug. 11. “The King Stag” features a cast of six actors (a few of whom appeared in last year’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” also at Prospect Park) and several musicians playing the accor-dion and percussion instruments. “We had touched on the spirit [in 1998], but it was too long,” Melnick told GO Brooklyn. “We were wedded too much to the text. This time we’ve totally adapted it and made it our own.” Gozzi was a member of the Granelleschi Society, whose goal was to preserve Tuscan literature from for-eign influences. Unlike his rival dramatist Carlo Goldoni, who intro-duced the modern Italian comedy in the style of Moliere, Gozzi continued writing in the tradition of commedia dell’arte. This form of comedy was characterized by improvisation upon the bare outline of a plot and the use of stock characters, some wearing masks. People like French writer Mme. De Stael (1766-1817) and Goethe considered Gozzi’s plays, many of which were dramatized fairy tales, charming and witty. “The King Stag” tells the story of a king who searches for a queen, is be-trayed by an evil minister and, in the end, learns the value of true love, with the help of a wizard. Using puppetry, music and a bit of magic, the LITE Company tells the story in a very physical and irreverent way. “The original play holds royalty as being automatically good. The evil people are those who want to take over from the king,” says Melnick. “We made it a modern morality play about the kingdom being a place where everyone is obsessed with be-ing important. Gozzi had his own morality for his time. And we’re put-ting a modern morality on it.” Melnick says his characters are black and white, good and evil, with no subtlety or subtext. “We’re heavy-handed, well, be-cause it’s fun,” he explains. Indeed, if commedia dell’arte ap-pealed to the learned and sophisticat-ed, it also attracted the masses. The rich are foolish. The well educated are pedantic. Servants often outwit their masters. Melnick keeps commedia dell’arte’s broad strokes and high-lights its subversiveness. “‘The King Stag’ is an artistic and social satire on how we look at the world but also on the media and how it represents the world,” Melnick says. Melnick also emphasizes the fan-tastic elements of the play with mag-ic, spells and magicians. “We changed it so that the whole story comes out of a box,” he says. “Puppets are integrated into the ac-tion, sometimes replacing the actors, doing things the actors can’t do like magical transformations.” Like commedia dell’arte, “The King Stag” will be presented out-doors. And like commedia dell’arte, which became popular throughout Europe thanks to traveling companies, the production will be on the move — to Charleston, West Virginia in Au-gust and Pennsylvania’s Swarthmore College in the fall. To facilitate these travels, the LITE Company has con-structed a small stage with a platform and backdrop that can be moved from place to place. Melnick believes that producing the play outdoors in the park “sup-ports the energy of commedia style,” as does making the show free. “A wide range of people will see the play — people who are not neces-sarily interested in serious theater, people whose strongest language may not be English, adults and children.” Fortunately, the language of en-chantment is universal, and, well, en-chanting. 

Beach blanket theater: (Above) Tanya Krohn, as Clarice (a contest-ant for the queen contest), and Robert Weinstein, as Deramo the king, in The LITE Company ’s free outdoor production of Gozzi ’s “The King Stag ” in Prospect Park. (At left) Krohn and Weinstein are joined by (far left) Sharon Cinnamon as the Magic Statue. David Gochfeld 

WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM THE BROOKLYN PAPERS 

The LITE Company will stage Car-lo Gozzi ’s “The King Stag ” July 6 through Aug. 11 in Prospect Park. Sunday performances will be in front of the steps and columns of the Tennis House at 2 and 5 pm; Saturday per-formances will be at 3 pm at various locations around the park, including the Music Pagoda (July 6 and Aug. 3), Harmony Playground (July 20 and 27) and the Roosevelt Memorial Hill near the Long Meadow (July 13 and Aug. 10). Admission is free. Rain cancella-tions will be announced an hour be-fore show time on the LITE hotline. For directions or more information, call the hotline at (212) 414-7773 or visit www.theliteco.org. 

T H E AT E R 

# Inaka Inaka Sushi House Our experienced Sushi Chef prepares the freshest Sushi & Sashimi to order! Sukiyaki, Yosenabe & Shabu Shabu prepared at your table Combination Teriyaki & Tempura Available 

Authentic Japanese Food in Park Slope 

A light, healthy meal for the entire family. 

Mon. - Sat. Noon - 10:30pm, Sun. 5pm - 10:30pm 

FREE DELIVERY • Catering Available • Major Credit Cards Continuously serving lunch and dinner 

236 7th Ave. (bet 4th & 5th Sts.) 

(718) 499-7856 

# We’re Back! 

Join us for a drink after work or a great meal with the gang in our beautiful new location! 

# Las Tres Palmas 

Spanish & American Cuisine 

121 Livingston St. (off Adams St.) Mon-Fri: 11-11; Sat-Sun: 12-11 • Catering all Occasions 

Fax (718) 624-2705 • • (718) 624-9565 

Open 7 days a week LUNCH – DINNER • Catering • Daily Specials • Kids Menu Available • Party Room Available up to 100 people • Free Valet Parking Thurs, Fri, Sat RESTAURANT & LOUNGE 9101 Third Avenue 718•745•0614 Bay Ridge, Brooklyn 

# Short Ribs are Back on 3rd Ave. Short Ribs are Back on 3rd Ave. 

Thursday Special 4pm - close 

# $21 95 

ALL THE RIBS AND CHICKEN YOU CAN EAT! FREE DELIVERY 

If it’s Fresher than here, it’s still swimming! If it’s Fresher than here, it’s still swimming! 

# BARRACUDA BARRACUDA SS E E A A F F O O O O D D

RR E E S S T T A A U U R R A A N N T T

Fish Prepared To Your Liking. 

Grilled, Broiled, Panfried or Blackend 

Specializing in preparation of Exotic Seafoods with your favorite sides... 

Lunch • Dinner Children’s Menu Available Lobster Feast 

3 Lobsters & Your Choice of One Side. 7 Days a Week. 

3 Course Dinner 

Mon-Fri, 4-6pm Soup, entree, beverage 

Brunch 12noon - 4pm Saturday and Sunday with complimentary wine. Full Bar, Fresh Imported Beers Kitchen Open 7 days a week 12noon-12mid 

Free Valet Parking 

Fri. & Sat. Nights until 2am and Sun. Day 

## 7026 Third Ave. 

(corner of 71st St.) – BAY RIDGE 

(718) 833-3759 • WE DELIVER! 

Fax: (718) 491-8662 • 

> price range

$ 12- $ 21 $29.95 $ 7.95 $ 9.95 

ITALIAN RESTAURANT 

Home of the Original Brick Oven Pizza 

We deliver 7 days a week 

Sun.-Thurs. 12-11pm • Fri. & Sat. 12-1am 

All major credit cards accepted. Visit us at romanorestaurant.com Established 1935 

7117 13th Ave. 232-5226• 232-2820 

Free Order of Garlic Sticks 

–––––––––– With delivery order of $10 or more ––––––––––– 

Monday thru Thursday 

Complimentary Glass of Wine 

––––– With $15 check minimum. Just mention this ad. ––––– 

Dine In 

Complete Special Dinners 

––––– Appetizer, pasta, main course, dessert & coffee ––––– 

Starting at $19 95 

# The Pearl Room The Pearl Room 

## Restaurant 

## 

Oyster Bar Garden Dining 

Available for Private Functions Reserve now for that special graduation party. 

8201 Third Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11209 Tel: 718.833.6666 Fax: 718.680.4172 

Celebrating 34 years! 

215 Union St. off Henry • C ARROLL GARDENS (718) 858-5370 • • www.ninosonunion.com OPEN 7 DAYS: Mon-Thurs: 12-10pm; Sat: 4-11pm; Sun: 2-10pm 

Restaurant Since 1968 

Ask about our upcoming 

WINEMAKERS DINNERS 

with your host, Anthony Catanzaro 

## NYC’s BEST* Penne Vodka is at 

Party room available. We cater for all occasions! 

• Daily News 

D • E • L • I • C • I • O • U • S Chinese Cuisine & Vegetarian Nutrition 

• Fast Free Delivery • Open 7 Days a Week • Party Orders Welcome 

We Only Use Vegetable Oil Natural Cooking and Fresh Vegetables 

162 Montague Street 

Brooklyn Heights 

(718) 522-5565/66 

fax (718) 522-1205 (24hr)    

> Mon - Thurs 11:30am - 10:00pm
> Fri - Sat 11:30 am - 11:00pm
> Sunday 2:00pm - 10:00pm

$7.00 min. 

FFREE DELIVERY 

Seniors: 15% Discount every Tuesday night (dine-in only) 

Sushi Bar & Fine Japanese Cuisine 

Parties catered on & off premises. 

# Sushi $18 99 

eat-in only • includes soda lunch & dinner 

78 Clark St at Henry St • Brooklyn Heights Free Delivery - $10min • • (718) 625-9893 

Lunch: Mon-Sat 11am-3pm; Dinner: Mon-Sat 4:30-11:30pm; Sunday: 11:30am-11pm 

# AllYouCanEat

> W25

# Going ‘Stag’ 

# The LITE Co. revives ‘King Stag’ on weekend afternoons 

# Balls to the wall 

All photos The Brooklyn Papers / Gregory Cross WHERE TO compiled by Susan Rosenthal 

MODA CAFE: Mod, rock and soul music with live DJ. No cover. 8 pm. 294 Fifth Ave. (718) 832-8897. 

GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: pres-ents Theophilus aka Tony Jarvis. $7. 9 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

CYCLONE ANNIVERSARY: Coney Island ’s Cyclone celebrates its 75th anniversary. Firework dis-play on the beach at West 10th Street at the Boardwalk. 1000 Surf Ave. (718) 265-2100. Free. TWO BOOTS: Sonido Costeno performs Latin-Caribbean rhythms. No cover. 10 pm. 514 Second St. (718) 499-3253. 

SHAKESPEARE: “The Tempest. ”

8 pm. See Sat., June 29. 

SAT , J UNE 29 

OUTDOORS AND TOURS 

CRUISING THE GOWANUS: 

Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment hosts a cruise aboard the Chelsea Screamer. See changes as the canal and the neighborhood experience a renaissance. Urban educator Dan Wiley leads tour. $35, $30 members. 9 am, Chelsea Piers, Pier 62, Hudson River between 22nd and 23rd streets, Manhattan. (718) 788-8500. 

ART IN THE ARCH: Prospect Park Alliance examines bird habits and habitats with a selection of photographs and sculptures. Gallery tour and climb to Arch ’srooftop for a view of Brooklyn. 1 to 5 pm. Grand Army Plaza Arch. (718) 965-8943. Free. 

PERFORMANCES 

BARGEMUSIC: Chamber music of Haydn, Bach and Debussy. $35. 7:30 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

CONCERT: Kingsborough Commu-nity College presents “The Sound of Music, ” ribute to music of Richard Rogers. 8 pm. Rainbow Bandshell, 2001 Oriental Boulevard. (718) 368-5000. Free. THELMA HILL: Thelma Hill Performing Arts Center pres-ents “Women Dancemakers, ” aprogram featuring women cho-reographers. $15, $12 seniors and students. 8 pm. Long Island University Triangle Theater, DeKalb and Flatbush avenues. (718) 875-9710. 

SHAKESPEARE: Kings County Shakespeare Company pres-ents “The Tempest. ” $12. 2 and 8 pm. Also, panel discus-sion and interpretation of play. St. Francis College, 182 Remsen St. (718) 398-0546. 

GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: pres-ents Mark Mulcahy and other guests. $5. 9 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

TWO BOOTS: Joe Taino and The Blue Flames play the blues. No cover. 10 pm. 514 Second St. (718) 499-3253. 

CHILDREN 

ARTY FACTS: Brooklyn Museum of Art invites children ages 4 to 7 and a significant adult to explore the galleries and create art. Free for children under 12, $6 adults. 11 am and 2 pm. Meet in Grand Lobby, 200 Eastern Parkway. (718) 638-5000. 

AQUARIUM: “Eye of the Albatross ” author Carl Safina gives a reading and answers questions. $9.75. 1 to 3 pm. West Eighth Street and Surf Avenue. (718) 265-FISH. 

BROOKLYN CHILDREN ’S MUSE-UM: Kids are invited to “Pattern Wizardry, ” a workshop on the magic of patterns. $4. 10 am to 5 pm. Also, Miles of Tiles work-shop brings the art of NY ’s pub-lic transportation system to kids. 2:30 pm. Also, doll-making workshop. 2 to 4:30 pm. 145 Brooklyn Ave. (718) 735-4400. 

PUPPETWORKS: “Pinnochio. ” $7, $6 children. 12:30 pm. 338 Sixth Ave. Reservations sug-gested. (718) 965-3391. 

OTHER 

MINI BOUTIQUE: 11:30 am to 4 pm. Good Shepherd Guild, 7420 Fourth Ave. (718) 745-8520. 

BAMCINEMATEK: “Village Voice: Best Undistributed Films ” series. Today ’s feature is “Millennium Mambo ” (2001). $9. 4, 6:30 and 9:30 pm. Q & A with film critic after 6:30 pm screening. 30 Lafayette Ave. (718) 636-4100. 

S UN , J UNE 30 

OUTDOORS AND TOURS 

BED-STUY WALK: YMCA and the Municipal Art Society tour Bed-ford-Stuyvesant. $15. 11 am to 1 pm. Meet at southwest cor-ner of Fulton Street and Nost-rand Avenue. (212) 575-4545. 

CONEY ISLAND: NY Like a Native walks through Coney Island and Brighton Beach. $14. 11:30 am to 2 pm. Call for meeting and reservations. (718) 393-7537. 

WALKING TOUR: Big Onion Tours visits the Brooklyn Bridge and Brooklyn Heights. $12, $10 stu-dents and seniors. 1 pm. Meet at southeast corner of Broad-way and Chamber streets, lower Manhattan. (212) 439-1090. 

PERFORMANCES 

CELEBRATE BROOKLYN: 24th season of outdoor performanc-es continues. Kreyol Festival with Haitian music by Tabou Combo, Boukman Eksperyans and Zin. $3. 2 to 9 pm. Prospect Park Bandshell, Ninth Street at Prospect Park West. (718) 965-8999. 

BARGEMUSIC: Haydn, Bach and Debussy. $35. 4 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: pres-ents Hidden Temple benefit party featuring live DJ ’s, per-formances, video mixing and more. $10. 8 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

THELMA HILL: See Sat., June 29. 

SHAKESPEARE: “The Tempest. ”

$12. 2 pm. See Sat., June 29. 

CHILDREN 

WYCKOFF HOUSE: Kids are invit-ed to adopt-a-pumpkin and learn useful tips for the garden. Composting demo. 1 to 3 pm. 5816 Clarendon Road. Reserva-tions. (718) 629-5400. Free. PUPPETWORKS: “Pinnochio. ”12:30 pm. See Sat., June 29. 

OTHER 

BROOKLYN CYCLONES: Team plays Mahoning Valley Scrap-pers. 5 pm. Call for ticket infor-mation. Surf Avenue at 19th Street. (718) 449-8497. 

NATURE CENTER: Salt Marsh Nature Center celebrates Walt Whitman. 6 pm. 3302 Ave. U. (718) 421-2021. Free. 

M ON , J ULY 1

BROOKLYN CYCLONES: Team plays Mahoning Valley Scrappers. 7 pm. Call for ticket information. Surf Avenue at 19th Street. (718) 449-8497. 

READING REHEARSAL: Brooklyn Symphony Orchestra invites amateur, student and semi-pro-fessional musicians to join in. Tonight ’s piece is Les Preludes by Liszt. 7:30 to 9:30 pm. Zion German Lutheran Church, 125 Henry St. (718) 852-0677. Free. GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: bene-fit event for “Forward, ” a local Filipino-American group. $10. 7 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

T UES , J ULY 2

COMIC OPERA: American Opera Projects presents “Fireworks, ”

an opera for the entire family. 8 pm. Fort Greene Park. Park tour preceeds opera. Bring your own seats. (718) 398-4024. Free. GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: The Wau Wau Sisters record release party. $8. 8:30 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

BROOKLYN CYCLONES: Team plays Auburn Doubledays. 7 pm. Call for ticket information. Surf Avenue at 19th Street. (718) 449-8497. 

HOLISTIC MALE: Park Slope Co-op hosts a talk, “The Whole Male. ” 7:30 pm. 782 Union St. (718) 622-0560. Free. 

W EDS , J ULY 3

FEAST: Our Lady of Mount Carmel 115th annual Old World Italian street festival and giglio dance. 7 pm to midnight. 275 North Eighth St. (718) 384-0223. 

BROOKLYN CYCLONES: Team plays Aberdeen Iron Birds. 7 pm. Call for ticket information. Surf Avenue at 19th Street. (718) 449-8497. 

GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: “Little Gray Book Lecture No. 11: Europe vs. America. ” $2. 8 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

T HURS , J ULY 4

Independence Day 

BARGEMUSIC: “The North Wind, ” featuring traditional Scottish and Irish instruments. $35. 7:30 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

JULY 4th FIREWORKS: Macy ’shosts its annual event. 9:15 pm. Viewing along the East River in Greenpoint on Commercial Street and West Street. 

BUTTAFLY CAFE: Maroon per-forms alternative jazz. No cover. 9:30 pm. 769 Washington Ave. (718) 636-1900. 

GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: pres-ents beat, hip hop and jazz with DJ Salinger. No cover. 10 pm to 2 am. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

F RI , J ULY 5

CELEBRATE BROOKLYN: 24th season of outdoor performanc-es. Lincoln Center Jazz Orches-tra is led by Wynton Marsalis. $3. 7:30 pm. Prospect Park Bandshell, Ninth Street at Pros-pect Park West. (718) 965-8999. 

BARGEMUSIC: “The North Wind, ” featuring traditional Scottish and Irish instruments. $35. 7:30 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

AQUARIUM: Aquajazz concert series features James Spaulding Quintet. As an added bonus, guests have front seat viewing from inside the Aquarium of the Coney Island fireworks. $20. 7 to 10:30 pm. West Eighth Street at Surf Avenue. (718) 265-FISH. 

FIREWORKS: Weekly Friday fire-works show. Live music, karo-ake and giveaways. 9:15 pm. Boardwalk between West 10th and West 12th streets in Coney Island. (718) 372-2592. Free. 

SAT , J ULY 6

FIRST SATURDAY: Brooklyn Museum of Art features African/ Latin music and film, as well as a vari-ety of talks and art activities. Rolando Matias and the Afro-Rican Ensemble perform jazz. 5 to 8 pm. “The Time Cycle, ” aplay that mixes science, art, his-tory and music. 7 pm. Costume designer discusses design influ-ences on costumes in “Star Wars. ” 8 pm. Dance music from 9 to 11 pm. 200 Eastern Parkway. (718) 638-5000. Free. AQUARIUM: Celebrate America and the animals found along our shores with the theme event 

“From Sea to Shining Sea: A Marine Mammal Celebration. ”

NY Aquarium offers workshops, live music, antique cars and more. $9.75. 11 am to 4 pm. West Eighth Street at Surf Avenue. (718) 265-FISH. 

WALKING TOUR: Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn Heights. See Sun. 

PROSPECT PARK ZOO: Visitors are invited to chat with and find out about zookeepers ’ work. Today “Something Fishy, ” invites participants to wear raincoats and boots and “save ” plastic fish from “polluted ” water. $2.50, $1.25 seniors, 50 cents for chil-dren 3 to 12. 1 to 3 pm. 450 Flatbush Ave. (718) 399-7339. 

HISTORY TOUR: Lefferts Home-stead invites community to learn about the history of the house, the neighborhood and the borough. 1 pm. Prospect Park, on Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard. (718) 421-2021. Free. OUTDOOR THEATER: LITE Com-pany presents production of Carlo Gozzi ’s play, “The King Stag, ” a fable of magic, intrigue and romance. 3 pm. Music Pa-goda, near Boathouse, Pros-pect Park. (212) 414-7773. Free. 

T HURS , J UNE 27 

BARGEMUSIC: Chamber music of Haydn, Barkauskas, Hersant and Sibelius. $35. 7:30 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

BARNES AND NOBLE: Author Karen Siplin reads from her book “His Insignificant Other. ”

7:30 to 8:30 pm. 267 Seventh Ave. (718) 832-9066. Free. HOMEOPATHY: Park Slope Food Co-op offers a talk on therapy that has been used for over 200 years. 7:30 pm. 782 Union St. (718) 622-0560. Free. GALAPAGOS ART SPACE: Night of music. $5. 8 pm. 70 North Sixth St. (718) 782-5188. 

TWO BOOTS: Latin bands per-form. No cover. 10 pm. 514 Second St. (718) 499-3253. 

DINNER THEATER: “The Last Sup-per. ” 7 pm. See Fri., June 28. 

SHAKESPEARE: Kings County Shakespeare Company pres-ents “The Tempest. ” 8 pm. See Sat., June 29. 

F RI , J UNE 28 

PUPNIC: Fellowship for the Interests of Dogs and their Owners (FIDO) celebrates summer. Owners whose dogs have names begin-ning with letters A through M are asked to bring an appetizer to share; N through Z bring a dessert to share. 5 to 8 pm. The Nethermead, Prospect Park. (888) 604-3422. Free. CELEBRATE BROOKLYN: 24th season of outdoor performing arts continues. Tonight: Sarah Harmer, Luther Wright and The Wrongs perform pop and folk music. $3. 7:30 pm. Prospect Park Bandshell, Ninth Street at Pros-pect Park West. (718) 965-8999. 

OPENING RECEPTION: “Beauti-ful Necessity, ” artworks by Meredith McNeal. 6 to 8 pm. Figureworks Gallery, 168 North Sixth St. (718) 486-7021. Free. OPENING: reception for “Grotto, ”

an exhibit with works by over 40 artists. 6 to 9 pm. 210 North Sixth St. (718) 384-9606. Free. DINNER THEATER: Bread and Wine Productions presents “The Last Supper. ” Performance cul-minates with a full dinner. $25 to $40. 7 pm. 410 16th St. Reservations. (718) 499-7758. 

BARGEMUSIC: Chamber music of Haydn, Barkauskas, Hersant and Sibelius. $35. 7:30 pm. Fulton Ferry Landing. (718) 624-2083. 

HEALING WITH TOUCH: Park Slope Food Co-op offers a talk on how to relieve tension, sea-sonal problems, digestive and reproductive imbalances and more. 7:30 pm. 782 Union St. (718) 622-0560. Free. PIANO RECITAL : Ragnhild Brink-haus performs Ravel, Rachman-inoff, Beethoven, Chopin, and Mendelssohn, sponsored by Boerun Hill Art Center. Refresh-ments. $5 contribution. 8 pm. Bethlehem Lutheran Church, corner Pacific Street and Third Avenue. (718) 855-9865. 

# T H E H E A L T H C A R E P L U S A D VA N TA G E 

# That is why our Health Services, Member Services, and Outreach representatives are available to help you get the services you need, when you need them. We have board certified, bilingual physicians and support staff who know and speak your language: English, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Arabic, and many others. And you can choose your family physician from at least (3) three primary care providers in your area. Combined with no co-payments or paperwork for addi-tional visits, free round-trip transportation, a family-friendly staff and our wide range of special community events, HEALTH CARE PLUS from HEALTH PLUS is the right choice for you and your family. Remember, enrollment in a Medicaid health plan is vol-untary until you receive an official notice from New York Medicaid CHOICE that you must enroll in a health plan. So, if you live in Brooklyn, Bronx, Manhattan, Queens or Staten Island, and receive Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Medicaid only (MA) or SSI, get more than Medicaid — Get HEALTH CARE PLUS from HEALTH PLUS Now! 

The Medicaid managed care plan in your neighborhood 

# Sign Up Today! Call 1-888-809-8009 New York Medicaid CHOICE Helpline Number 1-800-505-5678 WWW.HEALTHPLUS-NY.ORG 

112 DeKalb Ave. (718) 246-2800 OPEN M-Thur 11-11pm Fri-Sat 11-12pm Sunday 3-10pm 

CATERING AVAILABLE FOR ALL OCCASSIONS 

“favorite restaurant ”– Judge Glenda Hatchett 

Caribbean Soul Cuisine & Bakery 

# • • • • • • F Fo o r r t t GG r r e e e e n n e e • • • • • • 

Located in a Historic Landmark bi-level Brownstone. 

Two Steps Down 240 Dekalb Avenue (betw. Vanderbilt & Clermont) www.twostepsdown.com • 718 399•2020 • 

LOUISIANA • SOUTHERN CARRIBEAN 

## SEAFOOD 

Dinner: Wed-Sun 5-11:30 Brunch: Sun 11:30-3:30 

Restaurant • Bar • Lounge 

Serving Latin and Caribbean Cuisine 

229 DeKalb Ave. (cor. Clermont) Fort Greene 

Sun-Thurs: 6-11pm • Fri & Sat: 6-12mid • 222-1510 

> ❖❖

Try our MOJITOS 

smooth & sophisticated 

Sol Elixirs mussels grilled salmon 

AsianSoul 271 Adelphi Street • 718.522.1669 • buttacuplounge.com 

## Alien arias 

American Opera Projects will present “Fireworks, ” a new comic opera, at Fort Greene Park on July 2. The one-hour opera features music by Kitty Brazelton and lyrics by Park Slope resident Billy Aronson (pictured). The family appropriate 

“Fireworks ” relates the mad-cap adventures of an inter-galactic alien who, intrigued by the strange, colored lights coming from Earth, drops into Fort Greene Park on July 4. As the community celebrates America ’s Independence Day, the alien soon finds herself the object of romantic attention. Af-ter many hilarious encounters with unsuspecting park revelers, the alien discovers that democracy is one of the galaxy ’s most bizarre and provocative ideas. The performance is free and will follow free tours of Fort Greene Park, named for the Revolutionary War General Nathaniel Greene (1742-1786). The fully staged opera will begin at 8 pm at the base of the Prison Ship Martyrs Monument, a tribute to men, women and children who were held by the British in inhumane conditions aboard prison ships in Wal-labout Bay. Bring chairs and blankets because seating is limit-ed. A rain date has been set for July 3 at 8 pm. For more information, call (718) 398-4024 or visit the Web site at www.aopinc.org. 

## Just a short walk from BAM & Park Slope OR BY BUS: From Downtown Bklyn - B38 from Fulton Mall / From Park Slope - B69 from 8th Ave. BY TRAIN: N, M, R, Q to DeKalb Ave. / G to Fulton St. / A to Lafayette Ave. By Lisa J. Curtis 

The Brooklyn Papers 

# It was a helluva boys’ night out at the New York Sheraton on June 19 when the audience of mostly male Xaverian HS supporters turned out to honor former Mayor Rudolph Giu-liani at the Joe DiMaggio Award gala. It was also not unlike Christmas-time, as the all-boys Catholic high school showered Rudy with gifts: a crystal base-ball bat, a No. 5 jersey autographed by DiMaggio that he wore when the Yankees won the 1951 World Series, an autographed baseball bat used by Joe D. and a custom portrait by 

Igor Babailov of Rudy, with the Statue of Liberty looming large in the back-ground. The late Yankee Clipper was intro-duced to Xaverian High School by Dr. Rock Positano , an alumnus and board member of the school. (The foot spe-cialist met DiMaggio in 1989 when the retired baseball player sought medical attention for a heel ailment.) Positano was chairman of this year’s gala. Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , last year’s DiMaggio Award recipient, presented this year’s award to Giuliani. “He said we are going to lick this problem [on Sept. 11],” said Kissinger. “It wasn’t scripted. It came from deep within him. He’ll be a great American hero for as long as he lives.” The Nobel Prize winner was surpris-ingly deft at keeping the tribute from becoming maudlin. “People ask me, would I recom-mend [Giuliani] for Secretary of Homeland Defense?” said Kissinger. “I have a special reason for saying yes. He’s a consultant. He’s competing di-rectly with me. I’ll recommend him for anything. If I don’t get him off the street soon, I’ll have a cash-flow prob-lem!” Giuliani accepted the award from Kissinger to a roaring standing ovation. “I’m also here because of Rock Positano,” said Giuliani. “He would bust my feet if I didn’t come. That’s the Italian way.” He then quickly added, “I hope no one’s sensitive about that stuff.” Giuliani said he met DiMaggio af-ter a Columbus Day Parade. “From the time I was a lit-tle boy, he was my hero,” said Giuliani. Giu-liani said he was told that DiMaggio returned the admira-tion because of his efforts to get the Mafia out of New York. “Now, every time I see the begin-ning of the ‘Sopranos,’ I think of Joe,” said the Brooklyn-born former mayor. “The part I get all choked up about is when I see Tony driving to New Jersey — it gets to me.” 

Michael Badalucco (Emmy-award winning actor from the television show “The Practice” and a 1972 alumnus of Xaverian) served as master of cere-monies. Waiting for the event to begin, he spent time chatting in the VIP room with his former Xaverian math teacher, Ray Agoglia. “I’m proud of my Italian heritage and the traditions of the Italian people,” said Badalucco. “That includes eating pastries at Alba’s on 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst!” About Giuliani, Badalucco became more serious. “He’s a great man who embodies the spirit of America.” Xaverian President Sal Ferrera said Badalucco was one of the school’s most famous alumni, and is still re-membered for his participation in the Clippers Drama Club and a “memo-rable rendition of Santana’s ‘Oye Como Va.’” The gala raised more than $500,000, according to preliminary estimates, for the Joe DiMaggio Scholarship Fund at Xaverian High School, 7100 Shore Road. The fund provides scholarships to students qualifying for financial aid, and will also benefit the Bay Ridge school’s Real Academic Achievement (REACH) program for college-bound students with learning disabilities. Also showing support for the school and former mayor were former base-ball commissioner Fay Vincent , Eliz-abeth Vargas of ABC News, Hamp-tons restaurateur and advertising guru 

Jerry Della Femina , Manhattan Dis-trict Attorney Robert Morganthau 

and Daily News sports cartoonist Bill Gallo .Comedian Joe Piscopo sang a trib-ute in the style of Frank Sinatra. Creat-ing new lyrics for “The Lady is a Tramp,” Piscopo sang “Rudy is achamp.” “Who cares they named him Rudolph/ He gives Italians a good name,” he belted. The crowd, which included family members of some of the 23 Xaverian alumni who died in the World Trade Center, whooped when he sang, “‘Hail to the Chief’ should be your theme song.” Piscopo said he’s also a fan of the school. “I was a bad kid growing up,” he said. “Xaverian’s REACH program was what I needed.” Piscopo said he came to know about Xaverian through gala chairman Positano. “He was a reporter for a school pa-per and came to interview me when I was at ‘Saturday Night Live.’ He’s a great guy. One of my closest friends now,” said Piscopo. The comedian has created a produc-tion company, Avellino productions, which is producing a four-hour mini series for HBO, “Bloomfield Avenue,” written by Chazz Palminteri (“A Bronx Tale”). And although it is about a family from Italy, “It’s an ethnic cel-ebration. It’s not a lot of violence or hard edged” like that other HBO series about Italian-Americans. (He did con-cede that it is about real events — in Piscopo’s family perhaps?) Italian-American heritage and hero-ism was an important theme of the evening. Ferrera said, “Mr. Giuliani embodies the DiMaggio attributes of personal courage, grace and extremely high stan-dards in everything he does. It is happi-ly ironic that Joe thought highly of the former mayor and Mr. Giuliani idolized the Yankee Clipper. Clearly the award has come full circle for excellence.” So what did the city’s courageous 9-11 leader predict for New York’s fu-ture? “I get asked, ‘How do I see New York 100 years from now?’ I thought of a serious answer,” said Giuliani, but then the devout Yankee fan opted for the obvious: “Getting ready for the World Series in October.” 

Answer man 

On June 14, filmmaker John Sayles addressed audience questions at the Brooklyn Academy of Music be-fore a screening of his film “Matewan” (1987), which recreated a coal miners’ strike. BAM screened restored prints of Sayles’ films in a series called, “The John Sayles Film Restoration Project.” His new film, “Sunshine State,” about resort developers moving into a sleepy Florida town, features amazing performances by Edie Falco (“Sopra-nos”) and Angela Bassett (“How Stella Got Her Groove Back”). 

Voodoo boogie 

New Orleans boogie and blues pi-anist Dr. John (aka Mac Rebbenack) kicked off the Celebrate Brooklyn per-forming arts series on June 20. Mayor Michael Bloomberg also came to the band shell, at Ninth Street and Prospect Park West in the park, to greet the crowd. Next up at Celebrate Brooklyn is a performance by Sarah Harmer on June 28 and a seven-hour Kreyol Festi-val on June 30. Wynton Marsalis and the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra will give a rare outdoor gig on July 5. For a complete schedule of events, go to www.celebratebrooklyn.org or call (718) 855-7882 ext. 45. 

July 1, 2002 7WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM THE BROOKLYN PAPERS 

The Alliance for Downtown New York and present 

# Music at Castle Clinton FREE THURSDAY EVENINGS · 7 P.M. IN HISTORIC BATTERY PARK 4th of July Concert THURSDAY, JULY 4 · 2:30 P.M. HISTORIC BATTERY PARK · NO TICKETS REQUIRED Tickets are limited and will be distributed on a first-come, first-served basis at Castle Clinton at 5 p.m. on the day of the concert. Two tickets per person. FREE  Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis Juilliard Jazz Ensemble Afro-Latin Jazz Orchestra with Arturo O’Farrill July 11 · Jane Siberry/ Chocolate Genius July 18 · The Derek Trucks Band July 25 · Rosanne Cash/ Mojo Mancini Aug. 1 · Neko Case/ Laura Cantrell Aug. 8 · Los Amigos Invisibles July 5th Concert The New York Pops conducted by Skitch Henderson FRIDAY, JULY 5 · 6 P.M. HISTORIC BATTERY PARK · NO TICKETS REQUIRED FREE 

INFORMATION: (212) 835-2789, www.DowntownNY.com. All performances are subject to change and weather conditions. All persons and personal property are subject to search. SUBWAY DIRECTIONS: 4/5 to Bowling Green, 1/2 to Wall Street, N/R to Whitehall Street. 

# Brooklyn Bridge Park Summer Film Series Brooklyn Bridge Park Summer Film Series 

Double Indemnity Thurs., July 11 

Brooklyn-born Barbara Stanwyck stars with Fred McMurray in this film noir classic. 

My Cousin Vinny Thurs., July 18 

Marisa Tomei and Joe Pesci, a not-quite qualified Brooklyn lawyer, attempt to save the lives of two young New Yorkers in an Alabama town. 

The Way We Were Thurs., July 25 

Vintage Streisand — she’s a student activist and Robert Redford is her all-American paramour in this romantic drama. 

My American Girls Thurs., August 1 

A compelling look at the challenges a Dominican couple in Brooklyn face as they raise three daughters . 

Empire/ Fulton Ferry Park  

> E A S T R I V E R Cadman Plaza West Old Fulton St. Brooklyn Bridge Washington Street Main Street New Dock St.

York Street Front Street Water Street Prospect Street 

Rain dates (Fridays): July 12, July 19, July 26, and August 2. 

For rain date, detailed directions and more info: www.bbpc.net or 718-802-0603. 

The Brooklyn Bridge Park Summer Film Series is made possible by the Brooklyn Bridge Park Coalition with the cooperation of the New York Office of Parks, Recreation, and Historic Preservation.Thanks to Hallmark, Consolidated Edison of NY, AOL Time Warner, Time Warner Cable and GreenPoint Bank for underwriting support. Waterfront row seats. Great Brooklyn films. Free! 

## Empire Fulton Ferry State Park • 8:45 p.m. 

# How yuh doen’? 

# SmallTownBrooklyn.com Lisa&Bob@SmallTownBrooklyn.com (718) 222-8209 

# CHATTER Joe DiMaggio Award Gala 

June 19, 2002 

# CHITTER 

The original: Indie filmmaker John Sayles answers audience questions in Fort Greene on June 14 before a screening of his film “Matewan. ” BP / Gregory Cross 

Penned in: (At left) Former Mayor Rudy Giuliani was swarmed by au-tograph hounds after the June 19 tribute in his honor at the New York Sheraton. (Above) Actor Michael Badalucco was master of cere-monies at the event, which was a fundraiser for Xaverian High School. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango 

# Hero worship 

# Xaverian HS fundraiser pays homage to Giuliani & Joe D. 

Good time Rx: Boogie and blues pianist Dr. John opened the Celebrate Brooklyn performing arts series at Prospect Park last Thursday. BP / Greg Mango 

Comedian Joe Piscopo (top) sang a hilarious parody of a Sinatra song for Giuliani. (Middle) Both gossip columnist George Rush, left, and Henry Kissinger sat on the dais. (At right) Xaverian President Sal Fer-rera raised more than $500,000 at the event. The Brooklyn Papers / Greg Mango July 1, 2002 AWP 7THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

# EEM MP PL LO OY YM ME EN NT T

# CCCC L LLL A AAA S SSS S SSS I III F FFF I III E EEE D DDD S SSSHelp Wanted • Situation Wanted • Business Opportunities • Income Opportunities • Adoptions • Automotive • Bed & Breakfast • Bridal & Special Occasions • Business Services Children & Childcare • Cleaning Services • Firewood • Home Care • Instruction • Merchandise • Movers, Storage & Truckers • New Age • Personal Care • Pet Services • Psychics 

–––––– To advertise please call 834-9161, Monday-Friday 9am-5pm –––––– 

# BBu us si in ne es ss sSSe er rv vi ic ce es s

Attorneys Computers Career Preparation 

Tru sts, E stat es, Wi lls, P rox iesFree Consultat ion Ava ilabl eat 

## LAW OFFICES OF Peter G. Gray, P.C. 

# (718) 237-2023 

Elderlaw • Probate • Estate Litigation • Deed Transfers Medicaid Planning • Home and Hospital Visits Available 

189 Montague Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201 

R26-23 

Law Offices of Joseph M. Rizzo, P .C. 

637 Fifth Avenue (corner of 18th St.), P ARK SLOPE 

FREE PHONE CONSULTATION 

All Landlord & Tenant Matters Emergency Service 24 hrs / 7 days a week 

Residential & Commercial • Illegal Apt. Problems • Holdovers Evictions (non-payments) • Real Estate Closings Nuisance Tenants • Personal Injury 

(718) 369-5805 R49 

Remington Jaz Networks 

(718) 385-1685 Free Site Survey, Estimate and Consultation Microsoft, Dell, Acer and Novell Certifications 

## COMPUTER & N ETWORK PROBLEMS SOLVED !

Home Office School Call Repairs Training Internet 

R30 

Accountants & Tax Services DOUGLAS CONDON 

Certified Public Accountant 

• tax planning and preparation • accounting, auditing • advisory services • co-op and condo management 

Park Slope Office 718-788-3913 R40 

Attorneys SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY APPEALS 

FREE OFFICE CONSULTATION NO RECOVERY, NO FEE Stewart J. Diamond, Esq. 111 Livingston Street, Suite 1110 Brooklyn, New York 11201 

(718) 210-4738 R50 

BANKRUPTCY • REAL ESTATE STOP FORECLOSURE RICHARD S. FEINSILVER, ESQ. 

FREE CONSULTATION BROOKLYN: 111 Livingston Street 

800-479-6330 R29 

Law Offices of Ana Bunescu & ASSOCIATES 

Personal Injuries, Workers’ Compensation, Wills, Estate, Probate, Divorce, Immigration, Real Estate 

FREE CONSULTATION 

225 Broadway: (212) 587-0563 7117 12th Ave., Bklyn: (718) 745-0066 Spanish speaking: (718) 545-8358 bet. 9am-2pm R43 

Jeffrey D. Karan Attorney at Law 

32 Court St., Suite 1702 718-260-9150 

• Wills & Estates • Planning • Family Law • Real Estate • Landlord • Tenant • Commercial Litigation • Accidents • Malpractice • Divorce 

Evenings and home visits available R31 

PERSONAL INJURY MEDICAL MALPRACTICE Exclusive Plaintiff’s Practice Automobile – Construction – Products General Negligence 

800-675-8556 GREGORY S. GENNARELLI, ESQ 

The Woolworth Building 233 Broadway – Suite 950 New York, NY 10279 * free consultation GSGennarelli@Salsack.com 

R26-04 

Capital Available Restaurants & Retailers Solve Business Cash Flow Problems 

Our unique no hassle program gives you up to $75,000 cash now against your future credit card sales. No fees or collateral. Easy & fast approval. 

CALL NOW FOR DETAILS... 718.714.1612 advanceme, inc. R24 

Help Wanted 

Mental Health 

EAP PROFESSIONAL (Brooklyn/Manhattan) Magellan Behavioral Health is currently seeking a FULL-TIME Employee Assistance profession-al to provide on-site counseling & consultation services in NYC 3 days a week and to the United States Coast Guard on Staten Island two days a week. Position requires a Masters degree in the mental health field, licensed at an independent level & 3 yrs. post Masters expe-rience. Experience in assessment & brief therapy as well as chemi-cal dependency assessment &treatment required. EAP experi-ence a plus. An understanding of area resources, basic computer skills & good clinical case management skills are necessary. Magellan Behavioral Health offeres a competitive salary & benefits package. Please a p p l y o n l i n e a t : 

www.magellanhealth.com or submit resume in confidence to: 

Magellan Behavioral Health, Job Code: BROK/427HS/NYUP, P.O. Box 549265, Suite 304, W a l t h a m , M A 0 2 4 5 3 , F a x : ( 7 8 1 ) 6 6 3 - 3 7 7 8 ; E - m a i l : m a g e l l a n @ h i re s y s t e m s . c o m 

EOE m/f/d/v 

Magellan Behavioral Health 

R26 

Full Time Office Manager/ Receptionist 

For busy remodeling contrac-tors office in Bay Ridge. Needs exp. in MS Word, Excel, etc. Must be very organized. Fax resumes to: 

(718) 836-1095 R26 

Youth Programs Director 

Prospect Park Alliance seeks F.T. Youth Programs Director. Candidates should be experienced in youth development, program management. Have experi-ence with youth organizations. Requirements: AA/BA Degree, five years experience supervising youth 14-21, experience with Youth Development theory, group management skills. Fax cover letter & resume to D. Queeley (718) 965-8926 . L26 

Help Wanted 

Broker/Owner Operator 

Assist Owner/Developer Opening New Residential and Commercial Office in Park Slope 

fax resume (718) 965-5054 R26 

Certified Aerobics Instructor 

Boro Park location. One Thursday, 10am class – may become addi-tional classes. 

Call (718) 376-1669 lv msg 

W26 

CAREGIVERS 

Non Medical, Bonded Live-Ins and Overnights Call: Home Instead Sr. Care 

(718) 979-8243 R26 

BOOKKEEPER/ OFFICE MANAGER 

Women’s Discount Designer Ladies’ store in Park Slope seeks organized individual with mini-mum 5 years experience in A/R, A/P & Office management. Responsibilities include supervis-ing staff, bank recs, cash disp, payroll, bfts admin, correspon-dence. Knowledge of Windows & Quickbooks Pro a plus. Excellent benefits including 401(k), Medical, Dental, Employee Discounts, Paid Sick/Vacation. Call for appt. at 718-768-5400 ext. 25. Fax resumes to 718-768-5404 or email to jobs@aarons.com . 

# AARON’S 627 5 th Avenue at 17 th Street Park Slope Brooklyn NY 11215 

R26 

Sub Contractors Needed 

Reliable and experienced (Min 5 years). Must have own tools, vehicle and comp insurance. Steady jobs in Manhattan and Brooklyn. Kitchen, Bathroom, etc. Fax Resume (718) 836-1095 . R27 

Hair Stylist Wanted 

For Full Service Salon in Greenpoint. Must be licensed. 

(718) 349-1240 L25 

Computers For Fast Computer relief, Call 

DOCTOR DATA 

We make house and office calls to repair, upgrade or install any brand computer. Also installs network. Our 15 yrs of exp. will solve your computer problems. Our prices are reasonable and we guarantee our work. Call for a free phone consultation. 

718-998-3548 

email: info@drdata.com 

world wide web: http://www.drdata.com R25-50 

Call the TECH VET! 

HE MAKES HOUSE CALLS! Flat Rate and Hourly Service MAC and Windows 

646-932-3744 

Yes, that’s a local call! 

Copiers INTRODUCTORY JUNE SPECIAL $179.00 / month 

Color Copier/printer includes delivery, installation and one-year warranty on the printer. The print head has a 5-year war-ranty. Monthly payments are based on a 36-month lease. $179.00/mo. Contact: Marc Bochner, Acc’t Executive Konica Business Technologies, Inc. Phone: 800-283-9360 x259 Facsimile: 212-972-4154 R33 

Financial Services Financial Advisors 

Registered investment advisors will assist you with investment & financial planning needs. Whether investing for retirement, education or profit, our professional and personalized service will help you achieve your financial goals. 

WALNUT INVESTMENT SERVICES LLC 

1018 8th Avenue, Park Slope Tel: 788-4875 e-Mail: manager@walnutfund.com Or visit our web site at: www.walnutfund.com R27 

Typing 

Call BUTLER SECRETARIAL IF YOU WANT QUICK ACCURATE SERVICE 

• Academic & Professional Papers • Manuscripts • Resumes • Etc. 

(718) 369-0078 

Fax: (718) 832-1615 e-mail too! 

R26-17 

Writing Coach 

L33 

Tracks Across the Page 

Writing Consultant 

Workshops in Journal Keeping and Memoir 

Do you need help? 

• Reports – Grants • Correspondence • Applications • Personal Statements • Brochures • Pamphlets 

Experienced – Personable 

ELOISE KLEIN MFA (718) 624-4939 

When how it’s written makes the difference 

computer catch cold? 

Interviews Guaranteed Customized Resumes, Cover Letters and Interview Coaching 

By Certified Employment Interview Professional 

FREE RESUME ASSESSMENT 

First Impression 

CAREER SERVICES 

Convenient Park Slope Location 

917-576-2821 Active Member of PARW/CC & CMI L39 

# DEADLINE! For ALL Categories - Tuesdays, 4pm 

## What, When and How of our Classified Ads 

• The Brooklyn Classifieds appear in neighborhood editions of The Brooklyn Papers published during the week in which an ad runs. • Ads ordered and paid for by deadline are generally included in the next edition. But sometimes ads may be held for an additional week, based on production and space considerations. The Brooklyn Papers shall be under no liability for its failure for any cause to insert an advertise-ment. • Once ordered, a Classified Ad may NOT be cancelled before its first insertion. • Ads ordered to run more than one week may be cancelled after the first week. However, while the ad may be cancelled, NO REFUND OR CREDIT will be issued. • Contract rates for Classified Ads are “rate holders” — no skipped issues permitted. • Special “package price” and other discounted multiple insertion rates require prepayment for the total number of weeks ordered, may not be cancelled and may not be short rated to achieve a lower rate on renewal. • In the event of an error in a published ad, please contact The Brooklyn Papers by the first dead-line following publication date. 

## To advertise call 

# 834-9161 ask for classified 

Monday through Friday 9am-5pm 

Help Wanted 

Office Assistant 

Bay Ridge location, general office duties, light bookkeep-ing, QuickBooks. Flexible hours, benefits, oppt. for immediate advancement. 

Call (718) 833-0650. Fax (718) 836-4455. R27 

Medical Sales Reps 

Rapidly growing medical facility in Brooklyn needs dynamic sales per-sons. Exclusive territory & product. $15 hr plus high commission. bilingual a must. 

(718) 851-1662 L26 

Holistic Home Care Agency Inc. 

Hiring HHA, PCAs, LPNs FT/per diem positions Excellent Pay 

Call (718) 251-8917 Fax (718) 251-4380 L25 

P/T Help Wanted 

PT Educator 

College Educated child-friendly person needed for expanding learing enhance-ment program (see www.nyvision.org). Will train. Work at home $17/hr. Improve a chiild’s learning ability. 

Call (212) 265-4609 L26 

Certified Teacher 

Wanted Part time for local Bay Ridge pre-school. 

(718) 745-6908 L26 

Income Opportunites 

An Extraordinary Business Opportunity 

B i l l i o n $ N Y S t o c k E x c h a n g e Corporation with Lee Iacocca offers 100 thousand franchise-like “Distributorships” for new home business owners. Earn $5,000 to $15,000 plus monthly. Enroll now! Free business briefing. Call, Sayesman Home Business Group: 

1 (800) 844-8533 . R35 

$500 LOAN CALL NOW! 

Cash Tomorrow In Your Checking Account. Need Income of $1500/month. Call Easycash, Member FDIC. 1-800-220-4506. www.moneybyfax.com. W28 

Recent HS Grads (18+)/College Students 

Fun, Food, Chicks, Guys, Drinks, Dates, Clothes 

All costs money, so get a job. 

$18.25 base-appt. FT/PT shifts 

We also award scholarships. Positions are being filled fast. 

Bensonhurst 331-7900 Park Slope 832-7100 Midwood 839-0900 R35 

It is suggested that companies be researched before sending any money. Long distance rates may apply. 

Autos for Sale 1994 Ford Van (350) 

10 passenger with wheelchair lift. 60k miles. $6,000 nego-tiable. 

(718) 748-0650 x119 

R26 

Brooklyn 

## Foy House 

Bed and Breakfast in the heart of Park Slope 

(718) 636-1492 

By appointment only 

R29 

## Honey’s Home 

An Inviting Friendly and Relaxing Place to be while visitng Brooklyn, New York. A home away from home. 

Our phone (718) 434-7628 See us at www.honeysbedandbreakfast.com 

R31 

Child Care Available 

Sunflower Family Group Childcare 

A g e s 3 m o s. - 4 y r s. 8 a m - 6 p m . Organic meals included. Backyard, music classes. Licensed. Carroll Gardens & Park Slope. Call Ilene. 

(718) 488-8562 R25-22 

Responsible, honest, caring babysitter 

seeks FT job. Excellent references. Call Adanna (718) 241-3408. R26 

Caring, reliable mature woman seeks FT/PT position as babysitter. 6 yrs exp. Excellent references. (718) 375-7488. 

L28 

Nanny Housekeeper. Fixed full time live in or live out position. Flexible, reli-able, and energetic. Great references. 

(718) 675-4985 . L26 

Cleaning Svcs Available 

Est. 1980 “Old Fashioned Irish Cleaning” 

Specializing in: 

• All Phases of Domestic Service • Residential and Commercial 

Gift Certificates Available 

718-279-3334 R29 

ENLIGHTENED CLEANING SERVICE , I NC .

Complete Cleaning Move Out/Move In Clean-Up 

Office • Residential • General 

“Let us maintain your hallways” 718-573-4165 

Bonded R32 

ALWAYS SPRING CLEANING SERVICE 

Reliable, responsible, reasonable rates. $50 and up. 

(718) 499-2971 (347) 249-3342 

Apts • Houses • Offices R31 

CLEANING LADY AVAILABLE 

No Cleaning Exclusions 

“I’ll give my best to your mess...” 

(917) 697-7133 R27 

TRUE CHOICE CLEANING SERVICE 

APARTMENT • STUDIOS HOUSES • OFFICES • BOATS 

CORPORATE ACCOUNTS WELCOME. 

We handle all aspects of cleaning. FREE ESTIMATES. For reliable service: 

Call (718) 826-0500 L29 R20 

CLEANING SERVICES 

CHILDREN & CHILD CARE 

## BED & BREAKFAST AUTOMOTIVE 

Caricatures 

Have tux will travel 

PARTIES & SPECIAL OCCASSIONS OFFICE OR HOME GRAND OPENINGS WEDDINGS BAR/BAT MITZVAHS GIFTS (VIA) PHOTOS CUSTOM T-SHIRTS 

(917) 704-1160 

VIC CANTONE P.O. BOX 1039, NYC, NY 10116-1039 

R28 

Parties 

## Party Room 

Accomodates 75 people Parties for all occassions 

(917) 723-8742 R35 

RRRR I III C CCC O OOOThe Party Clown & Magician 

Birthday parties and special occasions — Adults & Kids. Comedy, Magic, Balloon Sculpting, Puppets, Games, M.C., Comic Roastings. 

718-434-9697 917-318-9092 R36 

CLOWNS • MAGICIANS 

All Cartoon Characters Balloons Sculpture • Face Painting 

Best Services for your Parties & Special Occasions 

Tel. (718) 596-1518 Se Habla Español 

L32 

# PARTY ROOM FOR CHILDREN & ADULTS. YOU DO NOTHING. ENTERTAINMENT TO GO. DJS FOR ALL OCCASIONS. 

KPS 718-238-6733 R26 

Arts 

Painting and Drawing Lessons 

Private Instruction. All ages and levels welcome. Will come to your home! 

(718) 499.1494 L28 

Glass courses at workspace11 

Learn glassmaking techniques at Williamsburg glass studio. Night class-es and weekend workshops, Summer & Fall courses. Call (718) 218-7643 or email glasscourses@workspace11.com 

R32 

Martial Arts 

TRADITIONAL AIKIDO SCHOOL 

• Aikido means, “way of harmony with the unviersal force.” • Training improves flexibility, muscle tone, endurance, stimulation and direction of Ki (universal energy). 

tel 917.576.9149 www.brooklynaikikai.com R25 

Music 

Park Slope DRUM LESSONS 

Explore Drumming through various styles of music: Rock, Jazz, Hip-Hop, Pop, Latin, etc. All ages & levels. Lesson space provided. No drum kit required. Affordable Rates. 

(718) 832-6598 R32 

Flute Lessons 

22 Years of Experience 

Many Styles • All ages Welcome PARK SLOPE AREA 718-399-2402 R34 

SLOPE MUSIC 

Making Musicians for 30 Years 

Most Instruments: Jazz/Voice Jazz • Classical • Folk Call for free interview Charles Sibirsky, Jazz Pianist 

Msg. 718-768-3804 271 9th St. P34 

BROOKLYN AIKIKAI 

PARK SLOPE ?

## INSTRUCTION 

BuBuLuBu Entertainment 

## ENTERTAINMENT Tutoring 

Test Prep/Tutor 

SAT • LSAT • GRE GMAT • SCIENCE HS EXAMS ENGLISH & MATH Tutoring 

All ages; 6 yrs. exp. w/references Flex hrs./rates Bklyn or Mhttn. Get the results you need! 

Eric (718) 398-7509 R38 

IMPROVE STUDY SKILLS 

Private tutoring in your home or my office. Experienced teacher with master’s degree. Children & adults. 

Bob Blumenthal 718-499-4787 

Reasonable Rates R42 

In school this summer? 

I can help you earn better grades. All ages welcome. Specializing in Math, Science and English. 

Call (718) 288-5470 R29 

TUTORING Math, Science, Accounting All Levels 

Private tutoring in your home. Grades 5-12, GED, elementary and intermediate algebra. All Boroughs. Flex hours, including weekends. 

PLEASE CALL (646) 267-8410 R25-50 

Support for your child. Reading, Writing, Math. 

Science, Social Studies, English. Ages 6-13. Special needs welcomed. NYS certified teacher. MS. Ed. 

Call (718) 369-8205 R31 

TUTORING ALL SUBJECTS • ALL GRADES Expert Test Preparation 

40 years helping primary, secondary college and adult students to excel 

Reasonable Rates • Home Lessons 

Certified Tutoring Service, Inc.® (718) 434-0944 MC/VISA/AmEx 

R40 

Yoga 

## YOGA KIDS ®

Yoga class for children of all abilities. Located at Creative Arts Studio, 310 Atlantic Ave. (off Smith St.) 5 week summer series, children 3 to 5 yrs old. Tues: July 9, 16, 23, 30 and Aug. 6th from 3:30-4:15pm. 

Contact: Joan Maguire (718) 858-7520 

Certified: CYKF/Early Childhood Teacher R29 

Merchandise For Sale Piano for Sale 

Apartment size grand Kimball piano. Asking $1000 or best offer. Good condition, one owner. Call (718) 855-2222, leave message. R25 

Soundproof booth for recording. 7-1/2 ft. high x 3-1/2ft. deep x 6ft. long. On wheels, glass window. Worth $1,500, selling for $900 or best offer. Nancy. 

(718) 834-9161 ext. 112 . W27 

Vintage claw foot cast iron bathtub. 

Original porcelain, good condition. Will deliver to Brooklyn address. $275. (917) 957-8623 . L26 

Beautiful Jennifer Convertibles Sleeper Sofa for sale. Goose down cushions – Great condition. Best price. (646) 567-8555 . L26 

Bookshelves, dishes, TVs, clothing, furniture at LOW prices. Call Denise for details. (718) 788-3952 . R27 

Merchandise Wanted 

R26-17 

Ira Mitchell’s Antique Corner 

## WE BUY 

Anything old! One piece or entire estate. TOP PRICES PAID! 

(212) 685-2632 R25 

BUYING OLD FURNITURE 

Dining & bedrooms, odds & ends, statues, vases, bronze & marble items, Oriental Rugs, Paintings, Etc. 

TOP PRICES • ALL CASH CALL JOHN MARTIN 718-843-1873 R34 

## TOP CASH PAID 

ANTIQUES WANTED: 

silver, paintings, china, porcelain, jewelry, chandeliers, lighting, oriental rugs, furniture, ancient artifacts, etc. 

We buy entire estates. Clean outs. We come to you! 

(800) 530-0006 (212) 751-0009 

R29 

Lic. Massage 

Brooklyn’s best kept secret 

# Yvonne’s Licensed massage at 1696 Flatbush Ave. If you or someone you love needs massage therapy for poor cir-culation, edema, anxiety, stress, or arthritis. Experienced Hands. 

(718) 421-7100 R34 

## PERSONAL CARE 

# L(.)(.)K! OLD CLOCKS & WATCHES WANTED 

by collector. Regardless of condition 

Highest prices paid 212-517-8725 

## MERCHANDISE 

To advertise in 

## BBu us si in ne es ss s S Se er rv v i i c c e e s s

Call (718) 834-9161 

CALL TO ADVERTISE (718) 834-9350 

$500 LOAN CALL NOW! 

Cash Tomorrow In Your Checking Account. Need Income of $1500/month. 

Call Easycash, Member FDIC 1-800-220-4506 

www.moneybyfax.com W29 8 July 1, 2002 THE BROOKLYN PAPERS • WWW .B ROOKLYN PAPERS .COM 

Air Conditioning 

DAN’S NOT A LOT OF MONEY$ ROOM AIR CONDITIONERS 

Sales • Repairs All Installations 

ALWAYS ON TIME / Call Til Midnight 980-9019 DAYS • EVES • WEEKENDS Free Information W40 

Architects 

AWARD WINNING LICENSED 

ARCHITECT & INTERIOR DESIGNER • From Conception to Completion 

Residential, Commercial, Manufacturing Alterations & New Buildings 

• Realistic Estimates & Time Schedules • Construction Management • Expediting Approvals & Permits 

Department of Buildings & Landmarks 

• Zoning Analysis & Property Potential 

To buy or not buy 

Martin della Paolera ARCHITECT 

65 Saint Felix Street Brooklyn NY 11217 TEL (718) 596-2379 

FAX (718) 596-2579 

EMAIL felix63@aol.com UFN 

Bathrooms EASTECH BATHROOMS & RENOVATIONS 

CERAMICS • QUARRY TILE • JACUZZIS 

FREE ESTIMATES 

718-875-1200 

License# 1068550 R48 L26/26-21 

Bathtub Refinishing 

FREE ESTIMATES • FREE COLOR MATCH 

Call Today 4 Your Amazing Savings 

5816 New Utrecht Ave. Bklyn, NY 11219 

Tel: (718) 871-7677 Fax: (718) 871-2229 R29 

Carpet Cleaning A & J Carpet Co. 

Upholstery Cleaning & Professional Carpet Cleaning 

Pet Stains • Floods • Wood Floors Waxed & Refinished (212) 831-1189 

Affordable Prices • Eves & Weekends 

R26-03 

Closets 

R26-11 

Construction NYRM CONSTRUCTION CO. 

General Contracting & Repairs Houses, Apartments & Offices COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTAIL. Complete interior renovations. Renovations/complete finished base-ments. Ceramic and marble work, bathroom/kitchen, hardwood floors. Framing/sheetrock install windows, doors, taping, painting. Free esti-mates. Licensed and Insured. Call now. 

(718) 847-7233 

E-MAIL: NYRM1768@AOL.COM R35 

QUALITY CONSTRUCTION 

Carpentry • Painting • Tile Work 

FREE ESTIMATES 

Reasonable Prices 

(718) 336-7969 R24 R24/26-16 

BROOKLYN CONSTRUCTION 

Painting Interior & Exterior • Master Painting • Plastering • Taping • Carpentry • Cement Work 

FREE ESTIMATES 

(718) 437-4221 Mazba (917) 478-6682 Solomon (718) 275-1509 R30 

Three generations • 23 years of quality honest work 

Kitchens • Bathrooms • Basements Cement Work • Carpentry • A/C Sys. Cabinets • Iron Work • Roofing Water Proofing • Plaster • Painting 

1 (800) 926-6955 

HIL # 0838887 • INSURED 

more than just closets... 

custom closets & wardrobe design furniture & office design 

www.closetsbydg.com tel 718.624-0328 

license # 1036367 

Amazing Reglazing 

CUSTOM BATHROOMS SHOWERS & JACUZZIS MARBLE & CERAMIC TILES WATER FILTERS & SYSTEMS COMPLETE RENOVATIONS 

• FREE ESTIMATES •

LIC. COOP-CONDO INS. 

WE KNOW CONSTRUCTION INC. 

1 (800) 283-9435 (718) 930-5222 

Construction 

# KNOCKOUT Renovations 

Lots of References! QR Magazine’s “Top 500 Contractors” 

COMPLETE RENOVATIONS, KITCHENS, BATHROOMS, 

ALL WORK GUARANTEED 

Licensed by Consumer Affairs 

(718) 745-0722 www.knockoutrenovation.com 

R40 R26-22 

Renovations & Restorations All Home Improvement Needs Kitchen • Bath • Paint • Carpentry Fully equipped with all trades 

ELECTRICAL • PLUMBING • CARPENTRY 

Equipped with 

DESIGNERS • ARCHITECTS • EXPEDITERS 

“You’ve tried all the rest, now go with the best.” Do it right the first time. 

17 YEARS EXPERIENCE LICENSED • BONDED • INSURED 

718-965-1857 or 718-692-7163 

R26-07 

# Timeless CONSTRUCTION & RESTORATION CORP. 

Complete interior renovation specialist continuing two genera-tions of fine craftsmanship 

Specialties include: 

* Kitchens and Baths * Custom Cabinetry and Woodwork * Plastering * All Flooring and Tile * Painting and Faux Finishes * Finished basements and additions 

Licensed and Insured 

(718) 979-0913 R29/26-18 R32 

S&D Construction 

Specializing in concrete. Sidewalks and driveways and all types of concrete work. 

(917) 676-5537 R25 

BAUEN CONSTRUCTION COMPLETE RENOVATIONS KITCHENS • BATHS BASEMENTS • ADDITIONS CARPENTRY • PAINTING WINDOWS • SHEETROCK FULLY INSURED FREE ESTIMATES (718) 668-2063 BUILDING OUR REPUTATION 

R26-18 

Contractors 

General Contractor 

kitchens • baths • painting FREE ESTIMATES / GOOD RATES 

LICENSED & INSURED. Eric (718) 399-2183 

R35 

GENERAL CONTRACTOR 

Jonathan’s Innovative Builders Corporation (718) 727-5137 

Specializing in all aspects of commercial and residential renovations such as: 

* Lowering Basement Floors * Extensions / Additions * Complete Kitchen & Bathroom * Finished Basements and more. 

Free estimates, all work guaranteed. Licensed & Fully Insured 

HIC License #0951359 L33 

ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN INTERIOR RENOVATIONS 

COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL 

CUSTOM RENOVATION S PECIALIST LICENSED & B ONDED #0836623 

FULLY INSURED TRIUMPH CONSTRUCTION 

1 (917) 847-8307 

# EAGLE 

CONTRACTORS General Renovations Interior & Exterior 

Roofing • Waterproofing Painting • Plastering Carpentry • Sheetrock Tile • Stucco • Pointing Scaffold • Brick & Cement Work 

License # 904813 • Insured FREE ESTIMATES 

718-686-1100 

Contractors 

TRY US FIRST!!! 

Doshen Construction Corp. Interior, Exterior Renovation Licensed Insured & Bonded 

1(866)2-DOSHEN (236-7436) 

ALL WORK GUARANTEED L22/43 

HOME IMPROVEMENT CO. 

Specializing in Brownstone Renovations. Also: Brick-laying, Painting, Carpentry, Roofing, etc. 

Lic# 1094488 

Tel: (718) 469-8165 Cell: (347) 245-7954 

L26-08 

Roofing ¥ B athrooms ¥ K itchensCarpentry ¥ A ll R enovations ¥ B rickworkDormers ¥ E xtensions ¥ Wi ndowsW a terproofing

Free Estimates, Licensed & Insured 718-276-8558 R35 

Decks 

# DECKS 

by Bart 

R OOF ¥ GARDEN ¥ TERRAC E 

Fences Too! • Free Estimates Call Bart: 15+ years experience 

We build year round Plan Ahead 

(718) 284-8053 800-YES-4-DECK 

Design Assist./Archit. Enginr. www.decksbybart.com R26-17 

Electricians 

R E S I D E N T I A L & C O M M E RCIAL 

Install Fixtures, Ceiling Fans, Outdoor Receptacles, Motion Sensors. Running TV & Phone Cables. Electrical Wiring, Circuit Breakers, Air Conditioning, Electric Heating. 

MBM ELECTRIC CORP (718) 434-1042 R28 L37 

Serving the Homes & Businesses of Brownstone Brooklyn 

Lighting • Power • Meters Intercoms • Phone • Data Licensed & Insured/ Call for free estimate 

(718) 222-2444 R26 

## ALECTRA INC. 

Have an electrical problem? 

No job too big, no job too small! 

Call me. Anthony Illiano 

LICENSED ELECTRICIAN 

718-522-3893 R26-12 

JOHN E. LONERGAN Licensed Electrican (718) 875-6100 (212) 475-6100 R30 R25 

Petri Electric 

“ALWAYS ON THE MOVE” 

Licensed Electrical Contractor. Wiring for light, heat & power. 220 Volt Upgrade. Intercom • Bells. 

1 (646) 739-1404 R39 

Exterminators 

## USA EXTERMINATORS RESIDENTIAL • COMMERCIAL 

“Safest Methods Used” 

• Termite • Flea Control • Roaches • Rats • Bed Bugs • Wasps • Moths • Bats • Hornets • Ticks • Bees • Rodent Proofing • Squirrels • Termite Inspections, FHA, VA Inspections 

718-832-0900 

Senior Citizen Discount $15 OFF Any Initial Visit $100 OFF Any Termite Treatment 

R29/35 

TERMITE EXPERTS 

Licensed & Insured 

718-996-6588 

FREE ESTIMATES • LEAVE MESSAGE 

ELECTRICIAN 

BERGER QUALITY ELECTRIC 

A Norway Electric 

## Licensed Electrician 24/7 Emergency Service Serving all of Brooklyn 

Maintenance Contracts and Residential 

All Major Credit Cards 10% Senior Citizen Discount 10% Off First Time Customer 

718-596-7177 

Chris Mullins Contracting 

MORGAN’S 

Floor Maintenance D & K FLOOR SERVICE, INC. 

Parquet and wood floors sanded, repaired, installed & refinished. Carpets steam cleaned & shampooed professionally. Tile floors stripped & waxed 

718-720-2555 R45 

ACE FLOOR & CONSTRUCTION 

Floor Sanding • Installation & Repair • Stain Decorator Colors • Painting • Ceramic Tile 

Work Guaranteed 5% discount - 2nd coat free (718) 363-2593 Beeper (917) 219-0146 W26 

SUNFLOORING 

Sanding • Refinishing • Repairs References Available • Free Estimates • Reasonable Prices 

(718) 398-8180 (917) 466-2718 Ask for Tony R35 

WOOD FLOOR S P E C I A L I S T S 

Insured/Bonded 

Sand • Stain • Bleach • Pickle Installation and Repairs Reasonable. Free Estimates 

718-321-0635 or 1-800-870-0635 R26/26-22 

Handyman CALL NED 

Plastering • Roofing • Sheetrock Ceramic Tile • Carpentry Cement Work • Painting Wallpaper • FREE ESTIMATES 718-871-1504 R33 R40 

Handyman Painter 

Clean & neat painting Tile Repairs • Regrouting and any other Home Repairs 

REASONABLE PRICES (917) 207-8317 

sammythehandyman@Ocatch.com R26 

Heating A&D Heating and Air Conditioning 

Quality Workmanship 24 Hour Emergency Service Servicing All Brands All Jobs Guaranteed Fully Insured & Licensed 

(718) 645-3541 UFN 

Home Improvement COLIN-HARRISON INC. 

TEL: (718) 434-2263 BP: (917) 429-5053 

FREE ESTIMATES 

ALUMINUM SIDING. PLUMBING CARPETRY. ELECTRICAL. PANELING MASONRY & FLOOR MAINT. R31 

Kosher Kitchens We ’ll Kosher your kitchen 

and toivel your dishes. Call Nationwide: 

1-888-GO-KOSHER (888-465-6743) UFN 

Landscaping/Gardening 

Landscape - Garden Service Annuals - Perennials, Herbs Maintenance - General Clean up Brownstone Yards - Terraces - Co-ops 

Marilyn Manning 718-753-9741 R26-16 

Locksmith 

W50 

> MasterCard
> ®®
> AMERICAN EXPRESS
> ®

“IT’S SPRING” Wake up Your Garden 

# CALL STAN 

* Dependable, reliable and reasonable rates * Plastering & Skim Coating * Painting & Electrical * All Home Repairs * Sheetrock & Plumbing 

(718) 768-7802 (347) 623-1578 

KBM Handyman Specials - Contracting 

Plumbing • Painting • Heating Carpentry • Carpet Cleaning Sewer Cleaning • Scrubbing Flooring • Waxing • Demolition Locksmith • General Cleaning 

F R E E ESTIMAT E 

763-0379 licensed, insured L50 

Movers (Licensed) 

R46 

Dave ’s D.J. Moving & Storage Available 

Written Binding Estimates Available. Commercial and residential. We carry building insurance. All furniture padded Free. Courteous, reliable service. Weekends avail., packing supplies, van service. Serving Bklyn for over 10 years. 

(718) 843-4417 

Lic. and Ins. DOT #32241 83 Davenport Ct. Howard Beach, NY 11414 

R18/21-29 

JUNIOR TRUCKING AND MOVING No job too big or too small 

Reliable • Experienced • Licensed New York DOT #T34964 Free Estimate Call Now 

Phone: 718-284-3583 Cell: 917-846-5348 L34 R24 L26-14 

ALPINE MOVING & STORAGE 

Long Distance Specialist. Low, Low Prices. Daily Trips to Florida. Weekly Trips to California. Professional Reliable Movers. Free Box Delivery. Free Estimates. 1 Month Free Storage. Fully Insured. U.S. D.O.T. #615388 • ICC #295107 

Call 718-788-0600 200 10th St., Bklyn L25 

Truckers 

1-2-3 Man with Van/Truck 

Any job, big or small Tristate Area Reliable,experienced,guaranteed. Low Low Rates! 

Call John (718) 543-1934 Cell: 1 (646) 339-3160 L29 

Sam ’s Transportation 

15 Passenger Van + Mini Van 

Light Moving – All 5 Boroughs 

New Jersey, Connecticut and Atlantic City 

917-731-4826 L43 

Coast Wide Trucking 

Trucking & Warehousing Pick up and Delivery Same day Delivery Low Rates 

(718) 499-0478 R28 

Painting 

Plaster Restoration 

Ornamental • Skim Coating Wallpaper • Custom Painting Stripping 

(718) 783-4868 

Demetrious 

25 years in Park Slope R36 R49 R48 

Master Pa inter

EXCELLENT PAINTING & PAPER HANGING 

OVER 25 Years Exp. INSURED / FREE EST 

Call Simon 718-763-3954 

US DOT#796162 

MOVING 

Low Low Rates Experts on all kinds of moving Free Estimates 

(718) 627-9896 INFINITY

Movers (Licensed) Painting Y and R Competitive Painting 

Remodeling. All types of painting, plastering, wallpaper – hanging and removing. Some carpentry work. Reasonable and reliable. 

FREE ESTIMATES 

(718) 769-0236 R25 

Fully I nsured Free E stimatesOWNER OPERATED To p Q uality Wo rk, D ependable S erviceand a job that will last!¥ P ainting ¥ S kim C oating ¥ P lastering¥ Wa llpaper R emoval ¥ S pecializing i nFaux F inishing a nd D ecorative P ainting¥ Stain & Va rnishing

Call (718) 332-7041 R34 

Master Plasterer/Painter 

Old Walls Saved 

Repair, Install, Moldings, Skim Coats 

Excellent References 

718-834-0470 R26-17 

TASOS GOFA S PAINTING Inteior/Exterior Painting Wallpaper, Plastering, Taping, Power Washing, Texture Ceilings 

718-253-6544 R35 

rofessional Painting 

Restore old surfaces. Benjamin Moore Paints used. Taping, plastering, wallpaper removal. 

Free Estimates 

Call 718-720-0565 

R26-06 

SUNSHINE , INC. 

NYS Registered 1974 Painter 

718-748-6990 

Int./Ext. • Comm./Resid. 

Painting • Plaster • Sheetrock 

Endorsed by Prof. Painters Assoc. Guaranteed Lowest Prices 

Bonded • Insured • Lic# 0933304 R35/25-34 John Haviaras 

PAINTING Interior/Exterior Painting Taping • Sheetrock Complete Apartment & Home Renovations. Affordable Prices Quality Work • Free Estimates 

718-921-6176 R26-18 

Painting - Plastering Paper Hanging - Glazing 

FREE ESTIMATES/FULLY INSURED 

718-522-3534 R26-25 

Painting & Decorating 

Residential & Commercial Over 20 yrs. Experience Painting, Plastering, Sheetrock, Taping, Floor Scraping, Complete Apartment and Home Renovations. 

Free Estimates 718-238-6718 R25 

Paint Removal 

PSST!! 

Recapture the original beauty of your fine architectural woodwork. We strip-restore-refinish doors, mantels, columns, shutters, banisters with non-toxic, environmentally safe, removers and finishes. Careful consid-erate workmanship since 1959. Call the 

Park Slope Stripping Team @ 718 783-4112 .

w w w.eastendw oodstrippers .com 

R40 

Plastering 

WALSH PLASTERING 

Ornamental Plaster Repaired & Restored 

New Designs Created New Walls and Ceilings Created Creative Plaster Finishes & Specialty Tints Available 

A. Walsh 718-875-3033 R38 

Absolute Plastering Inc. 

Ornamental, run cornice mould, and tinted plaster. Skim coating & domes and vaulted ceilings. 

(718) 322-3436 (917) 412-5593 

Ask for Fitz Custom Design & Restorations R41 

Plumbing 

FREE ESTIMATES Emergencies Welcome 

NYC Master Plumber, Lic #376 

(718) 336-4826 R30 VIOLATIONS REMOVED SEWERS & DRAINS CLEANED BOILERS & HOT WATER HEATERS INSTALLED 

Finishing Touch PAINTING 

Plumbing 

• New Hot water heaters • New faucets installed 

• Boilers repaired • Leaky pipes • Shower bodies 

• All heating repairs & conversions 

• Frozen pipes Thawed • Basements pumped 

• In-line TV inspections 

Specializing in High Pressure Water Jetting 

24 HOURS • 7 DAYS 718-769-5400 718-377-9335 L24/34 R26-19 

Restoration RESTORATIONS 

Done Reasonably and Well 

Carpentry • Built-Ins • Paneling Restoration Work Window Repair • Painting Garden & Landscaping Work 

Ryan & Paul 718-857-3661 R43 

Roofing 

EASTECH 

ROOFING Rubberized – Hot and Cold 

Fully Insured. 15 year guarantee on all rubber roofing 

Free Estimates • 20 yrs. Exp. 

718-875-1200 

License #1068550 R48 R47 

SUPERIOR ROOFING CO. 8805 3rd Ave. Bklyn, N.Y. 11209 

• Hot & Cold Tar - Shingling 

• Rubberize - Steam Cleaning 

• Cement & Brick Work 

718-833-5752 646-261-4805 R26-19 

Valor W. Corp. 

Commercial Residential Interior, Exterior All Types Of Masonry All Types Of Roofing Rubber, Shingle, Built-Up Free Estimates • Licensed/Bonded & Insured 

718-439-6333 L36 

Rubbish Removal 

Rubbishworks 

“THE BETTER ALTERNATIVE ”

INTERIOR / EXTERIOR 

• Rubbish Removal • Basements • Houses • Attics • Residential/Commerical • Real Estates Welcome 

R31 W26 

GREG ’S EXPRESS RUBBISH REMOVAL 

Basements Cleaned • Yards Construction Debris Houses & Stores All appliances removed 

ALL Contractors Welcome! 

Commercial Stores Welcome! Daily Pick-Ups Mini Containers Available 

Serving the Community 

Member Brooklyn Chamber of Commerc ePrompt & Pro fessional ¥ 24hr - 7 day s

718-369-7252 Beeper 917-808-1560 Lic: TWC-L-3413 Fully Insured R26-15 

Roll-Off Container Service Gumball Rubbish Removal 

Container Sizes & Prices 

10 yd $295 + tax 20 yd $495 + tax 30 yd $595 + tax 

Prices reflect services for household goods only: furniture, clothing, appliances. Demolition Debris is additional price. 

Clean out truck 9 yd $325 per load. 

Interior Demolition, Cleanout All major credit cards 

CALL ANYTIME 

718-230-8488 

R26-10 

Rubbish Removal Indoor/Outdoor, Attics, Basements, Garages, etc. Fast, clean, cheap. All Types Cleanouts FREE ESTIMATES • 10% OFF WITH THIS AD 

718-659-1844 

Serving All 5 Boros TOLL FREE: (866) 884-6000 

Schwamberger Contracting 

All Roofing, Rubber, Skylights, Pointing and Basements. 

Excellent References Available 

License #0831318 15th year with Brooklyn Papers 

718-646-4540 1 (347) 385-4696 

NEIGHBORHOOD Sewer & Drain Cleaning Plumbing 

TUBS • SINKS • MAIN SEWER TOILETS • YARD DRAINS 24/7 • Emergency Service 

745-7727 or 848-5654 

$ LOW, LOW, PRICES $  

> ¤¤¤

Steps 

R35 R26-12 

Tree Services G.R. Tree Service FREE ESTIMATES 

• Tree Pruning & Removal 

• Stump Grinding 

• Firewood • Land Clearance INSURED/REGISTERED SENIOR CITIZEN DISCOUNTS 

Call now for LOW special rates! 718-815-7897 

Member National Arborist Association L26 

Four Seasons T R E E S E R V I C E 

718-207-0762 

Free Estimate! 20 Years Experience We Specialize in Tree Pruning for City Trees, Backyards, Gardens. Tree Cabling & Cavities. Tree Removals. R25 

Upholstery 

• Kitchen & dining chairs recovered 

• New foam cushions • Slipcovers 

• Vertical and mini blinds 

• Shop at Home • Free Est. 

Perfect Touch Decorators 

718-263-8383 

Quality Work • Serving the 5 Boros R35 

Waterproofing 

L26 

Windows Quality Replacement Windows and Repairs 

Repair ALL TYPES of windows. Screens and insulated glass. 

Same Day Service • Licensed & Insured Reasonable Rates • Emergency Service 

Call Rene (718) 227-8787 

R36 

Window Washing A royal pane... in the glass. Treat your mom! 

Expert service – reasonable rates. Call now. 

(718) 748-2426 (917) 749-1195 PS - We clean gutters too. 

R33 

Woodwork Restorations 

The professional way to care for and maintain your fine architectural wood-work. Services offered: touch-ups –

clean and refurbish – prepare and recoat – or complete refinishing. Recapture lost beauty and elegance ... showcase the fabulous woodwork details in your home! Our expert craftsman will restore your original doors, stairways, fretwork, win-dows, mantels, columns, archways, wainscot, shutters and built-in cabinets. We are a responsible, and considerate restoration company dedicated to reclaiming the beauty of the original woodwork in your old house. Call us for a free estimate and a no obligation con-sultation today. 

Restoration NEW YORK 

(718) 783-4112 (516) 642-5375 (cell) www.restoreNY.com refinish@optonline.net R44 

BNS CONTRACTING CORP. Waterproofing & Roofing Scaffold Work our Specialty Exterior Maintenance Specialists 

Steam Cleaning • Brick Pointing Water Proofing • Roofing Sidewalk • Stucco • Painting All Kinds of Brick and Cement Work 

Lic# 1083302 Fully Insured Free Estimates (718) 921-4957 

LIVING ROOM FURNITURE REUPHOLSTERED 

Broken or Missing Baluster/Spindles Weak or Broken Steps. (Treads, Stringers or Risers) 

also 

FLOOR SANDING AVAILABLE 

Call: 718-893-4006 

Cee Dee Professional CONTRACTORS 

Heights Woodworking 

Brownstone Staircase Specialists 

• Restoration and Repair 

• Custom Handrails, Newel Posts, Spindles/Balusters, Treads, and Risers in Oak, Pine, and Mahogany 

• Woodcarving 

• We Can Recreate Any Spindle or Moulding In Business Since 1949 

Thousands of Satisfied Customers! 

718-875-7497 

W24-30 

# Visit us at 

# Home IMPROVEMENT
