Title: Trump Backs Plan to Cede Land for Peace in Ukraine

URL Source: https://www.nytimes.com/live/2025/08/16/world/trump-putin-meeting-alaska

Published Time: 2025-08-16T08:55:38.000Z

Markdown Content:
Pinned

Here’s the latest.
------------------

President Trump on Saturday split from Ukraine and key European allies after his summit with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, backing Mr. Putin’s plan for a sweeping peace agreement based on Ukraine ceding territory it controls to Russia, instead of the urgent cease-fire Mr. Trump had said he wanted before the meeting.

Skipping cease-fire discussions would give Russia an advantage in the talks, which are expected to continue on Monday when President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine visits Mr. Trump at the White House. It breaks from a strategy Mr. Trump and European allies, as well as Mr. Zelensky, had agreed to before the U.S.-Russia summit in Alaska.

Mr. Trump told European leaders that he believed a rapid peace deal could be negotiated if Mr. Zelensky agreed to give up the rest of the Donbas region to Russia, even those areas not occupied by Russian troops, according to two senior European officials briefed on the call.

In return, Mr. Putin offered a cease-fire in the rest of Ukraine at current battle lines and a written promise not to attack Ukraine or any European country again, the senior officials said. He has broken similar promises before.

Mr. Trump had threatened stark economic penalties if Mr. Putin left the meeting without a deal to end the war, but he has suspended those threats in the wake of the summit.

The American president’s moves got a chilly reception in Europe, where leaders have time and again seen Mr. Trump reverse positions on Ukraine after speaking with Mr. Putin.

Mr. Trump wrote on Truth Social early on Saturday that he had spoken by phone to Mr. Zelensky and some European leaders after his meeting with Mr. Putin. He claimed “it was determined by all” that it was better to go directly to negotiating a peace agreement without first implementing a cease-fire.

European leaders, publicly and privately, made clear that was not the case. They issued a statement that did not echo Mr. Trump’s claim that peace talks were preferable to a cease-fire. Britain, France, Germany and others threatened to increase economic penalties on Russia “as long as the killing in Ukraine continues.”

Mr. Zelensky, who was left out of the Alaska summit, said in a statement that he and Mr. Trump would on Monday “discuss all of the details regarding ending the killing and the war.”

Here’s what else to know:

*   **Zelensky’s challenge:**Ukraine was left scrambling to piece together what Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had discussed and striving to avoid being sidelined. Mr. Zelensky is heading to Washington on Monday. An official briefed on his call with Mr. Trump and Mr. Zelensky said Kyiv does not understand why the American president suddenly dropped the demand that a cease-fire precede negotiations. Read more ›

*   **European response:** European leaders moved to support Ukraine and voice caution of Russia. They neither endorsed Mr. Trump’s changed stance on how to achieve peace nor openly contradicted it. A virtual meeting between the leaders of France, Britain, and Germany is set for Sunday.

*   **Russia’s advantage:**Mr. Trump’s swing into alignment with Russia’s vision of ending the war came as Moscow’s forces have the upper hand on the battlefield. Discarding the prospect of a cease-fire allows Russia to press that advantage further. Read more ›

Aug. 16, 2025

Prime Minister Mark Carney of Canada praised President Trump for “creating the opportunity to end Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine,” and agreeing to provide security guarantees to Ukraine after a peace deal. He also said Canada would intensify its support for Ukraine and is working closely with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. His statement aligned with much of Europe’s response to the Alaska summit, cautiously avoiding contradicting Trump’s decision to prioritize a sweeping peace deal over an immediate cease-fire, while showing firm support of Ukraine.

Aug. 16, 2025

Putin keeps talking about the ‘root causes’ of the war. What does he mean?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in Moscow in 2024. Mr. Putin has repeatedly used the phrase ”root causes” to articulate Russian demands for ending the war in Ukraine.Credit...Nanna Heitmann for The New York Times

When he appeared onstage with President Trump after their summit in Alaska, and again on Saturday at the Kremlin, President Vladimir V. Putin trotted out what has become a well-worn turn of phrase, declaring that any solution to the war in Ukraine must address its “root causes.”

Mr. Putin has uttered the phrase — “pervoprichiny” in Russian — in just about every conversation concerning the war going back at least to February, when he used it in his first phone call with Mr. Trump after he returned to the presidency. It has become shorthand for the Russian president’s unwavering vision of Ukraine’s future.

Often, he and his deputies use the phrase with little or no explanation, as if its meaning were self-evident. “We are convinced that for the Ukrainian settlement to be sustainable and long-lasting, all root causes of the crisis must be eliminated,” Mr. Putin said on Friday in Alaska, without elaborating.

What exactly is Mr. Putin talking about? The “root causes” refers to Russia’s justification for the invasion of Ukraine — a concoction of Mr. Putin’s grievances over Ukraine’s political and historical choices that is hard to parse even for Eastern European experts.

But at its heart is Mr. Putin’s fixation with NATO’s expansion after the Cold War ended into what he believes should be Russia’s sphere of influence, and his desire to have a pliable, pro-Russia government in Kyiv.

Perhaps the closest Mr. Putin came to defining these root causes of late came in June 2024, when he outlined the conditions that he thought must be met for Russia to enter into a cease-fire agreement with Ukraine.

These included Ukrainian withdrawal from four Ukrainian regions Mr. Putin declared officially part of Russia in September 2022, even though his troops do not control all the territory in any of these regions.Ukraine, he said at the time, must also abandon its long-stated aspirations to join NATO, and the West must lift all sanctions imposed on Russia.

Mr. Putin’s continued use of the phrase, despite the exertions of the Trump administration to bring about the war’s end, suggest that for the Russian president little has changed since he first announced the start of what he described was a “special military operation” in the early hours of Feb. 24, 2022.

The Ukrainian leadership under President Volodymyr Zelensky, which he had hoped to decapitate in the war’s first days and replace with a pro-Russia regime, remains in place. And NATO, the expansion of which Mr. Putin described as an existential threat when he sent troops into Ukraine, has only grown larger, gaining Sweden and Finland, which has a long border with Russia.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

Eight Baltic and Nordic countries, including NATO’s newest members, Finland and Sweden, declared in a unified statement on Saturday that they would continue to arm Ukraine and bolster their own defenses in the face of Russian aggression.

“Putin cannot be trusted,” they wrote in the statement, released a day after President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met with President Trump in Alaska. The statement by a group of countries either bordering Russia or close enough to feel Moscow’s threat acutely was much sharper in tone than one released earlier on Saturday by the European Union, and far from the warm reception Putin received in Alaska. No limitations should be placed on Ukraine’s armed forces nor should Russia have any say in whether Ukraine joins NATO or the European Union, the Baltic and Nordic statement said, dismissing Putin’s central demands.

Aug. 16, 2025

Peter Baker

Peter Baker, the chief White House correspondent and a former Moscow co-bureau chief for The Washington Post, reported from Anchorage.

News Analysis

Trump bows to Putin’s approach on Ukraine.
------------------------------------------

Image

“I’m in this to stop the killing,” President Trump had said on the way to Alaska. He left Anchorage with pictures of him and President Vladimir V. Putin joshing on a red carpet and in the presidential limousine known as the Beast.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

On the flight to Alaska, President Trump declared that if he did not secure a cease-fire in Ukraine during talks with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, “I’m not going to be happy,” and there would be “severe consequences.”

Just hours later, he got back on Air Force One and departed Alaska without the cease-fire he deemed so critical. Yet he had imposed no consequences, and had pronounced himself so happy with how things went with Mr. Putin that he said “the meeting was a 10.”

Even in the annals of Mr. Trump’s erratic presidency, the Anchorage meeting with Mr. Putin now stands out as a reversal of historic proportions. Mr. Trump abandoned the main goal he brought to his subarctic summit and, as he revealed on Saturday, would no longer even pursue an immediate cease-fire. Instead, he bowed to Mr. Putin’s preferred approach of negotiating a broader peace agreement requiring Ukraine to give up territory.

The net effect was to give Mr. Putin a free pass to continue his war against his neighbor indefinitely without further penalty, pending time-consuming negotiations for a more sweeping deal that appears elusive at best. Instead of a halt to the slaughter — “I’m in this to stop the killing,” Mr. Trump had said on the way to Alaska — the president left Anchorage with pictures of him and Mr. Putin joshing on a red carpet and in the presidential limousine known as the Beast.

“He got played again,” said Ivo Daalder, who was ambassador to NATO under President Barack Obama. “For all the promises of a cease-fire, of severe economic consequences, of being disappointed, it took two minutes on the red carpet and 10 minutes in the Beast for Putin to play Trump again. What a sad spectacle.”

Mr. Trump’s allies focused on his plans to convene a three-way meeting with Mr. Putin and President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. “Let me tell you, I’ve never been more hopeful this war can end honorably and justly than I am right now,” Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and a leading hawk on the Ukraine war, said on Fox News Friday night.

The cease-fire that Mr. Trump gave up in Alaska had been so important to him last month that he threatened tough new economic sanctions if Russia did not pause the war within 50 days. Then he moved the deadline up to last Friday. Now there is no cease-fire, no deadline and no sanctions plan.

Image

Ruins left after a Russian strike in Ukraine in June.Credit...David Guttenfelder/The New York Times

Mr. Trump, characteristically, declared victory nonetheless, deeming the meeting “a great and very successful day in Alaska.” After calling Mr. Zelensky and European leaders from Air Force One on the way back to Washington, Mr. Trump said he would now try to broker the more comprehensive peace agreement Mr. Putin has sought.

“It was determined by all that the best way to end the horrific war between Russia and Ukraine is to go directly to a Peace Agreement, which would end the war, and not a mere Ceasefire Agreement, which often times do not hold up,” he wrote on social media on Saturday.

He said that Mr. Zelensky would come to Washington for meetings on Monday to pave the way for a joint meeting with Mr. Putin. “If all works out, we will then schedule a meeting with President Putin,” Mr. Trump said. “Potentially, millions of people’s lives will be saved.”

Mr. Putin’s conditions for such a long-term peace agreement, however, are so expansive that Ukrainian and European leaders are unlikely to go along. Mr. Putin referred to this during his joint appearance with Mr. Trump in Anchorage after their talks, when he spoke about addressing the “root causes” of the war — his term for years of Russian grievances not just about Ukraine but about the United States, NATO and Europe’s security architecture.

“We are convinced that in order for the Ukrainian settlement to be sustainable and long-term, all the root causes of the crisis, which have been discussed repeatedly, must be eliminated; all of Russia’s legitimate concerns must be taken into account; and a fair balance in the security sphere in Europe and the world as a whole must be restored,” Mr. Putin said in Alaska.

Image

President Vladimir V. Putin aims to reestablish Moscow’s sphere of influence not only in former Soviet territory but to some extent further in Eastern Europe.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

In the past, Mr. Putin has insisted that a comprehensive peace agreement require NATO to pull forces back to its pre-expansion 1997 borders, bar Ukraine from joining the alliance and require Kyiv to not only give up territory in the east but shrink its military. In effect, Mr. Putin aims to reestablish Moscow’s sphere of influence not only in former Soviet territory but to some extent further in Eastern Europe.

President Joseph R. Biden Jr., Mr. Zelensky and European leaders rejected similar demands on the eve of the full-scale Russian invasion in 2022. But Mr. Trump appears willing to engage in such a discussion, and since his Friday meeting with Mr. Putin, he has sought to shift the burden for reaching an agreement to Ukraine and Europe.

Mr. Trump has long expressed admiration for Mr. Putin and sympathy for his positions. At their most memorable meeting, held in Helsinki in 2018, Mr. Trump famously accepted Mr. Putin’s denial that Russia had intervened in the 2016 election, taking the former K.G.B. officer’s word over the conclusions of American intelligence agencies.

Much like then, the president’s chummy gathering in Alaska on Friday with Mr. Putin, who is now under U.S. sanctions and faces an international arrest warrant for war crimes, has generated ferocious blowback. Some critics compared it to the 1938 conference in Munich, when Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain of Britain surrendered part of Czechoslovakia to Germany’s Adolf Hitler as part of a policy of appeasement.

Former Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain, once considered the Trump of London, called the Alaska summit meeting “just about the most vomit-inducing episode in all the tawdry history of international diplomacy.”

But Mr. Zelensky and European leaders sought to make the best of the situation. Some were heartened by Mr. Trump’s comments on the way to Alaska suggesting a willingness to have the United States join Europe in offering some sort of security assurance to Ukraine short of NATO membership. He broached that again in his call with them following the meeting.

Image

Prime Minister Keir Starmer of Britain, left, said that “President Trump’s efforts have brought us closer than ever before to ending Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine.”Credit...Pool photo by Ben Stansall

“We support President Trump’s proposal for a trilateral meeting between Ukraine, the U.S.A. and Russia,” Mr. Zelensky said on Saturday. “Ukraine emphasizes that key issues can be discussed at the level of leaders, and a trilateral format is suitable for this.”

Prime Minister Keir Starmer of Britain praised the American president. “President Trump’s efforts have brought us closer than ever before to ending Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine,” he said in a statement. “His leadership in pursuit of an end to the killing should be commended.”

What remains unknown is whether Mr. Trump secured any unannounced concessions from Mr. Putin behind the scenes that would ease the way to a peace agreement in the days to come. Mr. Trump talked about “agreement” on a number of unspecified points, and Mr. Putin referred cryptically to an “understanding” between the two of them.

At the moment, however, it does not look like Mr. Putin has made any move toward compromise, even as Mr. Trump has now given up on his bid for an immediate cease-fire. Before the Alaska summit, Russian forces were pounding Ukraine as part of their relentless yearslong assault. And for now, at least, they will continue.

Aug. 16, 2025

Europe moves to back Ukraine after Trump drops cease-fire demand.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Image

Prime Minister Keir Starmer of the United Kingdom, left, and President Emmanuel Macron of France were among the European leaders who released statements in support of Ukraine after President Trump’s meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Friday.Credit...Pool photo by Leon Neal

Much of Europe moved on Saturday to back Ukraine after President Trump abandoned their joint demand for a cease-fire, but the leaders treaded carefully to not openly contradict Mr. Trump as he aligned himself with Russia’s vision of ending the war.

In a joint statement released after Mr. Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met in Alaska, European leaders welcomed Mr. Trump’s efforts to stop the war and his declaration that America would offer future security guarantees after a peace deal.

But it did not echo the position Mr. Trump espoused on Saturday morning that conclusive peace talks were now preferable to an immediate cease-fire that would set the stage for negotiations.

“As long as the killing in Ukraine continues, we stand ready to uphold the pressure on Russia,” the European leaders wrote. “We will continue to strengthen sanctions and wider economic measures to put pressure on Russia’s war economy until there is a just and lasting peace.”

The statement was signed by leaders from Britain, France, Germany, Finland, Italy, Poland, the European Union and the European Council.

Just days before the summit, Mr. Trump had assured Ukraine and key European allies that he would demand a cease-fire before engaging in serious talks about a more permanent peace deal.

In a complete reversal, Mr. Trump wrote on social media on Saturday that, after speaking with Mr. Putin, he believed a peace agreement would be preferable to a cease-fire. He said he had spoken to European leaders by phone and claimed they shared his view.

In their own statements, European leaders steered clear of reiterating their cease-fire demands, suggesting an attempt to avoid contradicting Mr. Trump.

Keir Starmer, the British prime minister, said in a statement that he welcomed “the openness of the United States, alongside Europe, to provide robust security guarantees to Ukraine as part of any deal.” Then, as in the joint statement, he said he was determined to keep increasing economic pressure on Russia until the war ends.

In a similar vein, President Emmanuel Macron of France praised America’s readiness to contribute. But he said it was essential to “maintain pressure on Russia as long as its war of aggression continues” and to remember “Russia’s well-established tendency not to honor its own commitments.”

Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister who has an amiable rapport with Mr. Trump, said there was a “glimmer of hope” for efforts to end the war in Ukraine.

In her statement, she said Mr. Trump “took up the Italian idea of security guarantees inspired by Article 5 of NATO.” Under this idea, she said, Ukraine would not become part of NATO, but “a collective security clause” would allow it “to benefit from the support of all its partners, including the U.S., ready to take action if it is attacked again.”

Mr. Zelensky, who will visit the White House on Monday, similarly avoided contradicting the U.S. president’s call for a final peace agreement. But he emphasized the “killings must stop as soon as possible.”

In a subsequent statement posted several hours later, Mr. Zelensky warned that the Kremlin could not be trusted and that Russia could try to launch a new wave of attacks.

“Based on the political and diplomatic situation around Ukraine, and knowing Russia’s treachery, we anticipate that in the coming days the Russian army may try to increase pressure and strikes against Ukrainian positions in order to create more favorable political circumstances for talks with global actors,” he said.

Kaja Kallas, the E.U.’s top diplomat, echoed Mr. Zelensky’s sentiments. On social media, she argued that Mr. Putin wanted to drag out negotiations while making no commitment to stop the killing.

“The harsh reality is that Russia has no intention of ending this war anytime soon,” she said.

A unified statement by Nordic and Baltic countries, including NATO’s newest members, Finland and Sweden, was much sharper in tone than the one released earlier by the other European leaders, and a far cry from the warm reception Mr. Putin was given in Alaska by Mr. Trump.

The leaders said they would continue to arm Ukraine and bolster their own defenses in the face of Russian aggression. The statement, by a group of countries either bordering Russia or close enough to feel Moscow’s threat acutely, said there should be no limitations on Ukraine’s armed forces, nor should Russia have any say in whether Ukraine joins NATO or the European Union.

“Putin cannot be trusted,” the leaders said, calling for Ukraine to have a seat at the negotiation table.

“Ultimately it is Russia’s responsibility to end its blatant violations of international law,” the statement said. “Russia’s aggression and imperialist ambitions are the root causes of this war.”

Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

With Putin by his side, Trump repeats his claims of a ‘Russia Hoax.’
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at their news conference in Alaska on Friday.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

With President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia by his side, President Trump on Friday suggested the two men were bonded by a shared ordeal, or what Mr. Trump called the “Russia hoax.”

“We were interfered with by the Russia, Russia, Russia hoax,” Mr. Trump said during remarks after his meeting in Alaska with Mr. Putin.

Mr. Trump was referring to the investigation during his first term into links between Russia and his presidential campaign in 2016. American intelligence agencies concluded that Mr. Putin had ordered an intelligence operation to benefit Mr. Trump. And Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, determined that Russia had carried out a “sweeping and systematic” attack on the 2016 election.

Mr. Trump has long felt aggrieved by the investigation, and on Friday used his meeting with the Russian leader to draw a link between himself and Mr. Putin.

“I think he’s probably seen things like that during the course of his career. He’s seen — he’s seen it all,” Mr. Trump said. “But we had to put up with the Russia, Russia, Russia hoax. He knew it was a hoax, and I knew it was a hoax.”

He added: “What was done was very criminal, but it made it harder for us to deal as a country, in terms of the business, and all of the things that would like to have dealt with. But we’ll have a good chance when this is over.”

Mr. Trump has largely held back from harsh criticism of the Russian president, despite recent complaints about Russian intransigence in ending the war in Ukraine. His affinity for Mr. Putin was on display after Friday’s summit, as the two men put on a show of friendship but left without a breakthrough in peace negotiations.

Aug. 16, 2025

Upon his return to Moscow, Putin convened top Russian officials at the Kremlin to brief them in televised remarks about the meeting in Alaska. He said his conversation with President Trump had been “very frank and informative,” adding that it brought Russia and the United States “closer to the necessary decisions” to end the war in Ukraine. Putin said that he had talked to Trump about the “root causes” of the war — a euphemism for Russia’s historical grievances toward Ukraine that he has used to justify the invasion. Putin said, as he has in the past, that “the elimination of these root causes should be the basis for a settlement.”

Aug. 16, 2025

Zelensky will meet Trump Monday in Washington to discuss ‘all the details.’
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in Rome last month. After the meeting in Anchorage on Friday, Mr. Zelensky spoke with President Trump on the phone, and made plans to travel to Washington this week.Credit...Antonio Masiello/Getty Images

After President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia ended inconclusive peace talks in Alaska, Ukraine was left in a position it knows all too well. It was scrambling to piece together what the two leaders had actually discussed, deciphering what they may have agreed on and striving to avoid being sidelined in peace talks.

A call a few hours later from Mr. Trump filled in some of the gaps. President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said the phone discussion, which included European leaders, had been “long and substantive” and covered “the main points” of the American leader’s talks with Mr. Putin. Mr. Zelensky added that he would visit Mr. Trump in Washington on Monday “to discuss all of the details regarding ending the killing and the war.”

But even as Mr. Zelensky’s statement suggested a potential path toward a peace deal after months of largely fruitless negotiations, a public statement by Mr. Trump later on Saturday morning raised questions about whether such an opening would be too heavily tilted toward Russia for Ukraine to accept.

Mr. Trump called on social media for a direct peace agreement without securing a cease-fire first, claiming that Mr. Zelensky and European leaders had agreed on the point. His statement was a stark shift from the “principles” agreed upon earlier in the week by Mr. Trump, Mr. Zelensky and his European allies, which called for refusing to discuss peace terms until a cease-fire was in place.

Russia has long pushed for a direct peace deal that would address a broad range of issues and impose onerous demands on Ukraine, including territorial concessions. Avoiding a cease-fire would allow Russia to continue pressing its advantage on the battlefield in the meantime.

An official briefed on the call between Mr. Trump and Mr. Zelensky said the Ukrainian leader’s trip to Washington would aim to seek clarity from Mr. Trump. Kyiv does not understand why the American president suddenly dropped the demand that a cease-fire precede negotiations.

In a statement, Mr. Zelensky seemed to tread carefully, trying not to openly contradict Mr. Trump.

“We need to achieve a real peace that will be lasting, not just another pause between Russian invasions,” Mr. Zelensky said. But he added that “the killings must stop as soon as possible, and the fire must cease both on the battlefield and in the air, as well as against our port infrastructure,” suggesting that he was still prioritizing a cease-fire.

Image

Ukrainian soldiers in the Donetsk region in June. The Donbas, which is made up of the Donestk and Luhansk regions, is at the center of territorial disputes between Ukraine and Russia.Credit...Tyler Hicks/The New York Times

In statements of their own, European leaders made no mention of having agreed to abandon their demand for a cease-fire. At the same time, the fact that the statements did not include a demand for a cease-fire, as in previous remarks, suggests at the very least an attempt not to antagonize Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump’s move to aim for a direct peace deal could bring to failure a week of frantic diplomacy in which Kyiv, with European support, had lobbied the American administration to insist that a cease-fire should come first and that Ukraine should not be undercut in the negotiations.

Mr. Trump’s social media post caused a feeling of whiplash among some Ukrainians, who quickly reversed their early assessments of the Alaska summit.

Oleksandr Merezhko, chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the Ukrainian Parliament, had initially expressed some relief, saying that “the situation could have been worse” if Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had struck a deal behind Ukraine’s back.

He said that a scenario in which “Trump and Putin started together to pressure Ukraine into surrender” could not have been ruled out given Mr. Trump’s history of deference to Mr. Putin.

But after Mr. Trump’s post on Truth Social, Mr. Merezhko changed his view. “In fact, Putin and Trump are starting to force us into surrender,” he said.

Mr. Trump also proposed security guarantees for Ukraine inspired by the collective defense agreement between NATO member countries, which states that any attack on a member is an attack against all, according to Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister.

Under such guarantees, Ukraine’s NATO allies would be “ready to take action” if Russia attacked again. But Mr. Merezhko and other Ukrainian allies said such a formulation was too vague.

“Which countries will agree to consider an attack against Ukraine as an attack against themselves?” Mr. Merezhko asked. “I’d like to believe that we will find such countries, but I’m not sure.”

Image

Mr. Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson in Anchorage on Friday.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

Mr. Trump, in an interview with Fox News after the meeting with Mr. Putin, also addressed the idea of territorial swaps, saying they were among the points “that we largely have agreed on.” Mr. Trump had said several times over the past week that territorial concessions would be part of a peace agreement, drawing pushback from Mr. Zelensky.

Mr. Zelensky, however, has not entirely ruled out possible land swaps, telling reporters this week that this is “a very complex issue that cannot be separated from security guarantees for Ukraine.”

Mr. Merezhko, who like many Ukrainian officials was left on tenterhooks by the Alaska meeting, watched the post-meeting news conference live from Kyiv at around 2 a.m. local time.

As both Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin offered only vague statements, Mr. Merezhko said it had become clear that no concrete deal had been reached.

He noted that Mr. Putin had again said that any end to the fighting must address the “root causes” of the war, which is Kremlin parlance for a range of issues that include the existence of Ukraine as a fully independent and sovereign nation aligned with the West.

“I think it’s a failure because Putin was again talking about security concerns and used his usual rhetoric,” Mr. Merezhko said as the news conference came to an end. “I don’t see any changes.”

Vadym Prystaiko, a former foreign affairs minister, said in a phone interview that the summit’s brief duration — it lasted just a few hours and broke up ahead of schedule — indicated limited progress toward peace.

He recalled that during cease-fire negotiations in the first Ukraine-Russia war, which started in 2014, he spent 16 hours in a room with Mr. Putin and Mr. Zelensky’s predecessor, Petro Poroshenko.

The cease-fire that was eventually agreed upon did not last, and fighting soon resumed.

“They didn’t manage to sit enough hours to actually go through all the stuff that is needed to reach a deal,” Mr. Prystaiko said of Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin.

In Kyiv, some emerged Saturday morning from a sleepless night following the news with the sense that the war was likely to continue unabated. After the Alaska summit wrapped up, the Ukrainian Air Force said that Russia had continued its assault on Ukraine, launching 85 drones and one ballistic missile overnight. These figures could not be independently verified.

Image

The aftermath of a Russian strike in Bilozerske, Donetsk region on Tuesday. Ukraine has demanded that a cease-fire precede a wider peace settlement, but Russia has refused to halt its attacks. Credit...Genya Savilov/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

Tetiana Chamlai, a 66-year-old retiree in Kyiv, said the situation with the war would change only if Ukraine was given more military support, to push Russian forces back enough to force Moscow to the negotiating table. “That’s the only way everything will stop,” she said. “I personally do not see any other way out.”

But Vice President JD Vance made clear this past week that the United States was “done” funding Ukraine’s defense against the Russian invasion. The Trump administration, however, is fine with Ukraine buying American weapons from U.S. companies, and Mr. Zelensky announced this week that Kyiv had secured $1.5 billion in European funding to purchase American arms.

How long the Ukrainian Army can hold against relentless Russian assaults remains uncertain. Moscow’s forces recently broke through a section of the Ukrainian defenses in the eastern Donbas region, and although their advance has been halted, the swift infiltration has underscored the strain on Ukraine’s stretched lines.

Balazs Jarabik, a former European Union diplomat in Kyiv who now works for R. Politik, a political analysis firm, said that Russia’s upper hand on the battlefield had most likely played a role in Mr. Trump’s agreeing to aim for a peace deal rather than a cease-fire.

“Kyiv and Europe must adapt to a new reality shaped by Washington and Moscow,” he said.

Olha Konovalova contributed reporting.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

Kaja Kallas, the E.U.’s top diplomat, said in written comments that “the harsh reality is that Russia has no intention of ending this war anytime soon,” arguing that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia wanted to drag out negotiations while making no commitment to stop the killing.

She added that “the U.S. holds the power to force Russia to negotiate seriously” — but it’s clear from the rest of her statement that she didn’t think that was happening yet.

Aug. 16, 2025

Vanessa Friedman

Vanessa Friedman has covered political image-making and its influences since Bush v. Gore.

The power of the Trump-Putin presidential photo op.
---------------------------------------------------

Image

President Vladimir V. Putin and President Trump at Joint Base Elmendorf Richardson in Anchorage on Friday.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

In the end there was no deal, but there was a photo op: a dramatic, well-choreographed image of President Trump not just welcoming President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to Alaska on Friday, but rolling out the red carpet, that now-universal symbol of fame, pageantry and pomp.

The two men clasped hands, and then strode to Mr. Trump’s limo, in complementary dark suits — single-breasted, two-button — matching white shirts and coordinating ties (red for Mr. Trump, burgundy for Mr. Putin), giving the impression of kindred spirits: just two statesmen meeting on the semi-neutral ground of an airport tarmac to go talk cease-fire, their respective planes looming in the background.

That’s the picture that was caught by the waiting cameras, and those are the photos that have gone around the world to accompany reports of the nonproductive meeting.

In the absence of an actual resolution to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, they have become the takeaway. And that, said both President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine and Senator Chris Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, even before the meeting, was Mr. Putin’s goal in the first place.

“He is seeking, excuse me, photos,” Mr. Zelensky said. “He needs a photo from the meeting with President Trump.”

Why? Because whatever happened afterward, a photo could be publicly seen — and read — as an implicit endorsement.

After all, the Russian president has been a virtual pariah in the West since his full-scale invasion of Ukraine; accused of war crimes by the International Criminal Court. Whether or not Mr. Trump was tough with him behind the closed doors of their meeting room — whether or not their talks were, as Mr. Trump later said, “productive” — what has now been preserved for posterity is Mr. Putin’s admission back into the fold.

And of all current world leaders, the only one who understands, and embraces, the power of the image quite as effectively as Mr. Trump is Mr. Putin. Both men have made themselves into caricatures through costume and scenography, the better to capture the popular imagination.

Mr. Trump has done it with his MAGA merch, his red-white-and-blue dressing (the one regularly adopted by members of his cabinet as well as Republicans in Congress), his hair and his showmanship.

Mr. Putin has done it with his orchestrated photo shoots: the ones that capture him braving the snow in Siberia, hugging a polar bear, hunting shirtless. They may look silly (at least from outside) but that doesn’t make them any less effective. Or headline-grabbing.

That Mr. Putin met Mr. Trump in the uniform Mr. Trump embraces made its own kind of statement. The conflict in Ukraine has been in part a battle fought in images for the support of the global imagination; that is why Mr. Zelensky insists on dressing to show solidarity with his fighting forces whenever he speaks to international bodies, be they Congress or the European Union; why his wife posed for the cover of Vogue.

By wearing his suit and tie in Alaska, Mr. Putin cast himself as Mr. Trump’s equal and drew another line between himself and Mr. Zelensky, who famously offended Mr. Trump by wearing his army look to the White House.

Their handshake — which went on for a while and also involved various friendly pats — was a pantomime of acceptance of that idea. And the photo was everyone’s souvenir.

Aug. 16, 2025

After meeting Putin, Trump reverts to land swaps for peace in Ukraine.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Trump with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Friday at a news conference at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson in Anchorage.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

President Trump told European leaders after his meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Friday in Alaska that he supported a plan to end the war in Ukraine by ceding unconquered territory to the Russian invaders, rather than try for a cease-fire, according to two senior European officials who were briefed on the call.

Mr. Trump will discuss that plan with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Monday at the White House,and there were discussions on Saturday about whether other European officials would join him, the officials said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss private talks.

After his meeting with Mr. Putin, Mr. Trump has dropped his demand for an immediate cease-fire and believes a rapid peace treaty can be negotiated, so long as Mr. Zelensky agrees to cede the rest of the Donbas region to Russia, even those areas not occupied by Russian troops.

Mr. Zelensky and the European leaders have strongly opposed such a concession of unoccupied land, which also contains important defensive lines and is mineral rich. Ukrainian officials have said that a final deal cannot involve Kyiv agreeing to cede any Ukrainian sovereign territory permanently, which would violate the Ukrainian Constitution.

In return, Mr. Putin offered a cease-fire in the rest of Ukraine at current battle lines and a written promise not to attack Ukraine or any European country again, the senior officials said. They pointed out to Mr. Trump that Mr. Putin often broke his written commitments.

It will be up to Ukraine to make decisions on its territory, the officials emphasized, adding that international borders must not be changed by force.

Mr. Trump did not mention during the call imposing any further sanctions or economic pressure on Russia, the officials said. But the European leaders emphasized that they would continue sanctions and economic pressure on Russia until the killing stops, one official said.

White House officials did not respond to a request for comment.

On a more positive note, the European officials said, Mr. Trump said that Mr. Putin agreed that Ukraine should have strong security guarantees after a settlement, but not under NATO. American troops might participate, Mr. Trump told the Europeans.

Mr. Putin also asked for guarantees for Russian to become an official language again in Ukraine and security for Russian Orthodox churches, the officials said.

Mr. Trump said he was hopeful on getting a trilateral meeting with Mr. Putin and Mr. Zelensky, the officials said. But Mr. Putin has so far refused to meet with Mr. Zelensky, considering him an illegitimate president of an artificial country.

Jim Tankersley and Maggie Haberman contributed reporting.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

It is noteworthy that Kyiv’s European allies, in their various statements after the Alaska meeting, did not mention the need to reach a cease-fire first. It has been one of their key principles.

The approach could be a way to avoid antagonizing President Trump, who said he wanted a direct peace agreement without securing a cease-fire first.

Aug. 16, 2025

President Volodymyr Zelensky, in a statement about the negotiations, seemed to tread carefully so as not to openly contradict Trump’s call for a direct peace deal over a cease-fire.

“We need to achieve a real peace that will be lasting, not just another pause between Russian invasions,” he said. But he added that “the killings must stop as soon as possible, and the fire must cease both on the battlefield and in the air, as well as against our port infrastructure,” suggesting that he still prioritizes a cease-fire.

Aug. 16, 2025

Trump heaps praise on Putin in a Sean Hannity interview.
--------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Trump speaking with reporters on Air Force One on his way to Alaska on Friday.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

After his summit with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Friday, President Trump sat down with the Fox News host Sean Hannity to record an interview in which he offered few details about what the two leaders had said about the war in Ukraine, but talked up their personal connection.

“I think the meeting was a 10,” Mr. Trump said after Mr. Hannity asked how he would rate his talks with the Russian president. “In the sense we got along great, and it’s good when two big powers get along, especially when they’re nuclear powers. We’re No. 1 and they’re No. 2 in the world.”

Without sharing any specific information from the meeting in Alaska, Mr. Trump put the onus for securing peace on Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky.

“Now it is really up to President Zelensky to get it done,” he said during the interview, which was broadcast later on Fox News. “I would also say the European nations have to get involved a little bit.”

In the interview, Mr. Trump repeatedly praised Mr. Putin, and brought up compliments he received from the Russian leader during the summit.

“I always had a great relationship with President Putin,” Mr. Trump said. “And we would have done great things together.”

He claimed that Mr. Putin had even supported his claim that the 2020 U.S. presidential election, which Mr. Trump lost to Joseph R. Biden Jr., was rigged.

“He said, ‘Your election was rigged because you have mail-in voting,’” Mr. Trump said, adding that Mr. Putin told him that by-mail voting does not exist anywhere else in the world. Whether Mr. Putin actually said that or not, several countries have by-mail voting. And Mr. Trump’s own attorney general in 2020 said his assertions of widespread fraud couldn’t be proven.

During the interview, Mr. Trump mused about a three-way summit between himself, Mr. Zelensky and Mr. Putin but said explicitly, “I didn’t ask about it.” Twenty minutes after saying that, Mr. Trump said he had in fact discussed that with Mr. Putin.

“They both want me there,” Mr. Trump said. “And I will be there.”

Mr. Zelensky said on Saturday that he would travel to Washington on Monday to discuss the war with Mr. Trump.

Earlier on Friday, the Ukrainian leader had criticized Russia’s latest attacks and cast doubt on Mr. Putin’s commitment to ending the war. But Mr. Trump told Mr. Hannity that he thinks the Russian leader wants to “solve the problem.”

He did not acknowledge that Mr. Putin had started the war.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister, said in a statement that “President Trump today took up the Italian idea of security guarantees inspired by Article 5 of NATO.” Under this idea, Ukraine would not become part of NATO, but “a collective security clause” would allow it “to benefit from the support of all its partners, including the U.S., ready to take action if it is attacked again,” Meloni said.

The idea could be appealing to Ukraine, which has long sought strong security guarantees to deter Russia from attacking again. But the devil is in the details. Several Ukrainian lawmakers said Meloni’s talk of “taking action” was too vague.

Aug. 16, 2025

Keir Starmer, the British prime minister, said in a statement that he welcomed “the openness of the United States, alongside Europe, to provide robust security guarantees to Ukraine as part of any deal.” Then he said, as in the joint statement, that he was determined to keep increasing economic pressure on Russia until the war ends.

Aug. 16, 2025

Russia holds the battlefield advantage over Ukraine.
----------------------------------------------------

Image

A Ukrainian soldier firing at Russian targets in the Donetsk region in June. The area is part of the Donbas, which Moscow seeks to capture.Credit...Tyler Hicks/The New York Times

Russia entered Friday’s inconclusive talks with the United States from a position of strength on the battlefield in Ukraine. It is a position Russia is likely to keep exploiting, as President Trump on Saturday seemed to rule out any prospect of an imminent cease-fire.

The Russian Army has driven a wedge into Ukrainian defenses in the east, and Ukrainian officials have warned that Moscow has massed forces and equipment for new offensive operations.

In recent days, Russian forces broke through a section of Ukrainian defenses in the eastern Donbas region, an area that Moscow has long sought to capture but currently controls only about three-quarters of. Russian troops advanced about 10 miles deep into the Ukrainian rear, threatening to outflank Ukraine’s positions.

The Russian advance now appears to have been stopped, and in some areas even pushed back. But military analysts note that the breach could still provide Russia with a new staging ground for future attacks, advancing its broader goal of seizing the remainder of the Donbas.

It is a stark contrast from the Kremlin’s position more than three years ago, during early peace talks in Istanbul. Back then, Russia’s army had made a failed attempt to capture Kyiv and was reeling from devastating Ukrainian counterattacks. Mr. Putin’s initial plan — to swiftly seize all of Ukraine, decapitate its military and political leadership and replace it with Moscow-friendly authorities — had to be abandoned. Russian troops withdrew to the east and south, where they refocused the fighting.

Since then, Russian forces have slowly but steadily captured Ukrainian territory. Since it launched its full-scale invasion in early 2022, Russia has captured roughly 27,000 square miles of territory in Ukraine, about the size of Ireland. This adds to the 17,000 square miles it already controlled from what is seen as the first phase of the war, which began in 2014. Altogether, Russia now controls nearly a fifth of Ukraine’s territory.

Ukraine holds a small sliver of land in the western Russian region of Kursk. That is a remnant of last year’s incursion, when its troops captured thousands of square miles and held them for months before Russia pushed them back early this year. On other parts of the front line, Ukraine has been gradually retreating under relentless assaults.

The Russian advance, however, has come at a steep price. About 230,000 Russian soldiers have died since the beginning of the invasion, according to estimates based on obituaries collected by the independent news outlet Mediazona and BBC News Russian.

Ukrainian losses are estimated at less than half of Russia’s. But Moscow has been able to rebuild and even expand its battered force by tapping into a population that is four times larger than Ukraine’s. Meanwhile, Kyiv has struggled to replenish its army through conscription.

This largely explains why Russia now has the upper hand on the battlefield. Ukraine doesn’t have enough soldiers to hold its lines, allowing Russian troops to slip through, as they did in the east in recent days, near the city of Pokrovsk.

The Ukrainian army rushed elite brigades to the area to halt the Russian advance. But many Ukrainian soldiers saw the Russian breach as a stark warning of what could happened in the coming months if Ukraine does not address its personnel shortages, lack of coordination between units and poorly planned counterattacks.

“This disaster has been building for a long time, worsening day by day,” Bohdan Krotevych, the former chief of staff of Ukraine’s Azov brigade and a National Guard lieutenant colonel, wrote on social media.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

European leaders are out with a joint statement about the negotiations. They notably do not echo Trump’s claim that peace talks are preferable to a cease-fire. The statement welcomes Trump’s efforts to stop the war and his declaration that America would contribute to future security guarantees after any peace deal. But otherwise, it sounds as if Europe is trying to reassure the world that it is standing behind Ukraine in key areas that Trump might not be. The statement is signed by leaders from Britain, France, Germany, Finland, Italy, Poland, the European Union and the European Council.

Aug. 16, 2025

One notable line is a threat to increase economic penalties on Putin. “As long as the killing in Ukraine continues, we stand ready to uphold the pressure on Russia,” the leaders wrote. “We will continue to strengthen sanctions and wider economic measures to put pressure on Russia’s war economy until there is a just and lasting peace.”

Aug. 16, 2025

President Trump’s argument that it would be better to seek a peace deal without a cease-fire first is a key development after his summit with Putin. Such an approach favors Russia because it can continue the war — where it has the upper hand — while talks on a comprehensive settlement take place. A cease-fire would favor Ukraine because it could offer a reprieve from Russian attacks.

Image

Credit...David Guttenfelder/The New York Times

Aug. 16, 2025

Trump posted on Truth Social that he, Putin, Zelensky and European leaders all agreed that “the best way to end the horrific war between Russia and Ukraine is to go directly to a Peace Agreement, which would end the war, and not a mere Ceasefire Agreement, which often times do not hold up.”

This is a notable departure from the “principles” that Trump and European leaders agreed to earlier this week on a call organized by the German chancellor, Friedrich Merz. Those principles included refusing to discuss terms of a peace plan until a cease-fire is in place.

Aug. 16, 2025

It is a shift that would appear to benefit Russia, which has long wanted to skip a cease-fire and go straight to negotiations over land swaps and other areas, and hurt Ukraine, which wants fighting to stop before negotiations start.

Aug. 16, 2025

A spokesman for Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, said on Saturday morning that European leaders had agreed to a common approach for the next steps of the peace process in Ukraine, after being briefed by Trump on his meeting with Putin. Merz, who convened a call between Trump and European allies this week, did not offer any details on what that common approach might entail.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

Dmitri Medvedev, a former Russian president who had previously drawn Trump’s ire with anti-U.S. statements, sounded more conciliatory the morning after the Alaska summit. In a Telegram post, Medvedev, widely seen as a social media attack dog for President Vladimir Putin, said that the summit was “calm, without ultimatums and threats,” and that Trump had “abandoned the escalation of pressure on Russia. At least for now.”

Medvedev, who wasn’t at the meeting, said that its most significant result was that “both sides directly placed the responsibility for achieving future results in the negotiations on ending military actions on Kyiv and Europe.”

Aug. 16, 2025

After President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine and President Trump spoke one on one, European leaders joined the conversation, the Ukrainian presidential office said. The French presidential office said the leaders of France, Germany, Britain, Italy, Finland and Poland joined the call, along with the heads of NATO and the European Commission.

Aug. 16, 2025

President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said he would travel to Washington on Monday to meet President Trump and “discuss all of the details regarding ending the killing and the war.” Zelensky said that he “had a long and substantive conversation” with Trump during which the American president informed him about his meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

Aug. 16, 2025

President Trump is back at the White House. His whirlwind trip is over.

Image

Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Aug. 16, 2025

We are holding on the plane because President Trump is on the phone with NATO leaders, according to Karoline Leavitt, the White House press secretary. She said Trump had a “lengthy” call earlier in the flight with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine and has spent most of his flight back on the phone.

Aug. 16, 2025

President Trump has just touched down at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland. It was a quiet flight from Alaska, except for the clips of his interview with Sean Hannity that cycled through Fox News on the in-flight televisions.

Aug. 16, 2025

Trump and Putin had an isolated conversation in Trump’s limo.
-------------------------------------------------------------

Image

President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson in Alaska on Friday.Credit...Andrew Harnik/Getty Images

At the summit in Alaska on Friday between President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, before their formal discussions on Ukraine, the two leaders had a brief conversation isolated from any aides or journalists in the U.S. president’s limousine.

In the apparently unplanned encounter, they were accompanied only by two security officers in the front of the eight-ton armored car. It left many wondering: What exactly did they talk about?

The two leaders were set to be picked up separately after they descended from their planes. Mr. Putin’s own presidential limousine was ready on the tarmac. But after they greeted each other, Mr. Trump gestured for Mr. Putin to walk with him toward the American presidential vehicle.

They slipped into the back of the limousine, called the Beast, and rode together to the nearby military facility where the talks would take place. As the car drove away, news cameras captured Mr. Putin flashing a wide smile and waving his hand.

Other world leaders have been offered rides in the Beast in the past, but it is unusual for someone from a rival country to be invited, especially with no one else. There did not appear to be any interpreters in the car with Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin on Friday. Mr. Putin is known to speak English well enough to hold a conversation.

Neither leader has shared what was said during that short ride, and it remained unknown hours later.

Video

It has added to the mystery of what they discuss in private, much like their meeting in Hamburg, Germany, in 2017, at the beginning of Mr. Trump’s first term.

After that meeting, Mr. Trump never revealed publicly what was discussed. His secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, and Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, were the only others in the room aside from the interpreters. Mr. Trump also took away his interpreter’s notes.

During that visit to Germany for a Group of 20 leaders meeting, Mr. Trump pulled up a chair next to Mr. Putin at a dinner to talk. No American officials were present, and the White House did not confirm the exchange until more than 10 days later, after it had been independently reported.
