Title: Trump’s claims on Tylenol (paracetamol), vaccines, and autism—what’s the truth?

URL Source: https://www.bmj.com/content/390/bmj.r2025

Published Time: 2025-09-25

Markdown Content:
1.   Katharine Lang

Author affiliations

Donald Trump has advised pregnant women not to take paracetamol (acetaminophen in the US, sold as Tylenol), claiming that its use in pregnancy is linked to autism in children.1

In a wide ranging press conference on 22 September, he said paracetamol “can be associated with a very increased risk of autism.”2

“Tylenol is not good. All right, I’ll say it; it’s not good,” Trump said. “For this reason the FDA [the US Food and Drug Administration] are strongly recommending that women limit Tylenol use during pregnancy unless medically necessary.

“And you shouldn’t give the child a Tylenol every time he’s born and he goes and has a shot. You shouldn’t give Tylenol to that child.”

At the same time, Trump’s announcement promoted leucovorin (folinic acid) as a treatment for autism. And, in other comments, Trump once again claimed a link between vaccines and autism.

Trump cited rising autism rates as reason for action, and it is true that diagnoses of the condition have risen rapidly over the past 30 years. One study reported that in the UK autism spectrum condition diagnoses rose by 787% between 1998 and 2018.3 In the US the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stated that in 2000 autism was diagnosed in one in 150 children but that by 2022 one in every 31 were given this diagnosis.4

However, most experts agree that the increase is largely due to increased awareness, testing, and diagnosis and a wider definition of the condition. Successive changes in diagnostic manuals since the 1980s have expanded the condition from a narrow disorder affecting children with severe language and intellectual disabilities to a spectrum that also includes Asperger’s syndrome, pervasive developmental disorder, and milder social-communication differences.

Sven Bölte, a specialist in child and adolescent psychiatric science at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, says that rather than an “epidemic of autism” there may be an “epidemic of diagnoses.”5

It is not clear what exactly causes autism, but the condition is known to have a strong genetic component, with several dozen susceptibility genes identified over the past 20 years.6

But Trump and his health secretary, Robert F Kennedy Jr, seem determined to find an “answer” to the increase in autism diagnoses—and have landed on paracetamol, its use in pregnancy, and, yet again, vaccines.

Is there good scientific evidence indicating that paracetamol increases autism risk?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No.

The US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) statement accompanying Trump’s comments cited a 2020 observational study published in _JAMA Psychiatry_.7 This found a higher “acetaminophen burden” associated with higher odds of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and coexisting ADHD with ASD.

Critics have questioned study’s methods and emphasised that, as an observational study, it cannot prove causation. The authors themselves were cautious about claiming a direct link, noting that their findings “support previous studies regarding the association between prenatal and perinatal acetaminophen exposure and childhood neurodevelopmental risk and warrant additional investigations.”

The Trump administration is also reported to have looked at a systematic review published in _Environmental Health_ in August, which found that, from 46 studies looking at the link, the evidence is consistent with an association between prenatal acetaminophen exposure and increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD and ASD.8

Andrea Baccarell, one of the paper’s authors and dean of the Harvard T H Chan School of Public Health, told _Time_ magazine he had discussed the study with Kennedy. He said, “Further research is needed to confirm the association and determine causality, but based on existing evidence I believe that caution about acetaminophen use during pregnancy—especially heavy or prolonged use—is warranted.”

But other experts have dismissed the potential link.

Laurie Tomlinson, professor of clinical epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said, “ I am confident that the best available evidence shows us paracetamol is safe to take during pregnancy within the recommended limits and does not increase the risk of children being born with autism.

“These claims seem to ignore numerous factors, including why paracetamol was taken in the first place.

“For example, women with hypermobility are more likely to have autistic children (since the two conditions are linked) and so may have needed to take paracetamol for joint pain during pregnancy, but it is the shared genetic causes rather than the drug that means that the child is more likely to be autistic.”

Monique Botha, associate professor in social and developmental psychology at Durham University, concurred: “There is no robust evidence or convincing studies to suggest there is any causal relationship, and any conclusions being drawn to the contrary are often motivated, under-evidenced, and unsupported by the most robust methods to answering this question.

“I am exceptionally confident in saying that no relationship [between paracetamol and autism] exists.”

Several studies support their assertions, most recently a Swedish study of almost 2.5 million children born between 1995 and 2019, which found no association between paracetamol use in pregnancy and risk of autism, ADHD, or intellectual disability.9 The researchers suggested that associations seen in other models may have been due to familial confounding.

Safe, commonly used drug
------------------------

Decades of research show that paracetamol is safe when used within recommended guidelines. And, counter to Trump’s assertions, paracetamol use has increased only slightly over the years that autism diagnoses have risen considerably.10

The drug is recommended by many medical agencies for use during pregnancy.

On 24 September the World Health Organization said, “Extensive research has been undertaken over the past decade, including large scale studies, looking into links between acetaminophen use during pregnancy and autism.

“At this time, no consistent association has been established.”11

In the UK the NHS gives similar advice: “Paracetamol is the first choice of painkiller if you’re pregnant. It’s commonly taken during pregnancy and does not harm your baby.”12 The Department of Health and Social Care further warns that avoiding taking paracetamol may be a far greater risk: “Untreated pain and fever can pose real risks to the unborn baby, so it is crucial to manage these symptoms with the recommended treatment.”13

Vaccine and autism claim revisited
----------------------------------

In the same briefing Trump once again alluded to links between vaccines and autism.

“You have a little child, little fragile child, and you get a vat of 80 different vaccines, I guess, 80 different blends, and they pump it in,” he said. “They pump so much stuff into those beautiful little babies, it’s a disgrace.

“We want no mercury in the vaccine. We want no aluminium in the vaccine. The MMR, I think, should be taken separately. This is based on what I feel, the mumps, measles, the three should be taken separately. And it seems to be that when you mix them, there could be a problem. So there’s no downside in taking them separately.”

He added, “Hepatitis B is sexually transmitted. There’s no reason to give a baby that’s almost just born hepatitis B. So I would say wait till the baby is 12 years old and formed and take hepatitis B.”

A reporter at the press conference pointed out that hepatitis B can be contracted without sexual contact, such as through needles and open wounds, but Trump reiterated his comment. Experts have pointed out that mothers and care givers can also spread the virus to babies at birth or by sharing food or toothbrushes.

Trump’s other links have been refuted. There is no evidence that small amounts of mercury (used in vaccines as the organocompound thiomersal) or aluminium cause autism. In fact, the FDA states there is a “robust body of peer reviewed scientific studies” supporting the safety of vaccines that contain thiomersal. And all routinely recommended childhood vaccines for children aged under 6 years are available in thimerosal-free formulations.14

On the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine, the 1998 paper by Andrew Wakefield and colleagues linking autism to the MMR vaccine has long been discredited, not only for its poor methods but also for falsification of data.15 16 Several studies have since found no association between MMR and autism.17 18

Experts advise that giving the vaccines separately means that children have a greater chance of contracting the illnesses between vaccinations or missing out on a shot—something that is thought to have contributed to the increase in measles in the US and elsewhere.

Trump did not provide data to back up his claims. He did emphasise in his comment on hepatitis that he was speaking for himself and not for “these doctors,” referring to Kennedy and Jay Bhattacharya, director of the National Institutes of Health, standing beside him.

Is there less autism in the Amish population?
---------------------------------------------

In his announcement Trump also said, “There are certain groups of people that don’t take vaccines and don’t take any pills that have no autism.” He later said that he was referring to the Amish population.

Although there has been limited research into autism in the Amish, evidence indicates that rates are likely to be similar to those in the general population. A 2010 preliminary study estimated that around one in 271 Amish children had autism spectrum disorders.19 Any differences from the wider population may be due to cultural and religious beliefs limiting access to diagnostic and healthcare services.20

There is no evidence indicating that Amish communities have low rates of autism because of rejection of vaccines.

Can leucovorin treat autism?
----------------------------

Trump’s announcement also posited leucovorin as a treatment for symptoms of autism. But experts have been dismissive of its potential until more large, controlled studies have been carried out.

Andrew Whitehouse, professor of autism research at The Kids Research Institute Australia, called the evidence weak and the treatment experimental. “A few small trials suggest possible small improvements in behavioural outcomes, yet these studies are limited by small numbers, inconsistent findings, and a lack of independent replication,” he said.

“Right now, the science does not come close to the standard needed to recommend leucovorin in the clinical management of autism. . . . Current research is too narrow and preliminary to draw strong conclusions, and the enthusiasm far outstrips the scientific evidence.”

Takeaway message
----------------

Scientists and doctors are clear that there is no scientific evidence to support Trump’s claims, and many are angry that this will cause further worry and confusion among parents.

Botha said, “Pain relief for pregnant women is woefully lacking, and paracetamol is a much safer pain relief option during pregnancy than basically any other alternative. We need to take pain seriously for women, including while pregnant.

“The fearmongering will prevent women from accessing the appropriate care during pregnancy. Further, it risks stigmatising families who have autistic children as having brought it on themselves, and it reinvigorates the long pattern of maternal shame and blame—as we’ve seen re-emerge repeatedly over the last 70 years.”

References
----------

1.   ↵
2.   ↵
3.   ↵
4.   ↵
5.   ↵
6.   ↵
7.   ↵
8.   ↵
9.   ↵
10.   ↵
11.   ↵
12.   ↵
13.   ↵
14.   ↵
15.   ↵
16.   ↵
17.   ↵
18.   ↵
19.   ↵
20.   ↵
