Title: NPS Incident Reports - Yosemite National Park

URL Source: https://npshistory.com/morningreport/incidents/yose.htm

Published Time: Wed, 15 Oct 2025 15:14:21 GMT

Markdown Content:
Thursday, May 8, 1986 Yosemite - Employee Injury J.K., 39, a GS-7 interpreter in the Wawona District at Yosemite, was involved in a two-car accident on Highway 41 between Fresno and Yosemite at about 11;30 p.m., on Tuesday, May 6. J.K. was taken to a Fresno hospital where he was operated on for fractures of both legs and severe head injuries. At the conclusion of surgery this morning, doctors said that J.K.'s chances of survival were poor. Highway patrol investigators have declined to suggest which driver may have been at fault in the accident and have not determined whether J.K. was leaving the park or returning. J.K.'s wife, J.L.A., an administrative officer at North Cascades National Park has been notified. She is en route to Fresno. Her name was not included in the report. Followup: J.K.'s pupils had just become dilated & fixed. Doctor says prognosis "very, very poor". Doctor says chances of recovery are 1 in 100. Thursday, May 8, 1986 Yosemite - Fatality Climber fell 100 feet to death on May 5 on a technical climb on Cookie Cliff in Merced Canyon. He was accompanied by another Japanese who spoke very little English. Next of kin notified. Monday, June 23, 1986 Yosemite - Fatality (Fall - Climbing) Party of two roped together. Both fell. A.F.C. died, J.C. had minor injuries. Monday, June 30, 1986 Yosemite - Fatality Fatality fall -- Cathedral Rock. Victim was apparently skilled climber. Fell approx. 40' No helmet. Died during evacuation. Next of kin notified. Monday, July 28, 1986 Yosemite - Plane Crash Brief summary of incident: Private plane crash - Gaylor Lakes area, 2 fatalities, 4 injured. Summary: The plane, a single engine Cherokee6, was on a flight from Paradise, CA to Death Valley. Flew over Yosemite Valley & Tuolumne Mdws heading east before crashing at 10,400' level. Reported by visitors within 10 min; rangers on scene within 25 min. of crash. 2 victims dead at scene; 4 injured victims transported by helicopter & ambulance to UC Davis Medical Center. Friday, August 15, 1986 Yosemite - Motor Vehicle Accident With Fatality Location: Tioga Road Summary: J.R.H. was the passenger in a vehicle which hit another car head-on. It appears that her son, who was driving, may have fallen asleep and crossed the center line. Son seriously injured and medevaced to Modesto. Subjects husband also injured and medevaced out. Unknown condition of person(s) in second vehicle. Four persons were in a third vehicle which hit first two were also injured and taken to hospital in the park. Next of kin present & requested that name of deceased NOT be released pending notification of relatives in England. Tuesday, September 2, 1986 86-2 - Yosemite - Climbing Fatality Location: DAF Dome, part of Fairview Dome Mr. A.M.C. was leading the second pitch of Apparatus Climb on DAF Dome when he fell 130 feet and landed on his head. Rangers on the scene attempted CPR, but to no avail. The reason for the fall is unknown at present, but it is suspected that it occurred because he left the main route. No further information available. Wednesday, September 3, 1986 86-7 - Yosemite - Search and Rescue Location: 1/2 mile west of Ribbon Falls Mr. J.C. and a female companion failed to return after a day hike on Sunday, August 31st. The couple had been unable to find their way back to the Yosemite Valley, and spent Sunday night on a ledge above the Valley. On Monday morning, he told her he was going for help, and about 15 minutes later he fell approximately 400' to his death. Rangers spotted the body from a helicopter, and found the woman, who was dehydrated but uninjured. Thursday, December 18, 1986 86-52 - Yosemite - Suspected Arson Location: Wawona District A roads and trails building which housed an office, locker room and storage area for small motorized equipment burned to the ground and was a total loss. Estimated damage to the building was $21,000; estimated damage to equipment was $10,000. A nearby fire house also received about $10,000 damage from heat radiation. There were no injuries. Over 50 employees responded to the blaze. The fire was suspected to be arson, but subsequent investigation by arson investigators from the park and the state's department of forestry tentatively identified the cause as a faulty gas heater. January 20, 1987 87-4 - Yosemite - Search and Rescue Location: Badger Pass Ski Area Ms. G.M.B. was reported missing by friends on the 17th. She was last seen at approximately 10 am at the ski rental shop. A Badger Pass employee found her glove at the top of Eagle Run, and her ski tracks appeared to head towards Westfall Meadow. A search was initiated by the park, and she was found at the above location the following day. Medical status was not given, but it was reported that she was flown to Yosemite Medical Clinic and is in good condition. February 18, 1987 87-16 - Yosemite - Auto Crash; Fatalities Location: Crane Creek, El Portel, CA A vehicle (type & make unknown at this time) was being operated, (operator unknown) westbound on Route 140 just outside the park boundary in El Portel, California. The vehicle struck a bridge, went out of control and came to rest in a creek bed. Both the driver and the passenger (below named individuals) were pronounced dead at the scene. Speed is believed to be a contributing factor to the accident. The Mariposa County Sheriff's Department is conducting the investigation. Since both individuals were relatives of park employees, a supplemental report is also being carried by the park staff. March 3, 1987 87-17 - Yosemite - Fatality Location: Wawona Mr. J.E.L., a park in-holder who lived in the Wawona District, was found lying on the road by park rangers. Although found still alive, he expired while being transported to the Valley Clinic. Cause of death was probably stroke or heart attack. March 9, 1987 87-21 - Yosemite - Auto Fatality Location: West of Pohono Bridge Mr. M.S.C. was speeding and lost control of his vehicle. It veered off the road into a Ponderosa pine, then traveled another 70' into a river. His body was found adjacent to the vehicle and in the water. Cause of death not given. March 11, 1987 87-23 - Yosemite - Rock Slide Location: Rex Pinnacle A major rock slide fell on North Side Drive in Yosemite valley near Rex Pinnacle. The area had been roped off due to minor slides, so there were no visitors in the area. About 200 - 300 feet of roadway are covered by rock, and it's estimated that it will take from three to five days to clear it away. On the above date and time Norm Hinson reported a rock slide just west of Sunny side Campground (Rex's Pinnacle). The slide came form the area of Three Brothers covering approximately 200-300- feet of road and completely crossing the road. The slide approximately three feet deep. No injuries were reported. Minor damage was done Hinson's patrol car and unestimated damage was reported on a second patrol car. Traffic was stopped prior to the slide at the Chevron Gas Station. All traffic has been rerouted to South side Drive. The estimated time for clearing the road is 3 to 5 days. April 13, 1987 87-41 - Yosemite - Rock Slide: Injuries Location: Tenaya Creek Trail Ms. B.N. and the G.'s were hiking on Tenaya Creek trail, about half way up the Tenaya Zigzags, when a rock slide fell on them. Mr. B.G. received critical injuries; he was medevaced to Yosemite clinic and thence to Modesto Hospital. His wife and sister-in-law were treated and released. The trail was closed immediately; an assessment was to be made this morning of the extent and cause of the slide. April 27, 1987 87-55 - Yosemite - Double Climbing Fatality Location: Buttress of Middle Cathedral F.Y. and D.H. were on the eighth pitch of an eight pitch climb up Middle Cathedral when both fell 800' to their deaths. Witnesses report that D.H. was above F.Y., fell off and pulled both free from their anchor system. Chief Ranger Rudolph feels, however, that D.H. was probably below F.Y. No rangers were involved or injured. April 28, 1987 87-60 - Yosemite - Suicide Park visitor happened to stop on road 2000' south of Bishop Creek on US Hwy 41, looked over edge and saw evidence of where a vehicle had passed over the edge. Visitor reported it to the park. Rangers found vehicle 100' below, victim's body was found an additional 100' feet below the car. A suicide note was found in the vehicle dated 4/21 (probable date of accident). B.J.J. apparently survived impact of vehicle landing and jumped from that point. June 16, 1987 87-111 - Yosemite - Auto Crash; Fatalities Location: Tioga Road, Mono Pass Trailhead A.F.W. and J.G.C. were the occupants of a vehicle that went off the road and hit a tree; both were killed. There's no indication of alcohol or of excessive speed. A member of a park trail crew witnessed the accident, but has not yet been interviewed. June 26, 1987 87-41 - Yosemite - Field Incident Update A hiker was hit by falling rocks on the Tenaya Creek trail and was reported to be in critical condition. Update: The man is recovering from head injuries. NO cause has been determined for the fall. The area is still roped off, and the trail will have to be rebuilt. June 26, 1987 87-127 - Yosemite - Successful SAR, Victim Found Location: Tuolumne Meadows On June 24, at approximately 6:00pm, L.M. was reported missing by his father who was camped at site A76 in the Tuolumne Meadows Campground. A search was initiated involving approximately 150 people, 2 dog teams, and 3 helicopters. L.M. is 26 years of age and severely retarded. On Friday, June 26, at 6:00pm L.M. was reported found in good condition. He was medivaced to the Yosemite Clinic were he was treated for minor cuts and scratches. He was then released to his family. The search generated a great deal of media, coverage in the Bay Area. The National Park Service received favorable comments for their successful efforts. August 3, 1987 87-176 - Yosemite - Fatality - Motor Vehicle Accident Location: Rancheria Flats in El Portal T.T. was the passenger in a jeep driven by A.P. A.P. apparently lost control of the vehicle and it rolled over. T.T. suffered injuries as a result of the accident and was transfered to Modesto Community Hospital the same day of the accident. He died of his injuries this morning. His father is a longtime employee with the maintenance division of Yosemite N P. The Sheriff's Office is continuing the investigation. August 6, 1987 87-186 - Yosemite - Fatality - Climber struck by Rockfall Location: Half Done Y.S.L. was with a climbing party of 5. He was starting the 2nd pitch of the North face route when a rock was dislodged by a member of his party who was climbing above him. Y.S.L. was struck in the head by the rock and became limp in his harness. His friends lowered him to the ground. He was flown to the valley Medical Center where he was pronounced dead. August 24, 1987 87-210 - Yosemite - Motorcycle Accident: Double Fatality Location: Tioga Road near Tuolomne E.L.C. (driver) and J.A.S. (passenger) were on a motorcycle which attempted to pass a large passenger bus and collided head-on with a car. Both were medevaced out from Crane Flat, but were DOA at the receiving hospital. No one in the car was hurt. September 3, 1987 87-223 - Yosemite - Fatality - Motor Vehicle Accident Location: Arch Rock, Rt # 140 E.F. was reportedly traveling at a high rate of speed and crashed through a rock wall on the river side of the highway. The vehicle fell 200' into the river canyon. E.F. was successfully extricated by park rangers who worked for 2 hours to free him from the wreckage. E.F. was transported to the Valley Medical Center in Fresno where he was admitted in critical condition. He died on August 30th at the Doctor's Hospital in Modesto. September 3, 1987 87-224 - Yosemite - Rockslide - No Injuries Location: Mirror Lake area A rockslide was reported to have occurred involving approximately 200,000 cubic yards of rock. The trail is open to traffic on south side of the Mirror Lake loop. Tenaya Lake can be reached via this south side passage. September 9, 1987 87-225 - Yosemite - Drug Seizure Location: Wildcat Creek The park reported the arrest of two white males on 9/8/87 after rangers had performed surveillance on a marijuana plantation located near Wildcat Creek. The plot contained over 100 mature plants, an elaborate irrigation system, and lean-to shelters. The estimated value of the plants is $150,000. September 25, 1987 87-236 - Yosemite - Fatality - Climbing Accident Location: El Capitan Victim was jumarring on the 25th pitch on the nose of El Capitan when he fell 150 feet to the end of his rope, striking his head against the rock wall. He was killed instantly. Ten NPS rangers were flown to the top of El Capitan. One ranger descended 1,200 feet to recover the body which was flown by helicopter to the valley floor. The Austrian consulate was notified. October 7, 1987 87-241 - Yosemite - Fatality-Fall Location: Bridal Veil Falls Victim apparently hiked to the top of the falls, walked to the edge to look over, then fell 2,000' to his death. Body was recovered by NPS rangers from the pond at the bottom of the falls and taken to mortuary in Merced, CA. Next of kin have been notified. November 23, 1987 87-264 - Yosemite - Fatality Location: White Wolfe Campground Mr. F.B.M. was hiking in the park when a snowstorm apparently forced him to take shelter in a cabin near White Wolfe Campground. Because he was a diabetic and was unable to get food or medication, he went into insulin shock and died. His body was discovered there on the 20th. F.B.M. suffered through a seizure while in the Valley two weeks previous to this incident, and became extremely violent - apparently a normal reaction for him - during the time he was being transported to the hospital. December 7, 1987 87-271 - Yosemite - Fatality: Visitor Fall Location: Tunnel View D.G. and her husband stopped at Tunnel View on Saturday afternoon. While he took a nap, she went for a walk. When he awoke, he could not find her and notified rangers. A search was begun which employed ground searchers, two dog teams and a helicopter, and her body was found at the bottom of a 350-foot embankment on Sunday afternoon. February 16, 1988 88-22 - Yosemite - Employee Death Location: El Portal J.L., a Yosemite maintenance worker, was killed while off-duty in a one-car motor vehicle accident in El Portal. The vehicle was totally consumed by fire. Her husband, D.L., ia a maintenance worker at Golden Gate. He has been notified of the accident. February 19, 1988 88-26 - Yosemite - Storm Location: Yosemite Valley Severe Santa Ana winds which swept over much of California blew down a number of trees in Yosemite Valley, including a 180-foot-tall Ponderosa pine which fell on a cabin occupied by J.E. (last name reported as B. in wire service stories), her mother and her mother's boyfriend. The girl was killed; the two adults suffered minor injuries. The lodge area was evacuated, but reopened to the public by midmorning on Friday. Sequoia has sent people to the park to assist in clearing remaining hazardous trees in the area. According to news reports, about twenty trees fell in the area, damaging five cabins and a number of vehicles. Winds as high as 60 mph were recorded in the park, and gusts of equal or higher speeds (up to 90 mph) toppled utility poles, fanned fires and damaged buildings all across the state. March 14, 1988 88-36 - Yosemite - Homicide Location: Curry Village M.H.E.-A. and R.E.D. were both employees of Curry Company. R.E.D. was fired from his job early on Saturday, and accused M.H.E.-A. of having something to do with the firing. He approached M.H.E.-A. with a knife in the latter's quarters; in the ensuing confrontation, M.H.E.-A. was able to gain control of the knife and stab and kill R.E.D. He turned himself in to park rangers, and plead self-defense. He was charged with first degree homicide in Federal court on Monday. May 23, 1988 88-88 - Yosemite - Climbing Fatality Location: Pancake Ridge, El Capitan R.K., a 24-year-old native of West Germany, was on the twentieth pitch on the nose of El Capitan when he pulled off a large flake of granite which knocked him off the cliff and also severed his climbing rope. He fell 2000' to his death. His partner was able to climb safely to the top. June 3, 1988 88-94 - Yosemite - Search and Rescue Location: Northwest face of Half Dome Two climbers were marooned 600 feet below the summit of Half Dome while climbing the northwest face on the 28th. An ice storm froze their ropes, preventing them from continuing beyond Big Sandy Ledge. The storm hampered rescue efforts until the afternoon of the 29th when supplies were dropped to the climbers by helicopter. Later that evening, rescuers dropped on the summit were able to lower new ropes to the climbers. The uninjured climbers then used these ropes to raise themselves to the summit. They subsequently hiked to the valley by trail. Thursday, January 5, 1989 88-288 - Yosemite - Death of Employee Dick Riegeluth, 66, chief of resource management at Yosemite since 1972, suffered a massive stroke on December 27th and died the following day at Fresno Hospital. He is survived by his wife Marilyn and by his children, Doug and Ellen. A memorial service was held at the Yosemite Chapel on January 3rd. Contributions may be made to the Mono Lake Committee, National Wildlife Federation, Sierra Club or the Nature Conservancy. Tuesday, February 14, 1989 89-19 - Yosemite - Assault on Ranger On the morning of February 5th, a Yosemite ranger was assaulted by a park visitor. G.H., 66, of Jacksonville, Oregon, became irate when he learned that the NPS would not reimburse him for towing charges incurred after he twice got stuck in the snow in the Sunnyside parking area. He'd also been warned to get his dog under physical control. G.H. assaulted the ranger with his fists and inflicted minor injuries; with the help of the tow truck operator, who went to the ranger's assistance, G.H. was brought under control, handcuffed and arrested. He has been charged with assault and interference charges under 18 USC 111 and 36 CFR 2.32(a)(1). (Herb Gercke, WRO). Friday, February 17, 1989 89-22 - Yosemite - Rock Slide Sometime during the night of February 14th, approximately five tons of rock and debris slid 600' downslope onto a 60-yard segment of Highway 120 8/10 of a mile below the tunnel. There were no injuries. Major clean-up operations are underway to open the road prior to this holiday weekend and the onset of a forecasted snow storm. (Herb Gercke, WRO). Friday, February 24, 1989 89-25 - Yosemite - Drug Arrests Early on Wednesday morning, park rangers, DEA agents, U.S. Marshalls and officers from several other local agencies executed arrest warrants for eleven people for distribution of controlled substances in the park. Eight of the eleven are employees of Yosemite Park and Curry Company and reside within the park; the employment of the remaining three, who lived outside of Yosemite, is not known. The arrests resulted from a lengthy investigation which was conducted by park rangers with the assistance of Yosemite Park and Curry Company. Wednesday, March 15, 1989 89-46 - Yosemite - Death of Concession Employee W.W.S., 31, of Mariposa, California, died in his sleep early on the morning of the 13th at his residence in Mariposa. W.W.S. was an employee of the Yosemite Park and Curry Company and a close friend of Representative Tony Coelho. He was suffering from a serious illness associated with epilepsy, (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO). Monday, April 10, 1989 89-66 - Yosemite - Climbing Fatality At 6:30 pm on the 7th, a park visitor found the body of 21-year-old J.L. of Longford Bottoms, England, at the bottom of a cliff in the vicinity of Mirror Lake and the base of Half Dome. Investigation revealed that J.L. had arrived in the park with a tour group that morning, and that he had rented a bicycle, ridden it to the Mirror Lake area, then gone hiking on the Mirror Lake loop trail. J.L. apparently attempted to solo climb the cliff bands below Half Dome and fell to his death. No climbing equipment was found in the area where the body was recovered. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, in message to RAD/WRO and RAD/WASO). Tuesday, May 30, 1989 89-106 - Yosemite - MVA with Two Fatalities On May 28th, a car containing five French nationals collided with a tree on the Tioga Road approximately three miles east of Crane Flat junction. J.B. and M.-P.M. were killed in the accident. The driver, D.B., suffered major injuries to his chest and lower extremities and was transported by Mediflight to Memorial North Hospital in Modesto. F.B. was also medivaced to Modesto with head lacerations and multiple fractures of both legs. S.K. was treated for minor rib and hand injuries at the Yosemite Medical Clinic and later released. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message to RAD/WRO and RAD/WASO). Thursday, July 13, 1989 89-179 - Yosemite - Drug and Weapons Arrest At approximately 9 p.m. on July 11th, a frightened park visitor at Yosemite Creek Campground, located four miles south of Tioga Pass Road, called the Yosemite dispatch office via the park's 911 emergency line to report that a man was shooting a semi-automatic handgun within the campground. She reported that she had heard several strings of shots being fired from site #62, that approximately 40 to 50 gunshots had come from this campsite over several hours along with loud arguing between a man and a woman, and that she had seen the man acting erratically, dancing wildly and shouting in the campsite. Rangers responded, evacuated about 30 other campers, and sealed off the area. By this time, darkness had fallen and the area around site #62 was quiet, with no one visible. Rangers set up a containment perimeter and began surveillance; they checked the registration of a vehicle at the site, and found it belonged to 25-year-old T.C., III, of Sparks, Nevada. The occupants of the tent were ordered to come out. T.C. and a woman, later identified as 25-year-old J.T., also of Sparks, exited and were detained by rangers. A search of the tent uncovered a loaded semi-automatic 9 millimeter pistol with a round chambered and a magazine bearing 17 more rounds, several other loaded and discharged magazines, copious quantities of beer and tequila, and a leather pouch containing several bundles of a white powdery substance believed to be either cocaine or methamphetamines. Three buds of suspected marijuana were also recovered from J.T.'s wallet. Both J.T. and T.C. have denied ownership of the controlled substances. The two were arrested for possession of controlled substances, and T.C. was also booked into the Yosemite jail for possessing a loaded firearm within a park area and for recklessly discharging a firearm in a park area. Their vehicle and their dog, a pit bull, were impounded. Further investigation revealed that warrants existed for T.C.'s arrest on a variety of traffic offenses in California. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE and Norm Hinson, Investigator, YOSE, via CompuServe reports to RAD/WASO and RAD/WRO). Tuesday, July 25, 1989 89-192 - Yosemite - Ascent of El Capitan by Paraplegic On Monday, climbers Mike Corbett and Mark Wellman, a 29-year-old paraplegic, were tackling the 600-foot Groove pitch on their way toward the 3,593-foot summit of the rock. The pair had already climbed about 2,000 feet since they began the climb. If successful, Wellman will become the first paraplegic to climb one of the world's most challenging cliffs. The two should complete the climb late today or early Wednesday. Wellman, who is using his arms to make the ascent, has estimated that it will take him 7,000 pull-ups to reach the top. Wellman was left paralyzed from the waist down when he fell 50 feet during a climb in 1982. (Associated Press report). Thursday, July 27, 1989 89-192 - Yosemite - Follow-up on Paraplegic Ascent of El Capitan Climbers Dike Corbett and Mark Wellman, a 29-year-old paraplegic ranger, reached the summit of El Capitan yesterday afternoon, seven days and four hours after they began their ascent. Wellman is the first paraplegic to conquer El Capitan. The climb took en estimated 7,000 pull-ups, each of which advanced him only a half foot. A nationwide television audience saw them reach the top, and the Senate later passed a resolution commending them for their "extraordinary feat of bravery and stoutheartedness." (Associated Press). Tuesday, August 1, 1989 89-199 - Yosemite - Search, Visitor Fatality At 4 p.m. on the 28th, W.B., a 28-year-old marathon runner from Whittier, California, was reported overdue from a hike to Mirror Lake. An extensive search was begun utilizing search dogs, helicopters and technical climbers. At 3 p.m. on the 30th, W.B.'s body was found below North Dome Gully and was recovered by helicopter later that day. It appears that W.B. attempted to take a short cut by descending the precipitous gully and fell fifty feet to his death. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO). Tuesday, August 15, 1989 89-227 - Yosemite - Falling Fatality J.E.O., 20, of Santa Barbara, California, hiked with two friends to the top of Yosemite Falls on the 12th and camped there overnight. The next morning, he went sliding in the water near Upper Yosemite Falls, slid over the edge and plunged 1400 feet to his death. Witnesses said that J.E.O. did not shout or appear to realize what was happening when he went over. Warning signs advising visitors to stay out of the water are posted in the area. (Telephone report from RAD/WRO and AP story). Thursday, August 24, 1989 89-241 - Yosemite (California) - Climber Rescue At 6 p.m. on the 22nd, Y.C., 21, of Tahoe City, California, sustained major injuries when he fell approximately 50 feet while attempting to climb a summit spire on Cathedral Peak. Y.C. was climbing a moderately technical route without the aid of climbing equipment. The 50 foot fall caused serious compound fractures to both lower bones in Y.C.'s right leg and major trauma to his head and face. Ranger response to the scene was delayed by high, gusty winds which precluded helicopter use. The rescue team reached the scene at dusk, stabilized Y.C.'s injuries, and prepared him for either a helicopter or lowering rescue for the following morning. Angel IV, a rescue helicopter from Lemoore Naval Air Station, arrived on scene at 8 a.m. yesterday morning. After making 14 passes in gusty winds and clouds, rescuers in the helicopter were finally able to cable winch Y.C. aboard the ship and transport him to Yosemite Medical Center, where he was treated for his injuries. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO). Monday, September 11, 1989 89-265 - Yosemite (California) - Hiker Found On August 23rd, J.H. of Cheshire, England, began a hike from Yosemite Valley into the Sierra Nevadas along Sunrise and Cloud's Rest trails. After reaching the summit line, he began descending the east slope, lost the trail, then slipped and fell down a ravine and broke his leg. Despite severe pain in his upper right leg, J.H. was able to get into his sleeping bag. Over the ensuing days, he shouted for help, but his cries were not heard. He also made several unsuccessful attempts to ascend the ravine to the trail above. Although he ran out of food after a couple of days, J.H. was able to get water from a nearby stream. On September 7th, J.H. spent seven hours crawling up the ravine and finally gained the trail, where he was found by hikers who gave him some candy bars, then went to a ranger station for help. Rangers hiked in to the area that evening and directed a helicopter crew to the spot on the following morning. J.H. is being treated for his injuries, but is reported, to be in excellent shape. (Associated Press, 9/8/89). Tuesday, October 10, 1989 89-313 - Yosemite (California) - Motor Vehicle Accident with Fatality On October 5th, T.E., 32, of Albany, California, was driving on Tioga Road west of May Lake Junction when his car was hit head-on by a vehicle in the wrong lane of traffic. Elkins was killed instantly; his passengers, A. and J.S., are hospitalized in, respectively, critical and serious condition. J.M., the driver of the second vehicle, sustained a spinal injury; his wife and two small children, aged five and six, received nunor injuries. J.M. was driving under the influence of alcohol and will be charged with felony manslaughter. (Lee Shackleton, YOSE, via CompuServe report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO). Friday, January 19, 1990 87-271 - Yosemite (California) - Homicide Arrest On December 5, 1987, S.G. reported to park rangers that his wife, Dolores, was missing. He said that the two of them had arrived in the park that afternoon and stopped at Tunnel View. He said that she went for a walk while he took a nap, and that he could not find her after he awoke. A search was begun, and her body was found the next day at the bottom of a 350-foot cliff. A joint investigation involving the NPS and the FBI was begun shortly thereafter. S.G. was an enlisted man at Lemoore NAS at the time of the incident, so the Naval Investigative Service assisted in the probe. Investigators found that the two had been married in August, 1987, and that S.G. had taken cut over $400,000 in insurance policies on her life just prior to her death. On October 20, 1989, following an 18- month-long investigation, S.G., now discharged from the Navy, was arrested for the murder of his wife. He was arraigned in US District Court in Fresno on October 23rd and pleaded innocent. S.G. is being held without bail in the Fresno County jail. A status conference is scheduled for January 29th to determine when the trial will be held. S.G. faces a maximum sentence of life imprisonment without parole. (CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, noon EST, 1/18/90). Friday, June 22, 1990 90-150 - Yosemite (California) - Successful Rescue On the afternoon of June 16th, rangers received a report of a person trapped in the cascade water of Yosemite Creek. Park visitor E.W. had been attempting to take photographs off the trail when he fell into the cascade pools. Although E.W. was able to extricate himself, he again fell into the creek on his second photo attempt, then slid approximately 100 feet down a cliff and became lodged in the swift water of the inner gorge between upper and lower Yosemite Falls. Rangers Joe Sumner and Kim Aufhauser were helicoptered in wet suits to a site near E.W., then rappelled 180 feet down a tributary waterfall to reach him. E.W. was unhurt, but severely hypothermic, having been up to his lower chest in 40 degree temperature water for over four hours. During the raising procedure (using a chest harness and Z-rig hauling rope system), E.W. stopped breathing. Aufhauser and Sumner stopped the procedure, quickly administered mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and were able to maintain E.W.'s airway. With E.W. now in a full harness, the raising process began again. Unfortunately, those manning the hauling system were unable to see either E.W., Aufhauser and Sumner or the obstacles that they wer encountering. During the final stages of raising, E.W. and Sumner were pulled through a waterfall and were momentarily unable to breathe. Ranger Kerry Maxwell, acting as spotter, radioed an urgent warning of their predicament and hastened the pulling efforts of the raising team. Sumner's head finally came through the falling water far enough to allow him to breathe and he was able to pull E.W.'s head out of the water as well. Exhausted, Aufhauser and Sumner finally succeeded in bringing the 230-pound E.W. to a site where he could be evacuated by helicopter; he was short-hauled to the valley floor by the park's contract ship just before dark. Rain and windy conditions during the entire operation made helicopter operations difficult. Visibility at the end of the evacuation flight prevented the helicopter from either leaving the valley or evacuating staff from the rescue site. Subsequent reports showed E.W.'s body core temperature to be 83 degrees. He was transported by ambulance from the park and subsequently flown by Medi-Flight to a hospital in Modesto. E.W. was subsequently released from that hospital without permanent injury. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 6/21). Thursday, July 12, 1990 90-192 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue On Sunday, June 24th, E.R. went for a day hike in the park but did not return as planned. E.R. later said that he'd told two friends where he was going, but neither of them confirmed this. His supervisor reported him overdue on the 27th when he failed to show up for work for the second day. An investigation was begun into the matter. On the 29th, rangers contacted a bus driver who thought he might have left E.R. off at Glacier Point on the 24th, but a search for a possible suicide victim had been going on in the area for three days and E.R. had not been seen during that time. On the 30th, E.R.'s girl friend in New Orleans was contacted, and she reported that he'd sent her a letter saying he was going to Snow Creek Falls. Because of three other rescues in progress, the first flight searching for E.R. was made three hours later at 7 p.m. He was spotted on a small ledge near the falls fifteen minutes later. Three rangers rappelled 200 feet to him, splinted his fractured ankle and prepared him for a helicopter short haul. E.R. was medevaced out just before dark. E.R. told rangers he'd fractured his ankle when he lost his balance while taking a photo, fell 100 feet, and came to rest on the ledge. He was unable to crawl back to the trail due to the steepness of the cliff, and could not yell to hikers in the area due to the roar of the falls. E.R. drank his two canteens of water the first day; he subsisted on his own fluid excretions and insects for the next six days. E.R. apparently learned survival skills as an Eagle Scout and conserved energy by remaining out of the sun and not moving around. Doctors stated that this conservation of energy may have saved his life, as it was unlikely that he could have survived another night in his condition without water. At the time of his rescue, E.R.'s ankle was infested by maggots and was suffering from gangrene. E.R. was cared for at the park's medical clinic, then transferred to a hospital. His foot will be saved and should work well after surgery. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/11). Thursday, July 12, 1990 90-193 - Yosemite (California) - Conviction On July 6th, the United States Attorney in Fresno, California, announced that a federal jury in U.S. District Court had returned a guilty verdict in the murder trial of S.A.G. S.A.G. was convicted of first degree murder for killing his wife, D.C.G., by pushing her off a 350-foot cliff in the Discovery View area of the park on December 5, 1987. S.A.G. told rangers at that time that his wife had disappeared while hiking in the area. Her body was discovered the following day after an extensive search, and her death was initially believed to have been an accident. However, contradictory statements made by S.A.G. concerning the circumstances of his wife's death led to further investigation by rangers and FBI agents. It was also learned that S.A.G. had insured his wife of three months for $437,000 just six weeks before the incident. That investigation led to a murder indictment against Gray on October 19, 1989. S.A.G. faces a potential maximum sentence of life imprisonment without parole. Sentencing has been scheduled for September 10th. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via (CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/11). Friday, July 13, 1990 90-194 - Yosemite (California) - Fatality On July 5th, V.B., 66, a Lebanese native living in Glendale, California, was reported missing. It was initially thought that he was lost outside of the park, but his car was found at the Sentinel Dome parking lot on July 9th. His body was soon found in the Bridalveil Falls drainage near the rim of Yosemite Valley. V.B. was a camera buff, and apparently walked west from the parking lot to the point where his body was found. There was no fall involved and no signs of foul play. His death is believed to have been from natural causes, but an investigation is underway. (Linda Abbott, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/12). Wednesday, August 1, 1990 90-219 - Redwoods/Lassen/Yosemite (California) - Arrest for Thefts, Assault On June 25th, M.F.S.S., 21, of Sequim, Washington, left town along with two females and a male, all of them juveniles. Shortly thereafter, they stopped in Seattle, where they stole a Seattle Police Department undercover vice vehicle. Later that month, they committed a burglary of a map fee box at Redwoods. On July 2nd, they broke into a Forest Service/National Park Service visitor center at Manzanita Lake at Lassen Volcanic and stole the safe; later that day, they committed additional burglaries in four Forest Service buildings. On July 3rd, M.F.S.S. sexually molested one of the two women with him, which the victim reported to park rangers at Yosemite on the 5th. M.F.S.S. was arrested on July 6th and charged with burglary of the visitor center at Lassen, burglary and theft at the Forest Service sites, possession of stolen property, and possession of a stolen vehicle. The sexual incident is being investigated by the Mono County Sheriff's Office, and the theft of the police vehicle is being investigated by Seattle PD. Additional charges are anticipated. (Guy Whitmer, LAVO, via (CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/23). Tuesday, August 7, 1990 90-240 - Yosemite (California) - Climbing Fatality M.T., 28, a Yosemite Park and Curry Company employee, was killed in a fall while attempting to climb a 5/8 pitch ascent on Keystone Corner on August 2nd. According to his climbing partner, M.T. might have exceeded his ability and experience. The probable cause of death is considered to be climber error compounded by equipment failure. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/6). Tuesday, October 9, 1990 90-358 - Yosemite NP (California) - Safety Inspections A two day commercial bus inspection was conducted in conjunction with California Highway Patrol, Public Utilities Commission, the Yosemite Law Enforcement Office, and Valley District rangers. During this two day period, 44 buses were inspected which resulted in 69 violation notices being issued and 9 buses being placed out of service for major safety violations. The inspection was well received by passengers. Many of them thanked us for being concerned with their safety and several of them were upset at the bus operators for operating unsafe buses. We also received favorable media coverage from CBS-TV in San Francisco and the San Francisco Chronicle. (CompuServe from Roger Rudolph, C.R. through Herb Gercke, WRD) Thursday, October 25, 1990 90-384 - Yosemite (California) - Earthquake At 11:15 p.m. on the 23rd, an earthquake registering 5.7 on the Richter scale occurred near Lee Vining, California, about 20 miles east of the park. The quake was strongly felt in the Yosemite Valley area; residents reported that it was extremely loud and lasted for at least 15 seconds. The Tioga Pass road was closed overnight due to rock slides outside of the park which have since been removed by Cal Trans work crews. Rock slides also closed Highway 140 and 120 in the park. One lane of Highway 140 was opened for administrative travel at 10 a.m. yesterday morning, and was scheduled to be completely opened later in the day. large rocks still need to be removed from Highway 120 near the junction with 140 and a stretch of pavement 30 feet long also must be replaced. The road has been closed indefinitely from Crane Flat Junction east. Due to the reduction in services available in the park, entrance fees have been suspended. Services should be fully restored within three to four days. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message and phone call from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/24). Tuesday, November 6, 1990 90-402 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests On the morning of October 25th, a team of five rangers arrested two concessions employees in the park for possession and delivery of controlled substances. The pair were charged under 36 CFR 2.35. One of the two admitted to the offense while being questioned, pled guilty upon arraignment, and received a $1,000 fine and two years probation; the other will be prosecuted. The arrests stemmed from an investigation which was initiated after information was received from a confidential informant. Rangers observed and recorded four buys during the investigation. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/5). Friday, November 9, 1990 90-408 - Yosemite (California) - Sexual Assault A man entered the Ticketron office in Tuolumne Meadows around 4 p.m. on October 13th and began asking the lone female employee various questions. The employee became uncomfortable with the questions and asked the man to leave. About an hour later, he returned, entered the building unnoticed, and went into a back office. He then emerged from that office, grabbed the woman, pulled her towards him and began assaulting her. When she screamed, the man released her and immediately left the building. Rangers are seeking the man and further investigating the incident. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via (CompuServe report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/8). Friday, November 9, 1990 90-409 - Yosemite (California) - Larceny Arrests On October 23rd, rangers in Tuolomne Meadows stopped a red Jeep Cherokee which matched a vehicle being sought by the Mono County sheriff's office. The vehicle had been used by unknown persons who'd been involved in fraudulent credit card use in Lee Vining, east of the park. When NCIC inquiries were subsequently conducted, rangers found that the Cherokee had been stolen in Orange County, and that the license plates, registration and proof of insurance had been stolen at Grand Canyon. The suspects were also in possession of various stolen credit cards. Photographs found in the Cherokee indicated that the suspects had been visiting parks throughout the Southwest and employing the stolen credit cards there. The cards were in the names of George Derrington and Thomas Hornung. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/8). Friday, November 9, 1990 90-410 - Yosemite (California) - Drug and Weapon Arrests On November 3rd, Valley District rangers contacted two illegal campers at Yosemite Lodge. The man and woman were subsequently arrested for possession of two 9 millimeter semi-automatics, crossbows, a blow gun and various martial arts weapons. LSD and marijuana were also found in the vehicle. Documents in the vehicle showed that the pair frequently visit national parks and that they are survivalists. Both were charged with various felony weapons violations. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/8). Tuesday, November 27, 1990 87-271 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Homicide On November 13th, S.G. was sentenced in U.S. District Court to life imprisonment without parole for the murder of his wife, D., in December of 1987. He was convicted of pushing her to her death off a 350-foot cliff near Tunnel View to collect a $500,000 life insurance policy. A joint investigation was conducted by the NPS and the Fresno office of the FBI. The two investigators from the park, Paul Ducasse and Fred Elchlepp, spent two years working on the case with the FBI before a grand jury indictment could be obtained. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/26). Monday, December 3, 1990 90-429 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest M.D., 28, a park concession employee, was arrested on November 21st and charged with possession of marijuana (21 USCj and obstruction of justice (18 USC 1512). At the time of his arrest, M.D. was found with a small quantity of marijuana and $740 in $20 bills. M.D. had been under investigation for several weeks for sexual assault, for possession and distribution of controlled substances, and for intimidating and threatening to murder the victim of a sexual assault who was also a possible government witness. During interviews with M.D., rangers learned that he had been making weekly trips to Fresno to purchase quarter- to half-pound quantities of marijuana, which he then brought to Yosemite and sold. M.D. also admitted to illegal sexual contacts with both adults and juveniles. Felony charges are pending. M.D. is currently being held in custody on these and other pending charges pertaining to formal court probation for a burglary conviction in which he has been ordered to make restitution of $20,000. (CRO, YOSE, via Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/29). Monday, December 3, 1990 90-430 - Yosemite (California) - Thwarted Suicide Attempt On November 22nd, rangers received information that Z.P., 28, of El Cerrito, California, might be in the park to commit suicide. At 1:00 that afternoon, rangers Lalone and Bardsley found Z.P.'s vehicle at Crane Flat and saw an empty handgun box and ammunition within. They finally spotted Z.P. after tracking her for six miles through the snow up the Tioga Road. As the rangers attempted to communicate with her, Z.P. removed a .38 caliber revolver from her pack and brandished it. She threatened to shoot the rangers if they interfered with her suicide attempt. When both rangers drew their weapons, Z.P. left the road and headed into the woods. Rangers Bardsley and Johnson tracked her for another half mile up the south fork of the Tuolumne drainage and found Z.P. with the weapon still in her hand. They took cover and began talking with her. Z.P. repeated her threat to shoot a ranger if they attempted to interfere with her. After three hours of negotiation, the rangers rushed and subdued her. Rangers Johnson and Lalone sustained minor injuries in the altercation. (CRO, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 11/29). Thursday, December 27, 1990 90-454 - Yosemite (California) - Burglary Arrest Rangers arrested 23-year-old M.S. at 1:30 a.m. on December 7th for possession of stolen property, burglary, possession of burglary tools and theft. Earlier that week, M.S., a former employee of Yosemite Park and Curry Company, allegedly broke into one of the company's buildings and stole a complete set of vending machine keys and a company radio. During the week, M.S. purportedly employed the keys to break into Coke vending machines and utilized tools to break into newspaper vending machines. Informants gave law enforcement rangers information about M.S.'s activities and provided the location of the stolen property. The radio, several master keys, a portion of the vending machine money and stolen tools have been recovered. M.S. allegedly broke into the more remote vending machines in the middle of the night while monitoring Curry security officers' radio transmissions; he is said to have utilized a mountain bike for transportation. M.S. was on supervised parole at the time of his arrest and is being held without bail on five felony counts. It's estimated that over $400 was stolen from the various vending machines. (CRO, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 12/26). Friday, December 28, 1990 90-455 - Yosemite (California) - ARPA Theft During the A-Rock Fire last summer, numerous archeological sites within the park were exposed, particularly in Foresta, the site of a Miwok hunting camp and burial area. After the fire, the park's law enforcement office received information that members of a contract tree removal crew were removing artifacts while clearing power line rights of way through Foresta. Following a two-month-long investigation by park rangers, the suspects were identified. On December 7th, the suspects confessed to removing the artifacts, which included trade items obtained from Anasazi groups in the southwest, and investigators were subsequently able to recover them. The artifacts were valued at approximately $1,000. (CRO, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 12/27). Wednesday, January 2, 1991 90-462 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Fatality R.A.B., 43, of Desert Hot Springs, California, was fatally injured in a two-car accident on Highway 41 on December 29th. R.A.B. was traveling southbound on the icy highway at an excessive rate of speed about three miles from the park's south entrance when he slid into an oncoming truck being driven by Malcom Fulmer of Wawona. R.A.B. was struck in the head and apparently killed by the binding of one of his unsecured skis, which were inside the vehicle. (Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 12/31). Wednesday, February 6, 1991 91-41 - Yosemite (California) - Arson At about 2:30 a.m. on January 25th, a structural fire broke out in a garage located within the administrative site at El Portal. Preliminary investigation indicates that the fire was man-caused and most likely arson. The garage was wooden with a dirt floor and was used for storage. A vehicle was observed leaving the scene when approached by park enforcement rangers; they were able to obtain a vehicle description and partial license plate number. An investigation is now underway. [Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 2/5] Friday, February 15, 1991 91-48 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest Rangers received information earlier this year that crack cocaine was arriving in the park on a weekly basis and began an investigation into the allegations five weeks ago. A suspect D.S., 24, of Fresno, California was identified through surveillance, and a search warrant was obtained for him and for his effects. A routine records check revealed that there were three warrants out for D.S. for false identification, escape and violation of probation. A team of rangers arrested D.S. on February 7th near the entrance to Yosemite Lodge. Although he was not in possession of any controlled substance at the time, further investigation disclosed that D.S. was a high-level participant in a crack cocaine distribution ring but not likely to be carrying the substance himself. The Fresno police department narcotics division, King's County sheriff's office and FBI are assisting in the investigation. [Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 2/14] Wednesday, February 20, 1991 91-53 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality C.A.Y., 17, of Davis, California, and three companions were hiking on the Falls Trail on February 18th when they decided to go scrambling along the scree slopes and cliffs on the north walls of the valley. While doing so, C.A.Y. lost his footing, fell about 15 feet, then fell another 285 feet. One of C.A.Y.s' companions attempted CPR without success. Responding rangers determined that C.A.Y. had died instantly as a result of head injuries. [Roger Rudolph, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 2/19] Wednesday, May 15, 1991 91-159 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning On May 13th, six people were thrown into the Merced River near Bridal Veil Falls when their rafts capsized. Rangers employed ropes to pull five to the shore, but the sixth, S.R., 18, of Los Angeles, was found face down in the water 100 yards downstream from the accident. Two of those rescued were treated for hypothermia. According to family members, the group ran into rapids while floating down the river in three rubber rafts. The Merced is reported to be more dangerous than usual because it is swollen with snow runoff. [Associated Press story, 5/15] Tuesday, May 28, 1991 91-171 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Three Fatalities Just after dawn on May 25th, E.W., 44, was driving on Highway 140 near Bridalveil Falls when she fell asleep at the wheel and lost control of her car, which then went off the road and plunged into the Merced River. E.W. and her four passengers - nephews L.T., 5, and M.T., 3; niece S., 7; and the children's grandmother, P.W.J. all survived the crash and climbed onto the car's roof. The girl was able to grab a rope thrown to the car from the shore and was pulled to safety; her brothers tried to hold onto her, but were swept away by the swift current. E.W. then dove into the river in an attempt to rescue the boys, but failed to reach them. She was unconscious by the time rangers reached her and was pronounced dead soon thereafter at the Yosemite Medical Clinic. Meanwhile, P.W.J. was rescued from the car's roof. An air, water and ground search was begun for the two boys, but has so far been fruitless. Six teams of snorkelers and scuba divers searched the less turbulent areas of the river along a two and a half mile stretch from the accident site, but were unable to find either of the victims. The only item to turn up during the first two days' search was one of the boy's shirts. Efforts are to continue today further down the river. [United Press news story] Wednesday, May 29, 1991 91-180 - Yosemite (California) - Rescues According to an Associated Press report this morning, the park has been experiencing a series of significant rescues over the past two weeks which ranger John Dill characterized as the most intensive such period he'd seen in the past 15 years. Incidents included the car accident reported yesterday, a rescue of three Italian climbers from El Capitan, a significant search for a missing hiker, and the recovery of a climber who broke a leg in a fall near Nevada Falls on the 26th. Further details will be provided when reports are received from the park. [Associated Press, 5/29] Monday, June 10, 1991 91-203 - Yosemite (California) - River Rescue On the afternoon of June 4th, K.L., 13, and J.S., 12, both relatives of NPS employees and residents of El Portal, were rafting on air mattresses in back eddies of the Merced River when they were caught up by the main current and swept downstream. K.L. was able to swim ashore, but J.S. continued down the river until she was able to grab an overhanging tree. NPS rescuers arrived on the scene shortly thereafter. They established a tyrolean traverse and brought J.S. safely ashore after a twohourlong rescue effort. J.S.'s rescue was one of a number of incidents on the Merced over the last few months which have come about because of a heavy spring runoff. [Chris Cruz, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 6/5] Wednesday, June 12, 1991 91-212 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning A.M., a 29-year-old Italian citizen enrolled as a graduate student at Stanford University, was standing in a pool near Chilnualna Falls in Wawona on the 8th when he slipped on the rocks, fell approximately 55 feet through the cascades of the creek, and sustained severe head injuries. His body was recovered a short time later, but it has not yet been determined whether he drowned or died from the injuries he received. The Italian consulate was notified. [Dan Card, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 6/11] Wednesday, June 12, 1991 91-213 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning While swimming with friends in a pool in the South Fork of the Merced River a mile above Swinging Bridge on the 8th, C.M. apparently got caught by the river's current and pulled under. His body was sighted further downstream later in the day, but has not yet been recovered. At the time of the report, divers were about to begin another effort to retrieve his remains. [Dan Card, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 6/11] Tuesday, July 2, 1991 91-251 - Yosemite (California) - Accidental Shooting L.S., 34, an off-duty concession security officer, shot himself in the hand around 8:00 p.m. on June 21st. L.S. was drinking in a concession bar when he reached into his fanny pack and accidentally discharged his concealed .22 caliber derringer. He was transported to the Yosemite clinic, then flown to Modesto for further treatment. L.S. was later charged with carrying a concealed weapon in magistrate court. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/1] Tuesday, July 2, 1991 91-252 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests On June 29th, arrest warrants were obtained for four men for possession and distribution of drugs in the park. Three of the men - D.E., 38, J.G., 41, and W.P., 24, all employees of Yosemite Park and Curry Company were arrested without incident for distribution of LSD and marijuana and for operating a continuing criminal enterprise. The fourth man, C.D., 27, a former NPS employee, is still at large. He has been charged with the distribution of methamphetamines, rock cocaine and marijuana. C.D. was recently arrested by the local drug task force on similar charges. At the time of the arrest, he was en route to the park with a shipment of cocaine and marijuana. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/1] Tuesday, July 2, 1991 91-253 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire A YCC crew was burning trash in Badger Pass on June 17th when a cook trailer next to the fire ignited. Flames soon spread to the exterior walls of the ski lodge. YCC crews and rangers at Badger were able to quickly extinguish the fire. Damages are estimated at $1,000. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/1] Tuesday, July 2, 1991 91-254 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue Late on the morning of the 26th, S.M., 32, fell 40 feet while climbing Half Dome and landed on a ledge which was 400 feet below the summit. A medic was lowered to S.M.'s location late in the afternoon, but rain and snow prevented evacuation. The medic remained with S.M. on the ledge through the night. S.M. was raised to the summit the next day; when the weather cleared briefly around 4:00 p.m., he was picked up by helicopter and flown to the valley floor. Over 20 people were involved in the rescue effort. This was the 33rd SAR mission of the month. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/1] Wednesday, July 10, 1991 91-274 - Yosemite (California) - Demonstration On July 8th, rangers responded to a report of a demonstration in the Hodgdon Meadows housing area and found ten people protesting the removal of trees from a park housing construction site. The group had failed to obtain a permit for the demonstration; rangers told them that they would have to leave the area, but that they would be allowed to obtain a special use permit to demonstrate elsewhere. They were given 15 minutes to leave the housing area. When the rangers returned to the area with a park forestry crew, the demonstrators blocked the roadway to prevent the crew from reaching the work site. The demonstrators were told that they would be arrested if they did not disperse. When they failed to leave, rangers arrested David Orr, 33, of Davis, California. The remaining demonstrators agreed to disperse immediately after his arrest. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/9] Wednesday, July 10, 1991 91-275 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning On the afternoon of July 5th, rangers in the El Portal subdistrict received word that 23-year-old M.B. of Huntington Beach, California, had fallen into the Merced River. Ten park personnel and a helicopter responded to the scene, but were unable to find her. Witnesses indicate that M.B. was standing on a large boulder next to the river's edge and that she apparently slipped and fell into the river. The river is presently classified as white water at this location. Search efforts have been suspended due to other search and rescue activities. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/9] Thursday, July 11, 1991 91-279 - Yosemite (California) - Wildland Arson At about 11:30 a.m. on the morning of July 3rd, the park's fire management office received a report of a wildland fire on the northern border of the park near Lake Eleanor. Park and Forest Service firefighters attacked and suppressed the fire within several hours, limiting the burn to a third of anacre. Investigators subsequently determined that the fire was mancaused and probably arson. The fire took place at a permanent camp which is apparently being used as a base camp for poachers. G.P., who was convicted in magistrate's court this spring for having a permanent camp within park boundaries, was spotted in the area the day before the fire and is a suspect in this case. The investigation is continuing. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/9] Thursday, July 11, 1991 91-280 - Yosemite (California) - Assault A woman employed by the park concessioner was sitting near Yosemite Creek on July 7th when she was approached by an unidentified male. The man attempted to engage in conversation with her; as she got up to walk away, he grabbed her. The woman was able to get free, and saw the man expose himself as she turned away from him. She later provided a detailed description of the assailant. Valley patrol units, including rangers in plain clothes, searched for the man for several hours without success. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/9] Thursday, July 11, 1991 91-281 - Yosemite (California) - Pursuit and Felony Arrest Just before noon on July 4th, rangers in Wawona spotted a 1991 Mazda pickup which had been stolen from Oakhurst, California, about a half hour earlier. The theft of the truck had been witnessed by the owner, who advised police that there was a loaded automatic handgun under the front seat. After all visitor traffic was stopped on the Wawona Road, rangers attempted a felony vehicle stop, but the driver, later identified as J.E.Y. of Corona, California, fled at speeds in excess of 65 mph. The park contract helicopter spotted the stolen truck and maintained visual surveillance while patrol units responded to the area. After seeing the helicopter, York stopped the truck and fled on foot. Rangers pursued. J.E.Y. attempted to hide in Big Creek by submerging himself with only his face above the water, but he was spotted and arrested. J.E.Y. has an extensive criminal history, including three prior convictions for grand theft auto. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/9] Monday, July 15, 1991 91-287 - Yosemite (California) - Successful Rescue Just after 5:00 p.m. on the 8th, rangers in the Valley District received a report that an unidentified visitor had slipped and fallen over a cliff between Upper and Lower Yosemite Falls. The park helicopter immediately flew SAR personnel and equipment to a landing zone near the scene. The victim, F.M., had fallen 20 to 25 feet into the water, but had managed to drag himself up onto a boulder in the middle of the stream. He complained of severe pain in one of his legs. Rescue personnel packaged the victim in a prerigged Stokes litter and employed a shorthaul extraction with the helicopter. F.M. was brought to the valley floor, then transported to the park's medical clinic, where Zrays confirmed that he had a fractured femur. Investigation of the incident revealed that F.M. had wandered several hundred feet from the established trail onto slippery, water-polished granite rocks and had then fallen into the stream. [Jim Tucker, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 7/11] Tuesday, July 16, 1991 91-295 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality Late on the afternoon of July 11th, three separate parties who were hiking in the vicinity of Upper Yosemite Falls reported seeing what appeared to be a body going over Upper Yosemite Falls. Rescue personnel searched the trail on foot and interviewed hikers and the park helicopter searched from the air that evening, but they were unable to locate a victim. A day pack was found at the top of the falls that evening which contained possible identification of the victim. Searchers found the body at the base of Upper Yosemite Falls above the Middle Cascades at about 1:00 p.m. on the 12th. Nine rescue personnel recovered the body. Identification of the victim was confirmed; notification of next of kin is pending. [CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/15] Wednesday, July 24, 1991 91-317 - Yosemite (California) - Fatality A 14-year-old female died of an apparent drug overdose while camping in Lyell Canyon on July 18th. The girl was on a commercial pack trip from Mammoth. Her sister discovered her body in the morning. It appears that she had ingested over 80 tablets of Norpramin, an anti-depressant drug, on the previous evening. Due to unusual circumstances surrounding the death, park investigators and the U.S. Attorney's office are conducting a manslaughter investigation. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via CompuServe message from RAD/WRO, 7/23] Wednesday, July 24, 1991 91-318 - Yosemite (California) - Arson At approximately 9:15 p.m. on the evening of July 18th, Wawona rangers and park fire personnel responded to a vehicle fire at the Wawona Hotel. Upon arrival at the scene, they found a 1987 BMW which had been damaged by a fire which had been extinguished by passing visitors. The rangers could smell the odor of an accelerant and began an arson investigation. The vehicle belongs to a concession employee who works at the hotel, and it is believedthat the fire was started by another employee. Park investigators and the California fire marshall's office are investigation. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/23] Wednesday, July 31, 1991 91-354 - Yosemite (California)- Weekend Incidents Over the ten day period ending yesterday, a series of violent crimes took place in the park. Rocks were thrown at NPS vehicles in two separate incidents; in one instance on July 25th, two individuals were arrested for destroying two patrol vehicle windshields with rocks. In addition to these cases, there have also been three sexual assaults, four instances of people resisting arrest, two child abuse cases, three simple assaults, a suicide and two drug overdoses. [J.R. Tomasovic, LES, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/30] Monday, August 5, 1991 91-365 - Yosemite (California) - Climbing Fatality On July 28th, ranger in the Mather District received a report that J.M., 20, of Polleck Pines, California, had failed to return from a solo free climb between Fairview and Mariuolumne Domes. Rangers began a search of the area, and the park helicopter was called in. J.M.'s body was spotted from the helicopter that evening. Rangers soon arrived at the location and determined that J.M. had died from a fall from an unknown height. [Kris Bardsley, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 8/2] Wednesday, August 7, 1991 91-374 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire A structural fire was reported in Tecoya Dormitory late on the evening of August 3rd. Two park engines responded and found the fire confined to a closet in the dorm. Initial investigation revealed that an improperly used extension cord had caused the fire. Property damage has been placed at about $2,000. It's estimated that the value of property saved was about $250,000. The dorm serves as concession employee housing for the Yosemite Park and Curry Company. [Steve Underwood, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/6] Wednesday, August 7, 1991 91-375 - Yosemite (California) - Disorderly Conduct; Assault on Rangers Rangers received a report of a disturbance in a valley campground on the evening of August 3rd. The caller reported that he had heard what he thought were gunshots and that one man was beating another in a nearby campsite. Rangers Jeff Lynn and Kelly McCloskey arrived at the campsite, observed disorderly behavior, and were immediately confronted by a belligerent A.T., who said that he had a gun and made a move to a van in an apparent attempt to get the weapon. The rangers drew their service revolvers. A.T. moved away from the van without a weapon, though, and instead grabbed a lantern from a neighboring campsite, jumped up on a picnic table and began swinging the lantern at rangers and bystanders and threatening them with serious bodily harm. Two more rangers arrived on scene, and the foursome attempted to calm A.T. and take him into custody peacefully. A.T. continued to threaten them, however, and lunged violently towards any ranger coming close to him. A.T. then moved swiftly through the campground, grabbed a second lantern from another site, and started swinging both of them. A friend of A.T. who tried to calm him down was struck in the head and shoulder by the lanterns. As A.T. headed toward the bank of the Merced River, he told rangers he was getting a knife and reached into his back pocket. Service revolvers were again drawn, and again A.T. failed to produce a weapon. He then jumped into the river; the four rangers and A.T.' friend attempted unsuccessfully to stop him. When A.T. emerged from the other side of the river in another campground, rangers McCloskey, Lynn, Martinez and Obernesser were able to subdue him and take him into custody. Although restrained, A.T. broke his restraints in a caged patrol car and seriously damaged both back doors and one window. He continued to be uncooperative at the park's jail and it took a minimum of six people to move him. A.T. will be charged with four felonies and several misdemeanors, including assault on a federal officer. Nearly all the rangers involved in his arrest incurred at least some minor injuries. One ranger will be on light duty for three days with an ankle injury. Investigation revealed that A.T. had many previous convictions for violence and drug-related offenses and that he was a manic depressive. A.T. admitted that he had not been taking his medication. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/6] Tuesday, August 13, 1991 91-394 - Yosemite (California) - Assault on Ranger Rangers Totten and Obernesser were flagged down by a group of young adults near Stoneman Bridge a few minutes after midnight on August 10th. They told the ranger that two drunk males who were throwing bottles and yelling obscenities had chased them off the bridge. The rangers made contact with the two men J.M., 21, of Newport Beach, California, and M.A., 25, of Ontario, California and saw that they were significantly under the influence of alcohol or drugs. While attempting to arrest them, one of the rangers was struck in the face by J.M., who subsequently ran from the bridge and into a nearby campground. After securing M.A., the two rangers pursued J.M. on foot. J.M. was waiting behind a tree and lunged at the first ranger, striking him several times in the face and head with his fists. One of the rangers employed an extendable baton to strike J.M., but without effect. J.M. then ran from the rangers again, and again turned and attacked the same ranger. J.M. was finally subdued and arrested. He was charged with two counts of assault on an officer and several misdemeanor charges, including resisting arrest, disorderly conduct and being under the influence. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/12] Tuesday, August 13, 1991 91-395 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests Rangers executed a search warrant at the residence of J.T., 22, a concession employee in Yosemite Valley, on the evening of August 6th. The action, which came about as the result of information provided by a confidential informant, led to the seizure of LSD, marijuana and documents which revealed details about an active drug distribution network in the Yosemite and San Francisco areas. Acting on that information, which corroborated additional information from the informant, rangers sought and received permission for a consent search of the residence of N.T., 28, also a concession employee in Yosemite. The search revealed more LSD, U.S. currency, and further documentary evidence. Both were charged with violations of 21 USC; they have been arraigned on the felony counts and are currently awaiting detention hearings. [Vince Johnson, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/12] Thursday, August 22, 1991 91-427 - Yosemite (California) - Explosives Found Mather District rangers found two military 60mm mortar rounds in Yosemite Creek Campground while on patrol on the afternoon of August 19th. Campers were evacuated from the immediate area. Law enforcement office investigators and California fire marshal and explosives disposal personnel responded. A portable Xray machine was used to examine the devices. Both proved to be highly suspicious, so a decision was made to detonate them on scene. They were exploded without incident. Examination of the rounds indicated that they were decoy explosive devices. An investigation is underway to determine who put the devices in the campground. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 8/21] Friday, August 23, 1991 91-429 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue Early on the afternoon of August 19th, rangers received a report that M.L., 24, of Pleasanton, California, was missing and had not been seen since 6:30 p.m. the previous evening. M.L. and several friends were hiking from the Kibbie Lake wilderness parking lot to their camp at Lake Eleanor when M.L., who had been drinking heavily, stepped off the trail to relieve himself. His friends continued to the campsite. When M.L. failed to show up, his friends searched the area, then contacted park rangers. A search was begun which employed the park helicopter and 150 people and dogs from numerous federal, state, local and volunteer agencies. An observer in the helicopter spotted M.L. in the middle of Cherry Creek at 10:00 a.m. on the 21st. He was six miles from the point last seen. Investigators subsequently determined that M.L. and his four friends had camped at Lake Eleanor on Saturday, August 17th, and that the group had consumed three cases of beer that evening. On Sunday morning, the five of them had drunk 10 liters of wine. [Kris Bardsley, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 8/22] Friday, September 6, 1991 91-466 - Yosemite (California) - Jail Fire On August 28th, a highly intoxicated and violent prisoner in the park jail's holding cell knocked loose the intercom system located behind a mesh grill in the cell's ceiling. The intercom landed on the mesh grill and the holding cell's spotlight ignited the intercom wires. The fire smoldered for some time before the onduty jailer discovered it. The fire destroyed the jail's intercom system, and it's estimated that it will cost approximately $1,000 to replace it. The jail does not have either sprinkler or fire alarm systems. [Scott Erickson, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 9/5] Tuesday, September 24, 1991 91-507 - Yosemite (California) - Assault on Concession Employee Rangers responded to a report of an assault in progress involving a shotgun in the Camp Six concession employee area at 4:00 a.m. on September 17th. The assault followed a lengthy argument the evening before in which M.R., a Yosemite Park and Curry Company employee, made threats of violence and racial insults toward other Camp Six residents. M.R. was intoxicated at the time. Following the argument, M.C., W.K. and A.K., also employees of the concessioner, then drove to Madera, California, where they picked up R.M. and returned to Yosemite. R.M. brought a 12-gauge shotgun and ammunition with him. During the trip back, the group agreed to bring M.R. to a parking area, hit him with the butt of the shotgun and otherwise beat him up, and shoot him if he resisted. When they returned to Camp Six, R.M. and M.C. assaulted M.R., inflicting minor injuries. M.C. apparently hesitated to use the shotgun, thereby limiting the attack to a physical beating. M.C., R.M. and M.R. were arrested; M.C. and R.M. were charged with assault, Riddick with disorderly conduct. A search of R.M.'s residence and work place by Madera police officers led to the discovery and seizure of a 12-gauge shotgun and a .22 caliber rifle and to the arrest of another man for violation of parole. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 9/23] Wednesday, October 2, 1991 91-534 - Yosemite (California) - Search in Progress Search efforts were begun on Saturday, September 28th, for W.L., 68, of Denair, California, who failed to return as scheduled from a day hike on the 27th. W.L. was last seen on Friday at 8:30 a.m. at the junction of Mirror Lake loop and the Snow Creek trail in Yosemite Valley. He intended to hike up the Snow Creek trail, probably to North Dome but possibly to the Tioga Road or elsewhere, and was to return in the evening. W.L. is reported to be in good shape, has no known medical problems, and was wellequipped for a day hike. As of the time of the report, there were 125 individuals involved in the search, including three helicopters and crews, seven dog teams, six volunteer search organizations, and employees from Yosemite, Sequoia-Kings Canyon, and Joshua Tree. [Scott Erickson, CR, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/1] Wednesday, October 2, 1991 91-535 - Yosemite (California) - Burglary On September 28th, Yosemite Park and Curry Company security officers and auditors discovered that $12,700 had been stolen from a drop safe at Degnan's Deli. The theft occurred some time between 8:00 a.m. on the 27th and 8:00 a.m. on the 28th. The safe was located within a secured room which was alarmed at the time of the theft. Law enforcement rangers and Curry security officers are working jointly on the case. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/1] Thursday, October 3, 1991 91-534 - Yosemite (California) - Followup on Search The search for W.L., 68, was discontinued early Tuesday morning after his body was located by ground searchers in an area known as the Ahwahnee Ramps. W.L. had fallen an undetermined distance and suffered massive head injuries. It's believed that he fell on the same day he departed on his hike. [Mike LaLone, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/2] Tuesday, October 8, 1991 91-542 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest Rangers in the Wawona District contacted V.T., 32, of Fresno, California, on the morning of October 6th and cited him for an illegal fire. V.T. became agitated during the encounter and was subsequently patted down for weapons. While the pat down was underway, V.T. threw a plastic bag containing marijuana on the ground. He was arrested and taken to the park's jail, and was found to be under the influence of PCP at the time of his booking. An additional pound of marijuana and a pound of suspected PCP were found during an inventory search of Trevino's property. V.T. also had stab wounds no more than four days old on his chest. Investigators are currently trying to determine who was to receive the drugs V.T. was transporting. V.T. has an extensive criminal history for drug trafficking, robbery, assault on a peace officer, and other violent crimes. He will be charged with felony narcotics distribution and with being under the influence of a controlled substance. It is believed that V.T. would have resisted arrest if he had not been injured. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/7] Friday, October 11, 1991 91-548 - Yosemite (California) - Search G.S., one of 90 cross-country runners taking part in a non-permitted marathon from Tuolumne Meadows to Yosemite Valley via Tenaya Canyon on October 5th, failed to show up at the end of the race. Rangers were notified and a search was begun the following day. G.S. was found within an hour by searchers in a helicopter. Race organizer D.H. of Enviro Sports had charged runners $70 each to participate in the race and had failed to obtain a permit for the run. It was later learned that several participants had become lost during the event and spent additional hours finding the race route. Total government search costs will exceed $4,000. Charges are pending against the race organizers. [Mike Mayer, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/10] Friday, October 11, 1991 91-549 - Yosemite (California) - Search A.S., a British citizen, went out for a run in Wawona on the evening of October 8th, but failed to return. A search was begun employing ground, air and dog teams. A.S. was found on the morning of the 10th. He'd apparently become lost and spent two nights in the woods. A.S. incurred some minor injuries, but it otherwise in good condition. [Scott Hinson, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/10] Thursday, October 31, 1991 91-595 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On October 25th, the first winter storm of the season moved into the central Sierras and dropped 4.5 inches of rain at lower elevations and equivalent amounts of snow above 4,000 feet. On the following evening, rangers received reports of cries for help from El Capitan, and found two climbers, S.P. and D.M., stranded in a hanging bivouac about 2,000 feet up the Sea of Dreams route and under a waterfall created by storm runoff. The climbers said that they were unhurt, but that they were unable to move because of the storm and were becoming hypothermic. Because of the poor weather conditions, ground and air rescue efforts were begun simultaneously. A 17-member ground team made a nine-mile, five-hour-long summit approach during the early morning hours of the 27th and reached the edge of El Capitan at 8:00 a.m. Meanwhile, an Army National Guard CH-47 moved a 12-member team to the top of El Capitan during a lull in the storm. Rescue teams made a 700-foot lowering to the stranded climbers; after being warmed, S.P. and D.M. were able to ascend a fixed line to the summit. While the first team was climbing out, another two-man climbing team began to yell for help. The two men, Russ Walling and Erik Erikson, were located 200 yards east of the first party and 400 feet below the summit. When contacted, they told rescuers that one of them had frostbite and that they were unable to complete the climb. The rescue team divided and made a 400- foot lowering to the pair, who were also able to extricate themselves by climbing a fixed line. Post-rescue interviews revealed that the climbers had been buffeted by high winds that ripped rain shelters from portable ledges and exposed them to the elements. S.P. and D.M. had bivouacked in a location that became a down chute for runoff, and other climbers on the wall reported that at one point during the storm the two men had completely disappeared under a waterfall. All victims were airlifted to the Valley medical center, where they were treated and released. [Mike Mayer, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 10/30] Friday, November 15, 1991 91-590 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Burglary Arrests Following their arrest on commercial burglary charges by Modesto police on October 9th, S.M.W., an escaped prisoner from Arkansas, and E.B. were implicated in two burglaries in the Stanislaus National Forest, one burglary and multiple thefts from pipe safes in Sequoia/Kings Canyon, and ten thefts or attempted thefts from campground pipe safes in the Mather District of Yosemite. Both E.B. and S.M.W. have admitted guilt in these cases and are awaiting hearings before a federal grand jury in Fresno. The two men have been committing thefts throughout central California and eastern Nevada, and may have committed similar crimes (with or without accomplices) in the southern Midwest and West. Their method of burglary has been to either remove the safe from the building and open it away from the scene or to peel open the safe at the scene using a pry bar. The method of burglary for the pipe safes has been to either pull out the safe sleeves or break the interior locking mechanism with a chain and pry bar. If you have any information on crimes of this nature, please contact Jeff Sullivan in the Yosemite law enforcement office for additional information (FTS 448-4245 or 209-372-0245). [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, via SEAdog message from Steve Martin, RAD/WRO, 11/7] Friday, November 15, 1991 91-615 - Yosemite (California) - Fatality On November 3rd, a body was spotted from the park's helicopter on a slope beneath Glacier Point. Recovery efforts were delayed until the following morning due to time constraints. Rescue personnel rapelled to the site that day and recovered the body. A tentative identification has been made, and an investigation into the death is underway. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via SEAdog message from Steve Martin, RAD/WRO, 11/7] Tuesday, November 19, 1991 91-622 - Yosemite (California) - Felony Arrest On the evening of November 14th, Yosemite investigators and FBI agents from arrested R.L.J., 37, of Tucson, Arizona, in connection with a robbery of a Bank of America branch office in Merced, California, on November 6th. R.L.J., an employee of Yosemite Park and Curry Company, reportedly approached a teller at the bank, possibly with a concealed weapon, and presented a note demanding 15 $100 bills. After receiving the bills, he reportedly left the bank and entered a travel agency, where he gave his name and address while making flight reservations. Rangers and FBI agents were contacted by the Merced police department after it was learned that R.L.J. was employed at Yosemite. R.L.J. was transported to Fresno for arraignment the morning after his arrest. Charges are pending and the investigation is continuing. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, via SEAdog message from Steve Martin, RAD/WRO, 11/18] Tuesday, December 3, 1991 91-639 - Yosemite (California) - Park Closure High winds began blowing in Yosemite Valley late on the morning of November 29th, and the park was notified at 3:00 that afternoon that winds of up to 70 mph could be expected later in the day. Since winds of this speed met criteria for evacuation in the park's emergency plan, park staff began evacuating Valley campgrounds and concession facilities at 5:30 p.m. The entire operation was completed just before midnight. The closure was lifted the following morning. No injuries or major damage were reported. [Bob Johnson, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 12/2] Thursday, January 16, 1992 92-7 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue On December 23rd, K.B., 25, and C.A., 44, both from the San Francisco Bay area, left Yosemite Valley on a hike to the Tenaya Lake area. They were scheduled to return to the valley on the 28th, but a major snowstorm passed over the Sierra-Nevadas during that time and marooned the hikers. The park received notification that they were overdue on the afternoon of January 1st and a search was begun the following morning. The party was spotted by observers in a helicopter just after noon on the 2nd. Neither K.B. nor C.A. was injured, but their food supply was virtually exhausted. The pair had been unable to traverse the deep snow, even with snowshoes. [Frank Dean, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 1/14] Wednesday, January 22, 1992 92-12 - Yosemite (California) - Fatality; Drug Overdose Rangers Bowen, Lalone and McCloskey (all paramedics) were dispatched to a Yosemite Park and Curry Company dorm in the early morning hours of January 14th in response to a report of an unconscious male in seizure. Upon arrival, they found M.C., 28, a former Curry Company employee, lying unconscious on the floor of a dorm restroom. During their examination of M.C., he went into respiratory arrest, and the rangers initiated advanced life support measures. He was taken to the park's clinic, then transferred to the Merced Community Medical Clinic, where he was placed on a life support system. M.C. never regained consciousness, though, and died on January 15th after life support measures were terminated. Yosemite investigators Jablonski, Sullivan and Hinson determined that M.C. had ingested large quantities of methamphetamines prior to the time he was found in the restroom. Law enforcement rangers from the Valley District conducted in-depth interviews within the community and identified several witnesses. A suspect was subsequently taken into custody on two counts of felony possession of Schedule III drugs (methamphetamines). A homicide investigation is being conducted to determine who provided the drugs to M.C. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 1/21] Thursday, January 30, 1992 92-19 - Yosemite (California) - Successful Search and Rescue E.L.W., 33, of San Francisco, was found in Tenaya Canyon late on the afternoon of January 27th after a two-day search. E.L.W. was reported missing by family members when he failed to return home from the park as planned on January 24th. Investigators learned that he had spent four nights in Yosemite Lodge before leaving on a hike on the 24th. They also found that he was a psychiatric patient with a history of substance abuse, that he believed he was being persecuted by satanic cults, that he had been depressed lately, and that he'd stopped taking his prescribed anti-psychotic and anti-depressant medications. Although he apparently planned to stay out for several days, he had no camping equipment and took only food and alcohol with him. Wilson survived three nights by seeking shelter under overhanging rocks and building fires. He was found uninjured in extremely hazardous terrain in lower Tenaya Canyon, approximately two and a half miles from Yosemite Valley. He was flown by helicopter to the valley, then taken to a local hospital for psychiatric evaluation. Approximately 50 people and a helicopter were employed in the search, including a ten-person investigative unit. U.S. Park Police officers from the San Francisco field office also assisted with the investigation. [Dave Brennan, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 1/29] Monday, March 9, 1992 91-375 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Assault on Ranger On August 3, 1991, rangers were involved in a confrontation with A.T. in which they were at one point required to draw their service revolvers and eventually had to physically subdue him. Several rangers and visitors were threatened and injured during the incident. A.T. was subsequently charged with four felony counts of assault on federal officers. He pled guilty to one of the four counts, and was sentenced to eight months in jail. A.T. has a long history of violent and drug-related crimes. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 3/6] Monday, March 9, 1992 91-394 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Assault on Ranger Following an assault on two park rangers on August 10, 1991, J.M. was charged with two felony counts of assault on a federal officer. J.M. pled guilty to one count of misdemeanor assault on a federal officer and was sentenced to 90 days in jail and three years' probation. J.M. has an extensive history of violent crime. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 3/6] Wednesday, March 18, 1992 92-83 - Yosemite (California) - Illegal Alcohol Sales by Concessioner On February 23rd, investigators Scott Hinson, Jeff Sullivan and Greg Jablonski concluded a month-long investigation into illegal sales of alcoholic beverages to minors at concession retail establishments with the filing of charges against eight persons on 17 counts of violating 36 CFR 2.35, which prohibits sale of alcohol to minors. Each of the persons pled guilty to all counts. Sentencing is pending. The superintendent is reviewing the possibility of administrative action against the concessioner. [Scott Hinson, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 3/16] Thursday, April 2, 1992 92-101 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests On March 20th, rangers executed search and arrest warrants at a house in the Wawona District occupied by Yosemite Park and Curry employees and arrested P.L., J.D. and V.S. - all local employees - on charges of distribution of controlled substances. A fourth employee, R.C., was arrested in Merced on the 25th by California Highway Patrol officers on an outstanding warrant stemming from this investigation. One additional warrant remains outstanding for an individual who is still at large. P.L. and J.D. have pled guilty to multiple counts of distribution of controlled substances; V.S. has pled guilty to possession of a controlled substance. The case against R.C. for distribution of a controlled substance is pending. The arrests stemmed from a six-month-long undercover operation by investigators who employed confidential informants. Several marijuana purchases were made before the warrants were secured. Rangers from both the Wawona and Valley Districts assisted in the execution of the warrants. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, via CompuServe message from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 4/1] Monday, April 27, 1992 92-141 - Yosemite (California) - Fuel Spill A double tractor trailer went off the road on the Chapel straightaway in Yosemite Valley on April 23rd. One of the truck's tanks ruptured and spilled about 75 gallons of diesel fuel. Most of the spill was cleaned up with pads by park and concession staff, and a prescribed burn was employed to remove the remaining residue. The spill occurred away from the Merced River, so there was probably no contamination of the river. [CompuServe report from RAD/WRO, 10/23] Friday, May 1, 1992 92-158 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire Yosemite dispatch received a 911 call from a visitor in the Wawona area reporting a rental cabin on fire early on the afternoon of April 28th. Responding park personnel found the structure fully involved, with the fire spreading to a pickup truck and surrounding trees. A nearby residence was protected, an adjacent propane tank was successfully cooled down, and the fire was kept from spreading. Caustic fumes from the burning vehicle and hazardous live power lines provided additional concerns during suppression efforts. The cabin occupants were able to exit the cabin safely, but the husband and a park employee living next to the structure were treated and released on scene for smoke inhalation. The cabin, which is valued at $175,000, is a total loss, as was the $22,000, three-day-old pickup. The cause of the fire is under investigation by Yosemite investigators and the California fire marshall's office. [Pat Hattaway, YOSE, via SEAdog message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 4/29] Monday, May 4, 1992 92-162 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality A.M.B., 19, a Curry Company employee, was killed on April 30th while rock scrambling with two other Curry employees in an area known as Ranger Rock in Yosemite Valley. The three were descending through a granite rock area when A.M.B. apparently dislodged a small boulder, slipped and fell between 150 and 200 feet. Rangers were on scene within nine minutes of receipt of the report and immediately began administering CPR and advanced life support measures. They were unable to revive A.M.B.. [Telefax from Bob Johnson, YOSE, via USPP dispatch, 5/1] Monday, May 4, 1992 92-163 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning A.G., 18, of Redwood City, California, drowned in the Merced River near the footbridge below Vernal Fall on April 11th. A.G. was hiking with three companions on the trail to Vernal and Nevada Falls. When A.G. reached the Vernal Fall footbridge, he jumped over the bridge railing to a rock, then slipped and fell into the river. Approximately 20 people were involved in the search for him, including foot searchers on each side of the river, medics and personnel equipped for whitewater rescue. A.G. was found a quarter-mile downstream from the footbridge later that morning. Medics attempted to resuscitate him, but were unsuccessful. This is the first water-related fatality in Yosemite this year; last year, eight such fatalities occurred in the park. [Mike LaLone, YOSE, via SEAdog message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 4/30] Tuesday, May 5, 1992 92-165 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue; Illegal BASE Jumping At about 6:45 a.m. on April 23rd, rangers Russell Marsh and Cameron Jacobi responded to cries for help from the east face of El Capitan and found two uninjured climbers beckoning for help for a person who was apparently at the base of the cliff near the start of The Nose route. Jacobi was able to find the victim, 28-year-old C.H. of Colin, California, and provide him with medical assistance for a severe head laceration and multiple fractures. During his evaluation of C.H., Jacobi determined that he was probably a BASE jumper, though no parachute was found in the area to confirm this. C.H. was transported to El Capitan Meadow by a carry-out team, then transported by helicopter to Modesto. C.H. later told Marsh that he had experienced some type of parachute failure after jumping off El Capitan. The park prosecutor is reviewing the possibility of filing criminal charges against C.H. [cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 5/4] Tuesday, May 5, 1992 92-167 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Fatality V.I. and J.L. were driving in a Ford pickup truck on Highway 120 in the park on May 3rd when V.I. lost control of the vehicle, which subsequently rolled over. V.I. was knocked unconscious and pinned inside the cab; J.L. was able to escape with minor injuries. As first responders arrived, the vehicle engine compartment caught fire and spread rapidly. Dry chemical fire extinguishers slowed but did not stop the spread of the fire. Efforts were made to free V.I., but the fire drove rescuers back until fire trucks arrived and extinguished the blaze. V.I. continued to breath for about ten minutes after rescuers reached him, but CPR efforts were eventually halted and he was pronounced dead at the scene. [Dave Lattimore, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 5/4] Tuesday, May 5, 1992 92-168 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue Just before 7:00 p.m. on April 30th, rangers received a report that cries for help had been heard from a cliff about 2,000 feet above the floor of Yosemite Valley. Ranger Eric Gabriel and SAR team member Dan McDevitt climbed in the dark and reached 24-year-old S.S., a concession employee, at about 1:30 a.m. S.S. had lost the trail he was following and had fallen 50 vertical feet and landed on the ledge where he was found. S.S. suffered a laceration of his right leg and numerous abrasions and contusions. Following a night on the ledge, rangers and Lemoore Naval Air Station personnel evacuated S.S. by helicopter hoist. S.S. was treated at Yosemite's clinic and released. [Kelly McClosky, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 5/4] Friday, May 15, 1992 92-193 - Yosemite (California) - Rescues Park rangers were involved in three separate rock climbing rescues on Tuesday, May 12th. At 11:00 a.m., H.S., an instructor for the Yosemite Institute, was struck on the head by falling rocks and fell 70 feet to the end of his rope while lead climbing the "Central Pillar of Frenzy" route on Middle Cathedral Rock. While rangers were responding to the scene, visitors transported H.S. to the park clinic. Rangers assisted with advanced life support at the clinic. H.S. was flown by commercial medical helicopter to a trauma center with possible spinal injuries. Then, at about 1:00 p.m., A.T., 32, fell while leading on the second pitch of a climb on the Glacier Point Apron, slid about 30 feet, hit a ledge, and sustained a serious fracture of her lower leg. Her partner lowered her to the ground; responding park medics provided ALS and evacuated her from the base of the cliff. At the same time, cries for help were reported from the "Zodiac" route on El Capitan. J.M. had been following an aid pitch when his ascenders came off the rope while he was passing a piece of protection. He grabbed the rope as he fell and held on until the pain was too great to endure; he then let go, fell about 70 feet and was caught by the rope. J.M.'s hands were seriously burned, but he sustained no other injuries. Park rescuers were flown to the top of the route and a team member was lowered about 700 feet to the victim. J.M. was able to endure serious pain and ascend the fixed lines to the summit under his own power. He was then flown off the mountain by park helicopter. [Dan Horner, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 5/14] Wednesday, May 20, 1992 92-206 - Yosemite (California) - Multiple Incidents During the past weekend, Yosemite rangers were involved in the following incidents: * Seven SAR incidents, including four technical rescues and four helicopter operations. One incident on El Capitan's "Big Wall" required a lowering operation; a second at the base of Vernal Falls involved a seriously injured, combative falling victim who later tested HIV positive; a third on Four Mile Trail involved the extrication of two "ledged out" youths who were rescued in very reduced light conditions. * Seven EMS responses, including four ALS cases and a "Code Blue" incident involving successful CPR on a three-year-old child. * Two mental cases requiring transport to outside medical facilities. * The initiation of a child molestation investigation. * Five motor vehicle accidents. * Five DUI, four under the influence of alcohol, and two controlled substance arrests. * One arrest on a wanted persons warrant. Rangers also had to deal with the opening of the Tioga Pass Road and the weekend-long presence of "Emergency: Code Three" filming crews in the park. [Jim Tucker, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 5/19] Tuesday, May 26, 1992 92-215 - Yosemite (California) - Successful Rescue Late on the morning of May 20th, C.B., 68, collapsed on the front porch of the Yosemite Valley visitor center. Visitor center personnel summoned help, and rangers arrived on scene within three minutes. They found that C.B. had no pulse and was not breathing; both CPR and advanced life support measures were initiated. C.B. was defibrillated twice and transported to the park clinic while his breathing was supported by medics. After stabilization at the clinic, he was flown by helicopter ambulance to a Modesto hospital, where he is in the cardiac care unit. [Dan Horner, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Carol Leggat, RAD/WRO, 5/22] Thursday, May 28, 1992 92-227 - Yosemite (California) - EMS Rescue At 2:18 a.m. on May 15th, the El Portal ambulance crew received a report that two-year-old J.T. had experienced a cardiac arrest, and that his mother had begun CPR on him. Ranger Mark Harvey was first on scene, and continued to provide ventilations once he determined the child had a pulse. Park medics (cardiac) Joe Coho and Chris Cruz and EMT's Jim and Lynn Wilson arrived on scene with the El Portal ambulance shortly thereafter and began advanced cardiac life support measures. The patient was asthmatic, having febrile seizures, and suffering respiratory arrest. When Riggs ambulance arrived on scene for support and ground transport to Mariposa, J.T. was taken to J.C. Fremont Hospital. While en route, Cruz, Coho, paramedic Les Wenger and EMT Debbie Wenger continued resuscitation efforts, and Les Wenger was able to nasally intubate the boy. J.T. began to respond to treatment and began to breathe spontaneously when at the hospital. He was then flown to Valley Children's Hospital. Doctors there report that the boy had viral encephalitis and a right local lesion on the brain. He is expected to fully recover. [Dispatch, YOSE, via Carol Leggat, RAD/WRO, 5/27] Tuesday, June 2, 1992 92-237 - Yosemite (California) - Assault on Ranger On May 30th, ranger Mark Bush was on foot patrol on a trail near Vernal Falls when he encountered C.B., who had a smell of burnt marijuana about him. Bush questioned C.B. about this, and received consent to search his pack. During the search, the suspect pushed Bush and fled. Bush almost fell over a 100-foot drop-off, but was able to catch himself and arrest his fall. A search involving eight rangers by foot, horse and car ensured, but was called off 45 minutes later due to other priority incidents occurring at the same time. C.B. turned himself in to rangers the next day. He was booked for felony assault on a federal officer. [John Roth, YOSE, via cc:Mail report from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 6/1] Friday, June 5, 1992 92-158 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Structural Fire Investigators have determined the cause of the fire which burned down the rental cabin just after midnight on April 28th (not in the afternoon, as was previously reported). The occupants of the cabin had placed a plastic ice chest on top of their furnace, believing that the furnace, which was an older model mounted in the floor, would not be running due to warm temperatures. The furnace heat ignited the cooler, and flames rapidly spread to the rest of the structure. [Pat Harraway, YOSE, via cc:Mail report from Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO, 6/4] Tuesday, June 9, 1992 92-251 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On the morning of May 25th, seven-year-old E.D. fell from the top of an overhanging cliff while hiking above the Mist Trail near the top of Vernal Falls. After free-falling approximately 100 vertical feet, Dillon landed in a thicket of trees and came to rest about 20 feet below the trail. Bystanders improvised a litter from a pack frame and carried Dillon up to the trail. Park medics responding by helicopter and foot found Dillon semi-conscious with apparent internal injuries, a fractured leg and possible head trauma. Advance life support measures were begun and E.D. was short-hauled by helicopter to Yosemite Valley. He was then transported by helicopter to Memorial North Hospital in Modesto, where he was determined to be suffering from a fractured tibia and fibula. [Dave Brennan, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 6/8] Tuesday, June 16, 1992 92-272 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality On the afternoon of June 4th, K.F. was hiking with his wife along Tamarack Creek when they came upon a vertical drop and waterfall. K.F. approached the drop and grabbed a tree limb so he could look over the edge. The tree limb broke and K.F. fell 100 feet and was killed. His body was recovered by rangers. [Mike Mayer, YOSE, via cc:Mail message from Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 6/15] Monday, June 22, 1992 92-291 - Yosemite (California) - Illegal Tour Bus Operation On June 16th, M.B., travel agent and leader of a bus tour with 40 Czechoslovakian citizens, was cited for operating a commercial bus in the park without PUC or ICC authority. This is the same group that attempted to use falsely purchased Golden Eagle Passes to enter Devils Tower and Badlands earlier this month (Morning Report, 6/11/92). M.B. entered a plea of guilty to the charge the following day; as part of a plea agreement, he agreed to terminate all future business in the United States, cancel future tours, and pay refunds to those already paid. He must also show proof of a contract with an authorized bus company to transport his passengers from Yosemite back to New York, and is prohibited from operating the MCI bus with Mass license 11946 with passengers on board. M.B.'s business associates - K.L., B.A. and R.H. - are aware of the terms of this agreement and the conditions of probation. M.B. has contacted Green Tortoise to transport passengers back to New York. Note: All commercial tour buses must have ICC authority, which requires a minimum of $5 million insurance, and the ICC number must be displayed on the side of the vehicle. For further information, contact Scott Connelly, the park's legal officer, at 209-372-0243. [Scott Connelly, YOSE, 6/19] Monday, July 13, 1992 92-321 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue While climbing on the Leaning Tower route near Bridalveil Falls on July 4th, climber B.Y. dislodged a 50-pound flake of granite which fell approximately 20 feet and struck his partner, D.B., in the forehead. D.B. was immediately knocked unconscious. B.Y. climbed down to him and yelled for help. A passerby who heard him advised the park, and four rangers and SAR team members were flown to the top of the route just prior to nightfall. Cardiac medic Dan Horner was lowered approximately 300 feet on overhanging granite and soon reached D.B., who had since regained consciousness. Horner stabilized D.B. and attended him as the two were lowered another 800 feet to the ground. A carry-out team brought D.B. down a steep talus field on belay. He was transported to the park medical clinic, then flown out to another medical facility where surgery was performed on his fractured skull. The prognosis for his recovery is excellent, as no brain tissues was damaged or traumatized. D.B. was wearing a climbing helmet, which clearly saved his life. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, 7/10] Monday, July 13, 1992 92-322 - Yosemite (California) - Weapons and Drug Arrest On Friday, July 3rd, rangers Jose Figueroa and Mike Welsh saw six Hell's Angels on motorcycles travelling in formation through the Big Oak Flat subdistrict. When they committed an illegal pass, the rangers employed lights and sire in an attempt to stop them at a large turnout; although the motorcyclists slowed down, they refused to stop. After passing several more turnouts, the group finally pulled across the oncoming lane and into a paved turnout. The rangers ordered the group to stay seated on their motorcycles until directed to do otherwise, but refused to comply until Figueroa drew a shotgun from his patrol vehicle. After ranger Jessica Rust arrived to provide additional assistance, the subjects' drivers licenses were collected and checked. One member of the group, F.D., 28, had a record as an officer safety risk. He'd been riding in what is known as the "enforcer" position in the formation. Figueroa noticed that F.D. was highly agitated and kept reaching his right hand toward the unfastened saddlebags on his motorcycle. Figueroa ordered him off the bike, then checked the saddlebag, where he found a Smith and Wesson Model 639 semi-automatic pistol, loaded and chambered, just under the saddlebag's flap. F.D. was taken into custody for possession of the firearm. While searching F.D., rangers found a bundle of cocaine, a baggie of marijuana, pills of unknown substance, and a hidden slot in hist belt which was designed to carry a handcuff key. He was charged with possession of a firearm and controlled substances. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 7/9] Friday, July 17, 1992 92-353 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On July 14th, four persons were rescued from the shoulder of Half Dome after a large tree limb fell onto their campsite, injuring two of them. Hikers C.O and S.O. and P.S. and T.S. had camped at the location on the previous evening, and intended to hike to the top of Half Dome the following morning. At 5:30 a.m., a 50-pound, eight-foot-long tree limb from an overhanging red fir fell about 100 feet and struck C.O. and P.S. C.O. sustained an open fracture of the left lower leg and decreased blood circulation to the leg; P.S.'s left ankle was injured. A rescue crew was flown to the area and provided advanced life support to the victims, who were then flown to Yosemite Valley. C.O. was immediately transferred to a commercial medical helicopter and taken to the Modesto Medical Center. P.S. was treated at the park medical clinic. [John Roth, YOSE, 7/16] Wednesday, July 22, 1992 92-363 - Yosemite (California) - Attempted Armed Assault Arrest Rangers were dispatched to a call of an intoxicated individual threatening local residents, possibly with a weapon, on the evening of July 20th. F.S., a Yosemite Park and Curry Company employee who had recently been fired by the concessioner, had apparently locked his roommate in their tent against his will and threatened to kill him. He allowed his roommate to leave after about 15 minutes, then began threatening to kill the housing area supervisor. F.S. was brandishing a long piece of wood with a spike protruding from one end. When rangers arrived on scene, F.S. had barricaded himself inside the tent and threatened to kill all of them, challenging the rangers to come into his tent so he could "take care" of them. The rangers evacuated the surrounding area and attempted negotiations with F.S.; when they proved fruitless, the decision was made to get F.S. out of the tent by employing the recently-issued Capstun spray. About two minutes after the spray was employed, F.S. attempted to escape through his own barricade. Rangers eventually broke down the door, then subdued and arrested him. F.S. has a long history of violent crimes and crimes against peace officers. He had assaulted a ranger a week prior to this incident. [Rick Obernesser, YOSE, 7/20] Thursday, July 23, 1992 92-370 - Yosemite (California) - Horse Accident; Fatality On the afternoon of July 15th, two-year-old G.W. suffered serious injuries when he was thrown from then dragged by a "walk and lead" pony rented from the park concessioner. The incident took place a short distance from the concessioner stables in Yosemite Valley. The boy's mother, E.W., was leading the pony at the time of the incident, and was injured in her attempts to stop the pony. Responding rangers found two civilian physicians and a registered nurse treating the child. The boy was transported by park ambulance to Yosemite Medical Clinic while personnel maintained his airway and respirations. He was then flown to a hospital in Modesto. On July 17th, rangers were notified that he'd been removed from life support systems and was pronounced dead. [Dan Horner, YOSE, 7/22] Wednesday, August 5, 1992 92-387 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On the afternoon of July 30th, S.-D.C., a Korean national, was on the third pitch of the Regular route on Half Dome when he had a mishap with his ascending devices and fell approximately 40 feet to the end of his rope, striking the wall as he fell. S.-D.C.'s climbing partners found him unconscious, but he revived after about ten minutes. Although S.-D.C. suffered an open skull fracture and fractures to a knee and both ankles, he was able to return to the base of the route with his partners' assistance. Ranger/medics Kerry Maxwell and Mike LaLone helo-rappeled to the scene and provided advanced life support. S.-D.C. was then short-hauled to the Valley floor and eventually flown to a hospital in Modesto via commercial medical helicopter. [John Roth, YOSE, 8/4] Wednesday, August 5, 1992 92-389 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On July 26th, Tuolumne rangers received a report that two climbers had fallen about 500 feet on the Dana Glacier, just outside the park. Rangers Eric Gabriel and Dave Page were flown to the scene by the park's contract helicopter. They found that one of the climbers, R.V., was uninjured, but that the other, J.J., 36, of Loma Linda, California, was suffering from severe back and ankle pain and facial lacerations. Johnson was approximately 200 feet up an ice-covered talus slope and a short distance up the glacier. As Page and Gabriel treated him, several large boulders came down around the party. J.J. was packaged for a flight out by short haul, but the helicopter crew was forced to cut the rope and abandon the operation due to downdrafts from the glacier and insufficient power to lift the litter. After reassessing the situation, Page and Gabriel established a bollard and used the remains of the short haul rope and one of the climbers' ropes to lower J.J. 200 feet to another landing site. He was then flown to Dana Meadow, stabilized by park medics, and taken by ambulance to Mammoth Lakes, where he was treated for a fracture ankle, fractured facial bones, and fractures of T-8 and L-1 vertebrae. [Kris Bardsley, YOSE, 7/29] Thursday, August 6, 1992 92-391 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire At about 2:00 a.m. on August 3rd, the owners of a private residence in Wawona awoke two seasonal rangers in their quarters across the street and reported that their home was on fire. The rangers could see flames rapidly spreading through the structure and summoned assistance. Responding units, which included both structural and wildland fire engines, arrived to find the structure fully involved, with fire spreading through approximately a half acre of ground cover. The fire was quickly contained, and mop-up operations continued until 6:00 a.m. The structure, which consisted of an old mobile home with wood additions, was a total loss. The cause of the fire is being investigated by the state fire marshall's office. [Pat Hattaway, YOSE, 8/5] Thursday, August 6, 1992 92-392 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clouting Rangers began receiving reports concerning a series of car clouts in the Tuolumne Meadows campground early on the morning of August 2nd, and eventually determined that seven vehicles had been broken into between 12:30 and 6:00 a.m. Most of the vehicles were locked at the time of the break-ins, and there were no signs of forced entry. Many of the vehicles were relocked after the incident. Approximately $1,000 in cash was taken, but many of the vehicles contained cameras and other valuables which were left untouched. None of the victims saw or heard anything. One visitor was asleep in the back of his pickup truck when the break-in occurred. There are no significant leads, and the case is still under investigation. [Kristin Bardsley, YOSE, 8/5] Friday, August 7, 1992 92-406 - Yosemite (California) - High Speed Pursuit; Arrest About a half hour before midnight on July 31st, ranger Brian Sorby attempted to stop a speeding red Honda CRX with an expired registration on Superintendent Straight, but the driver, G.H., 27, of Thousand Oaks, California, did not respond to Sorby's lights and siren and continued westward. When traffic cleared, G.H. accelerated to 60 mph. Sorby requested assistance and was joined in the pursuit by rangers Kent Delbon, Bruce Phillips and Mike LaLone. G.H. accelerated to speeds in excess of 90 mph and forced other vehicles off the road. When the CRX approached Eagle Creek, Sorby passed G.H. and attempted to stop him by locking the patrol car's emergency brakes, sliding sideways and blocking the road. G.H. got by Sorby by driving off the road and continued on with Sorby and Delbon behind him. At the intersection of Highways 120 and 140, the CRX skidded to a stop. G.H. was arrested without incident and booked in Yosemite jail on a felony charge of evasion of a peace officer and a charge of driving on a suspended license. [Brain Sorby, YOSE, 8/4] Monday, August 10, 1992 87-271 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Homicide The conviction of S.G. for the murder of his wife in the park in December of 1987 has been upheld in the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. S.G. had been convicted of pushing his wife, D., over a 350-foot cliff near the Wawona tunnel for the purpose of collecting approximately $500,000 in insurance money. In the trial, S.G.'s counsel argued that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction. S.G. is currently serving a life sentence for the murder. [Herb Gercke, RAD/WRO, 7/24] Monday, August 10, 1992 92-407 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests On July 25th, the proprietor of a lodging facility outside the park's east entrance called Tuolumne rangers to report witnessing a probable drug transaction. The reporting party gave the rangers a description of the vehicle and its occupants and said that they were driving toward the park's entrance. Rangers stopped the vehicle and identified the occupants as A.H. and P.H., both employees of the U.S. Forest Service stationed in a forest adjacent to the park. Investigation and a consent search led to the discovery of an undeclared firearm, a quantity of marijuana, paraphernalia, and over $200 in cash. The two men were arrested for possession and intent to distribute a controlled substance. [Kevin O'Connor-Henry, YOSE, 8/4] Monday, August 10, 1992 92-408 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest Following a routine traffic stop in the Valley, rangers became suspicious regarding the contents of a vehicle driven by J.H. and gained his consent to search it. They discovered marijuana and paraphernalia in the passenger compartment and a box containing 202 hits of LSD in the trunk. They also found a large assortment of pills, a stolen Honda generator, and a citation for off-road travel which had been issued to J.H.'s companion in Cuyahoga Valley NRA. J.H. was arrested and cited for possession of a controlled substance, possession of stolen property, and driving while his license was suspended. [Mark Bush, YOSE, 8/5] Friday, August 14, 1992 92-417 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On the afternoon of August 6th, park visitors reported hearing cries for help from a party on the Nose route on El Capitan. Rangers responded and quickly determined that two Spanish-speaking climbers were calling for help from a ledge near Dolt Tower. Ranger Gustavo Martinez flew by in the park's contract helicopter and employed a message board to determine that one of the two, J.S., from Barcelona, Spain, had suffered incapacitating back injuries. The other climber, A.V., also of Barcelona, was uninjured. The two were on a ledge just big enough to accommodate Serrano in a supine position. A helicopter was summoned from Lemoore NAS to assist in the rescue; at the same time, a four-member rescue team began climbing the 1200 feet to the ledge. With the aid of the Navy helicopter, rangers John Roth and John Dill heli-rappelled onto the ledge after A.V. was picked up and flown out. Dill and Roth performed a medical assessment on J.S. and packaged him in a litter, all on the very limited space provided by the ledge. Roth and the litter were hoisted into the Navy ship, but Dill spent the night on the ledge. The evacuation occurred about five minutes before darkness would have forced the helicopter to abort the mission. The rescue team assisted Dill in his descent the following day. Preliminary reports on J.S. indicate a compression fracture of the L-1 vertebra and a possible lacerated liver. This was the 159th SAR in Yosemite this calendar year. [Jim Tucker, YOSE, 8/11] Friday, August 14, 1992 92-418 - Yosemite (California) - Climbing Fatalities Just after 4:00 p.m. on the afternoon of August 9th, Tuolumne rangers received a report that two climbers - A.M., 39, of Stateline, Nevada, and C.N., 37, of South Lake Tahoe, Nevada - had been killed while climbing on the southeast buttress of Cathedral Peak. A.M., an experienced climber, and C.N., a novice, had begun their climb about three hours earlier. A.M., who was leading the climb, was belaying Kostecki from a position above her on the fourth pitch when she fell, causing an anchor failure which pulled A.M. from his belay position. Both climbers fell about 400 feet before landing at the base of the peak. They were pronounced dead at the scene by rangers. [Cathy Casalegno, YOSE, 8/11] Friday, August 14, 1992 92-419 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Serious Injuries A car driven by J.L., 25, of Redwood City, California, went off the roadway on Big Oak Flat Road on the evening of August 9th, hit an embankment, then crossed into the oncoming lane of the highway and hit a car with five occupants. All four people in the J.L. vehicle and four of the five people in the second vehicle were injured. Two were eventually taken to the trauma center in Modesto; the others were treated on-scene and taken to the park medical clinic. Both lanes of traffic were blocked and the road was closed for almost three hours. Personnel from throughout the park responded and provided emergency care. J.L. was treated, then taken into custody and booked on seven counts of felony DUI. The only uninjured person was the driver of the second vehicle, as his car was equipped with a driver's side airbag. [Dave Lattimore, YOSE, 8/11] Wednesday, August 19, 1992 92-443 - Yosemite (California) - Commercial Vehicle Inspections During the period from August 11th to the 13th, park rangers, in cooperation with the state highway patrol and public utility commission, conducted commercial vehicle inspections at two locations in the park. A total of 114 vehicles were stopped; 19 were put out of service for mechanical violations, 19 drivers had licenses suspended for various violations, and 159 citations were issued. This and similar inspections have been highly successful in obtaining regulatory compliance from drivers and commercial vehicle companies entering the park. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, 8/18] Friday, September 25, 1992 92-523 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality R.M., 42, of Greeley, Colorado, fell approximately 2,600 feet to his death while attempting to rappel on El Capitan on September 23rd. The exact cause of the accident is unknown at this time. Other members of R.M.'s group descended the face successfully. A carryout team removed his body. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 9/24] Friday, September 25, 1992 92-524 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clouting On September 20th, 12 auto burglaries occurred in Tuolumne campground. The victims mostly lost cash and credit cards; other valuables were left in the vehicles. The campers were all tent camping. No physical evidence has been found at the scene. A day later, Wawona campground had seven auto burglaries. Again, only cash was taken from the vehicles, and the victims were tent camping. The thefts in both cases fit the MO of a known area car clouting group. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, 9/24] Friday, September 25, 1992 92-526 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests A three-month-long drug buy program in Yosemite Valley recently culminated with charges being filed against a dozen people on 26 counts of drug trafficking. Four cases have been submitted to the U.S. attorney for felony indictments. Most of the suspects have previous drug trafficking convictions. During the buy program, rangers purchased LSD, methamphetamines, cocaine, crack and marijuana. [J.R. Tomasovic, YOSE, 9/24] Thursday, October 1, 1992 92-540 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue Dispatch received a call reporting a climbing accident on the northwest face of Half Dome on the morning of September 21st. Although the anonymous caller said he was calling from Sunnyside campground in Yosemite Valley, the 911 system display showed that it was coming from Fish Camp, just outside the park's south entrance and an hour by car from the Valley. Rangers conducted a reconnaissance of Half Dome but failed to find any climbers in distress. Because of the similarity of this report to past BASE jumper parachuting accidents, rangers decided to conduct an aerial search for a fallen parachutist. At about 12:30 p.m., searchers in the park's contract helicopter found J.N., 35, of Lake Worth, Florida, lying at the base of Half Dome, approximately 2,000 feet below the summit. Park medics landed nearby and found that J.N. had a fractured femur, fractured pelvis, and unstable vital signs. The provided advanced life support, then short-hauled J.N. by helicopter to the Valley, after which he was taken to a hospital in Modesto. Doctors estimate that it will take J.N. at least a year to recover from his injuries. Investigators found that J.N. and a second parachutist had jumped from the summit at about 6:30 a.m. Witnesses said that J.N.'s chute didn't deploy properly and that it never fully opened before he hit the ground. The second parachutist apparently landed without problem in lower Tenaya Canyon. He has not yet been identified, but several investigative leads are being pursued. J.N. had in his possession a scanner programmed to pick up all Yosemite radio frequencies and a portable two-way radio. He will be charged with CFR violations for air delivery and creating a hazardous condition. In addition to other penalties, prosecutors will seek full restitution of the $3,000 rescue cost. [Dave Brennan, YOSE, 9/29] Friday, October 2, 1992 92-541 - Yosemite (California) - Felony Arrest On the evening of September 26th, an abandoned vehicle was discovered in the Wawona District, and checks on it revealed that it had been stolen in Ohio. Information received from Ohio led to the identification and detention of S.L.H., 20, of Pittsfield, Illinois, the following day. S.L.H. told investigators that he had stolen the vehicle in Gallipolis, Ohio, on September 15th, and subsequently admitted to committing a burglary in Kemmerer, Wyoming, where he obtained two weapons that rangers had found in the vehicle. He also admitted to minor larcenies throughout the Midwest and implicated himself in a theft in Longview, Texas. Information collected in the investigation has been turned over to law enforcement agencies in Wyoming, Texas, Ohio and Illinois. S.L.H. is currently being held on three federal charges - interstate transportation of a stolen vehicle, interstate transportation of stolen weapons, and possession of weapons by a convicted felon. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 9/29] Tuesday, October 20, 1992 92-563 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue D.C. fell about 20 feet and sustained a compression fracture of a vertebra while leading the 26th pitch of the Nose route on El Capitan at 7:30 a.m. on October 12th. His partners climbed to the top of El Capitan and summoned assistance. Word of D.C.'s injury reached the park at 8:40 p.m., and a rescue party was flown to the scene the following morning. Rangers Kelly McCloskey and Mike Ray were lowered approximately 900 feet to D.C.'s location. He was stabilized and hauled to the top along with McCloskey, who is a park medic. D.C. was flown to the Valley for preliminary treatment, then taken to a hospital in Modesto via helicopter. [Mike Lalone, YOSE, 10/16] Monday, October 26, 1992 92-574 - Yosemite (California) - Assault On the afternoon of October 21st, Wawona District rangers were advised that a couple with three large German shepherds was in the Mariposa Grove and refused to remove the animals from a closed area. When an interpretive ranger contacted them, the dogs' owners, A.R. and K.R., refused to cooperate and replied to the ranger's requests with profanity. Law enforcement rangers were then summoned. When they attempted to talk to A.R., he became more belligerent and advanced on one of the rangers while the dogs were still unsecured. The rangers broke off contact and summoned the assistance of other rangers with control sticks for the animals. A.R. was again contacted and again responded with abusive language and refusals to cooperate. He was advised that he was under arrest, but resisted and made it impossible for the rangers to cuff him. One of the rangers then approached A.R. and sprayed him once with Capstun. A.R. was immediately immobilized and taken into custody. He was booked for disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, interfering with an agency function and other offenses. [Pat Hattaway, YOSE, 10/23] Wednesday, November 18, 1992 92-609 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest On November 15th, park investigators developed a lead on the location of a methamphetamine distribution operation that had been set up in Yosemite Lodge. A search warrant was secured on information provided by a confidential informant, and surveillance of the premises was begun. The suspected dealer was identified as D.C., a former manager of Yosemite Park and Curry Company's Mountain Room Bar, who is alleged to be the main supplier for methamphetamine dealers in Yosemite. D.C. was detained as he attempted to leave the cabin he had rented. A search of the cabin led to the discovery of just over 42 grams of methamphetamine (valued at $4,000), all of it packaged for sale. Investigators seized various items of paraphernalia used in the distribution of methamphetamine, a large quantity of cash, and assorted documents containing names and phone numbers of suspected dealers. D.C. was arrested and is currently being held on two felony counts - one for possession of narcotics for sale, the other for possession of hypodermic syringes - and one misdemeanor count of being under the influence of a controlled substance. [W. Jeffrey Sullivan, LEO, YOSE, 11/17] Wednesday, January 27, 1993 92-609 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Drug Arrest On January 25th, D.C. pled guilty to a charge of possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine in U.S. District Court in Fresno. Under the new federal sentencing guidelines, D.C. will serve a significant mandatory prison term. D.C. was a unit manager for the park concessioner last summer when park criminal investigators learned that he was selling methamphetamine to street dealers out of a Yosemite Lodge cabin rented in his name. Following surveillance of the cabin, investigators secured and executed a search warrant on the night of November 15th and seized more than 40 grams of 98 percent pure methamphetamine in numerous packages weighing from a quarter gram to eight grams each. Also seized were two gram/carat scales, scores of empty zip-lock bags, several blackened and bent spoons, numerous hypodermic syringes, and a sizeable amount of cutting agent. At the time of his arrest, D.C. had fresh injection marks on his arms, a pulse of 100, and pupils that did not respond to light. He subsequently admitted his drug addiction to investigators. In his pocket was a key chain with an eight-ball and a miniature, personalized California license plate with the words "SPEED DEMON" on it. Three other dealers who obtained narcotics from D.C. were also arrested and have pled guilty to possession of a controlled substance. [Law Enforcement Office, YOSE, 1/26] Friday, March 19, 1993 93-122 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire Just after 6:30 a.m. on March 13th, a fire was reported in Ahwahnee Bungalow 721, a Yosemite Park and Curry Company lodging unit located near the Ahwahnee Hotel in Yosemite Valley. A Curry Company engine crew was first on scene and found flames extending through the roof. They diminished the fire's intensity by applying water from the outside; park firefighters then entered the building and extinguished the fire in the attic and raceway. The building was unoccupied at the time. Damage is estimated to be approximately $20,000, but the value saved was about four times that amount. The fire was caused by a heat lamp left on in the raceway to prevent pipes from freezing. It had been burning for some time before being discovered. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 3/18] Thursday, March 25, 1993 93-141 - Yosemite (California) - Marijuana Cultivation While on boat patrol on Hetch Hetchy reservoir, ranger Mike Kerns came upon a collapsible canvas kayak pulled up on shore in an area where boating is prohibited. Kerns followed the fresh footprints he discovered along the shoreline and found an abandoned red duffel bag stuffed between two large rocks about a half mile from the kayak. Inside the bag were numerous seed planters. A naked man soon came walking up the beach. The man, who identified himself as R.A., admitted that the duffel bag was his and that he was preparing to plant marijuana about two miles upriver at Hat Creek. Kerns followed R.A. to his campsite, where he found a bag containing marijuana in plain sight. A search of the campsite led to the discovery of 369 grams of marijuana and seeds. Kerns towed R.A. in his kayak back to Hetch Hetchy dam, then took him to Yosemite jail, where he's being held pending cultivation charges. [Karen Frasier, YOSE, 3/24] Monday, March 29, 1993 93-150 - Yosemite (California) - Illegal Weapon Possession Conviction Last October 3rd, ranger Steve Weinstock contacted three people drinking alcohol inside a vehicle at a service station and discovered that one of the passengers, S.M., was a known felon who had recently been released from prison and was on parole. S.M. had an extensive criminal and prison history for burglary, possession of deadly weapons and assaults on peace officers. Weinstock and another ranger conducted an intensive on-scene investigation and discovered that S.M. was in possession of firearms and was providing alcohol to minors. As they attempted to take him into custody on related charges, S.M. became combative and attempted to resist arrest. He was quickly subdued and taken into custody. Subsequent investigation revealed that S.M. had illegally obtained one firearm from a home he had burglarized in San Francisco three days before the Yosemite incident. S.M. was charged with first degree burglary, possession of stolen property and being a felon in possession of a firearm. The San Mateo county district attorney prosecuted S.M. on a combination of federal and state charges. On March 9th, S.M. pled guilty to all charges and received a sentence of four years in state prison. The state parole board also found S.M. guilty of parole violations and sentenced him to an additional two-year prison term. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 3/25] Friday, April 2, 1993 93-164 - Yosemite (California) - Conviction for Weapons Possession On September 26, 1992, ranger Noel McJunkin discovered a stolen vehicle parked near the Southfork Bridge in Wawona, and subsequently discovered that it had been stolen in Ohio by S.H. and driven to the park by way of Wyoming. A BOL (be on the lookout) was issued for S.H., and ranger Mike Durr soon spotted him walking along Highway 41. A search of the stolen vehicle led to the seizure of a .44 magnum revolver and a seven millimeter magnum rifle. S.H., a convicted felon, had stolen the weapons from a home in Wyoming. He was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm (18 USC 922) and sentenced to 33 months in prison and three years of supervised release. [LEO/YOSE, 4/1] Monday, April 5, 1993 93-165 - Yosemite (California) - Assault Conviction On August 20, 1992, rangers arrested J.L. on assault charges after the 6'9", 230-pound J.L. picked up his girlfriend and threw her to the ground with such force that he caused her serious bodily injury. In February, J.L. pleaded guilty to a charge of assault resulting in serious bodily injury (18 USC 113f) and was sentenced to 24 months in California state prison, three years of supervised release, and payment of $1,440 in restitution to the victim. J.L. was also ordered to participate in a correctional treatment program for drug and alcohol abuse, submit to mental health counseling, and refrain from further contacts with the victim. [LEO/YOSE, 3/31] Thursday, April 8, 1993 93-170 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest On March 31st, G.C. was arrested for possession of controlled substances for distribution following a two-week investigation by rangers Fred Elchlepp and N.S. Hinson. G.C., who was travelling with her daughter, was en route to meet her drop-off contact at Yosemite Lodge at the time of her arrest. Rangers found 150 grams of Marijuana and 15 grams of dried psilocybin mushrooms in a safe in the trunk of her '91 Caprice. Also found in the locked safe were scales and packaging materials. Investigators had learned that G.C. had been supplying assorted narcotics to the park on a weekly basis since at least last August. Asset forfeiture proceedings on the vehicle are in progress. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 4/5] Friday, April 9, 1993 93-171 - Yosemite (California) - Commercial Use Violations On February 11th, D.C., also known as either H.C. or Y.C., was arrested in Los Angeles on a no-bail federal warrant issued by the park's magistrate for a variety of charges involving commercial use of the park and other illegal activities. He had been a fugitive for seven months at the time of the arrest. D.C., who claims he is a citizen of Hong Kong, was first licensed to operate a tour bus in 1984, and for several years made regular runs to the park with buses and vans loaded with Chinese-speaking travelers from both San Francisco's Chinatown and Asian countries. He first came to the attention of park rangers several years ago when one of his buses backed into a ranger's private vehicle and caused $1,500 in damage. Upon investigation, it was determined that D.C. did not have insurance, California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) authority, or a permit to operate within the park. On New Year's Day in 1989, a bus driven by D.C. slid out of control on an icy road in the park and collided head on with another vehicle; three people were injured, one seriously. D.C. pleaded guilty to unsafe operation of a bus, failure to possess a license to drive a bus, operating a vehicle that was mechanically unsafe, and failure to have a log book. He was placed on summary probation and fined $400. As a result of D.C.'s subsequent unwillingness to desist from operating illegally in the park and without PUC authority, the California Highway Patrol and NPS initiated a program of surprise inspections of tour buses in the park. Arrest warrants were issued for D.C. and two of his drivers following the issuance of several citations to them and their subsequent failure to appear in court. Last May, D.C. pleaded guilty to a series of violations, was fined $4,000 and was sentenced to three years' probation. On July 4, 1992, a D.C.-owned company van crashed in Nevada, killing two people and injuring 13 other passengers. The accident was caused by a tire blow-out at high speeds; the van's tires were found to be bald and defective. After the crash, D.C. closed his San Francisco office and disappeared. The park subsequently filed a petition for violation of probation and failure to appear, and a bench warrant was issued. D.C. was apprehended when police were called to a domestic dispute and was later arrested on the federal warrant. After D.C. paid his fine, the federal district court withdrew the probation violation petition and opted to release D.C. into the state's custody for further prosecution. The district attorney's office in San Francisco has filed criminal fraud charges and issued a felony arrest warrant for D.C. for failing to return monies paid for tours after D.C. closed his office, and California PUC has filed charges for operating tour buses without a permit. The ICC has obtained an injunction against D.C.'s interstate transportation operations and will be filing charges against D.C. in federal district court in San Francisco for contempt of court. It's not yet known whether the state of Nevada will file charges regarding the bus accident with fatalities. [LEO/YOSE, 3/31] Wednesday, April 14, 1993 93-181 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clouts Six auto burglaries occurred in the Wawona campground between midnight and 8 a.m. on April 10th. The methods used in the clouts were very similar to those recorded over the past two years by the NPS, Forest Service and California State Parks at sites in California, Oregon, Montana, and Arizona. All the vehicles that were burglarized were at tent sites, with the point of entry into the vehicle on the side away from the tent. A wire was passed through the window molding to gain access to each vehicle, and some were found with their passenger windows rolled down. The only items taken were compact discs and cash. Other items which were traceable were not disturbed. The FBI and NPS are working together on this case. If you have had any similar incidents, please contact the park at 209-372-0614. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 4/12] Wednesday, May 12, 1993 93-248 - Yosemite (California) - Auto Theft; Pursuit and Arrest Rangers Wilson, Robinson and Sholly responded to a report of two young males in the process of breaking into a car at 2:15 a.m. on May 10th. They arrived on scene within three minutes and were advised by the reporting party that the suspects had hurriedly left the area in a red '93 Oldsmobile and were westbound on Northside Drive. The vehicle was overtaken within a few miles and a car stop was initiated. The suspects slowed to five miles an hour, then quickly accelerated and sped away. Sholly and Robinson pursued the vehicle for 30 miles through the Merced River Canyon into Mariposa County jurisdiction; they requested assistance from the county sheriff's office, which dispatched two units to intercept the vehicle. The car raced by them, however, so county and NPS units continued the pursuit for another nine miles until the car went off the road on a curve near Midpines Summit and crashed. The suspects exited the totally wrecked vehicle and disappeared into the brush. Sholly and Robinson began a search and found one suspect, a 15-year-old male, within about 20 minutes. He was placed under arrest for grand theft auto and evading peace officers, then treated for minor injuries. Mariposa County deputies arrested a second 15- year-old in the area around 9 a.m. He was also taken into custody and treated for minor injuries. NPS investigators Elchlepp, Jablonski and Jones determined that the red Oldsmobile was an Alamo rental which the juveniles had stolen earlier in the evening from the Wawona Hotel in Yosemite after abandoning two inoperable Oldsmobiles there that had been stolen in Fresno and Madera, California. The car which was being broken into in Yosemite was also an Alamo rental. The juveniles subsequently admitted to numerous instances of stealing or car-jacking autos, then selling them to chop shops in the San Joaquin Valley. The case has been turned over to California Highway Patrol investigators in Fresno County, the county of residence for both juveniles. [Fred Elchlepp, YOSE, 5/11] Friday, May 21, 1993 93-272 - Yosemite (California) - Vehicle Fire On the afternoon of May 18th, park dispatch received notification that a motor home was on fire in the Lower River campground. The first responder, campground supervisor Mike Osborne, reported that the vehicle was fully engulfed. Within five minutes of the first report, the heavily populated area was evacuated, a safe perimeter had been established, and traffic had been redirected to accommodate incoming concessioner and NPS fire engines. The fire was quickly controlled, but the vehicle was totally destroyed. Its owners, an elderly couple from Pacific Palisades, had gone out for a short bike ride, having left the vehicle after smelling an odor within it. Preliminary investigation indicates that the fire was probably caused by faulty wiring. The immediate response of park and concessioner firefighters saved surrounding vehicles, prevented injuries, and kept the fire from spreading to timber within the campground. [Mariann Brantley, YOSE, 5/20] Tuesday, June 1, 1993 93-295 - Yosemite (California) - Aircraft Crash; Four Fatalities Late on Friday, May 28th, Civil Air Patrol officials notified the park that an ELT signal had been received from a point near Mt. Lyell. It was too late to send search aircraft to the area, but a helicopter was dispatched at first light on Saturday morning. The helicopter's crew found aircraft wreckage at 11,800 feet about a quarter mile southeast of the mountain shortly thereafter. Rangers arrived on scene at 10 a.m. and determined that four people had been killed in the accident. Because of the heavy volume of Memorial Day activity in the park, Dare County officers served as coroners at the scene. The aircraft was on its way from Sequoia Fields to Columbia, California, at the time of the accident. No further specifics are currently available. The Federal Aviation Administration and National Transportation Safety Board have been advised and are responding. [Mike O'Neil, RAD/WRO, and Dispatch, YOSE, 5/29] Tuesday, June 1, 1993 93-261 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality D.H., 39, of Manchester, England, nicknamed "The Human Fly" because of his standing as one of the world's top free climbers, was killed in a fall from 3,000-foot Sentinel Rock sometime before the morning of May 29th, when his body was found at the foot of the rock. [Seattle Times, 5/31] Wednesday, June 2, 1993 93-301 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality On May 25th, the rangers received a report of a body lying at the top of a talus slope in the LeConte Gully area. They found the remains of C.F., 49, of Miami, Florida, at the top of the slope about 800 feet above the valley floor. C.F. had been reported missing by fellow campers on May 18th when he failed to return from a day climb. C.F. reportedly had no climbing experience and failed to tell anyone where he was going or when he intended to return. The investigation revealed that he fell about 300 feet down a nearly vertical slope. Recovery of the body required the use of technical rock climbing equipment due to the angle of the slope and hazardous conditions at the site. Search and rescue volunteers and rangers Keith McAuliffe, Cameron Sholly and Jessica Rust assisted SAR officer Mike Ray with the recovery. The death has been ruled accidental. [Greg Jablonski, YOSE, 6/1] Tuesday, June 8, 1993 93-334 - Yosemite (California) - Search in Progress A search was initiated on the evening of June 3rd for W.S., 22, of San Marcos, California, who was reported missing in the White Wolf - Harden Lake area (8,000 foot elevation) of the park. W.S. became separated from his hiking partner, D.B., 23, at a crossing of the Middle Fort of the Tuolumne River. W.S., D.B. and three other hikers began their backpacking trip at the Aspen Valley Road gate on June 1st; although they weren't scheduled to return until June 15th, D.B. had injured his ankle and D.B. had accompanied him on the hike out. W.S. was last seen by D.B. around 3 p.m. on the 3rd after D.B. crossed the Tuolumne on a log which dislodged and left W.S. stranded on the opposite bank. D.B. continued hiking and was picked up on the Tioga Road by a patrolling ranger. Hasty search teams failed to locate W.S. that evening or the following day. A total of 180 people have been committed to the search, including 111 ground searchers and two dog teams. Three helicopters were also on standby yesterday, but had so far been unable to fly due to the lack of visibility. Inclement weather continues to hamper search efforts. Light to moderate snow continues to fall throughout the search area, with a total of eight to twelve inches now on the ground. The hikers had been advised of dangerous water crossings and heavy snow above 7,500 feet when they received their wilderness permit on June 1st. Personnel from Yosemite, Sequoia/Kings Canyon, Joshua Tree, Channel Islands, and the Stanislaus National Forest have been committed along with members of eight volunteer search teams and the California Youth Authority. Media interest is increasing. Dave Lattimore is incident commander; Phyllis Cremonini is information officer. [Dave Lattimore, YOSE, 6/7] Wednesday, June 9, 1993 93-334 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Search in Progress W.S. was found at 9 a.m. on June 7th when he walked into a camp that had been set up for searchers at White Wolf. He was in good condition, but was taken to the park's clinic for a thorough examination, treated for dehydration, and released. W.S. had become separated from his hiking partner, Devin Barlow, during a stream crossing. Barlow waited in the area for an hour and a half, then hiked out to the Tioga Road and reported W.S. missing. W.S. had crossed downstream of Barlow and had become disoriented. He set up his tent and got into his sleeping bag to stay warm and dry. He was able to start a fire on Thursday night, but not on Friday due to rain and snow. On Saturday, he moved his tent to a small peak in the White Wolf vicinity and stayed there over the weekend. On Monday, he saw that the weather was clearing, so he packed up his gear and hiked downhill. W.S. saw a picnic table across a small creek, moved toward it, and broke into a bathroom in the White Wolf campground in order to obtain dry shelter. Shortly thereafter, he heard a motor and went outside to investigate. It was a snowplow being used to clear the campground road for a busload of searchers. Two searchers were walking behind the plow and identified W.S. as the missing hiker. He was then taken to the clinic. Almost 200 people were involved in the search on Monday, including seven dog teams, 110 ground searchers and three helicopters and crews. The search was run under a joint Forest Service-National Park Service command, and was assisted by Yosemite Park and Curry Company and volunteer search teams from throughout the state of California. [Phyllis Cremonini, YOSE, 6/8] Friday, June 11, 1993 93-334 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Search An extensive debriefing of W.S., who was the subject of a five- day search by upwards of 200 people last week, has revealed that a major factor in his becoming lost was probably his extensive use of marijuana. Final costs for the search have not been totalled, but will likely exceed $100,000. [CRO, YOSE, 6/10] Tuesday, June 15, 1993 93-359 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clouts Rangers in the Wawona District took twelve reports of auto burglaries in the Wawona campground on June 11th. Items taken included cash, compact discs, sunglasses and some baggage; left untouched were credit cards, cameras and other items with serial numbers. The MO matches that employed in auto burglaries being investigated by several agencies in the Western United States. If you have questions or information concerning these burglaries, please contact criminal investigator Jeff Sullivan at Yosemite or special agent Paul Ducasse at Western Regional Office. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 6/14] Wednesday, June 16, 1993 93-364 - Yosemite (California) - Marijuana Cultivation Conviction On May 7th, M.C. and R.O. were sentenced in federal court following their conviction for possession and cultivation of marijuana in the park. Mather District rangers arrested the pair last October following discovery of their 250-plant marijuana patch. Rangers Sullivan and Jablonski assisted the U.S. attorney's office during a suppression and sentencing hearing on Miranda issues pertaining to the arrest, voluntary confessions, and evidentiary questions pertaining to cultivation practices and methods. M.C. received a mandatory sentence of five years incarceration under federal sentencing guidelines. R.O. received a sentence of two years in prison. Neither had a previous record for any drug-related offense at the time of their arrests; both pled guilty to the charges without a trial. [Greg Jablonski, YOSE, 6/11] Wednesday, June 16, 1993 93-365 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrest Criminal investigators Fred Elchlepp and Jeff Sullivan arrested R.D.L. R.D.L. at his residence at the Yosemite Lodge on the evening of June 12th on charges of possession of marijuana for sale. At the time of his arrest, R.D.L. had in his possession ten plastic bags of marijuana weighing 102 grams. [Fred Elchlepp, YOSE, 6/14] Wednesday, June 16, 1993 93-368 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue Rangers responded to a report of cries for help coming from climbers on the Nose route on El Capitan on the afternoon of May 31st. Rain had been falling steadily in the park all day; above the 8,600-foot level, snow fell. It was determined that two male climbers at Camp 5 - P.B. and T.F. - were uninjured but required assistance because they were ill-prepared for the weather. The park contract helicopter flew rescue teams and equipment to the summit of El Capitan to fix ropes from that point 800 feet down to the climbers. A search and rescue volunteer rappelled down from the top of the Nose route to the two climbers. P.B. and T.F. declined the offer of dry gear, said that they were strong enough to ascend, and were able to warm up after a few minutes of jumaring up the fixed line. They arrived at the top around 11 p.m. and spent the night there with the rescue team. All were flown off El Capitan the next morning. Debriefing revealed that a reliance on waterproof/breathable fabric jackets, pants and bivy sacks (which leaked) and down sleeping bags (which lost their insulation when wet) were contributing factors in this incident. The two men did not carry waterproof tarps, which could have kept them dry. Although P.B. and T.F. are both experienced climbers, they were new to big wall climbing. Both are employed as leaders for an outdoor recreation company and have many years' experience. Because of the risk and cost involved in this rescue, the case has been referred to the park legal specialist for prosecutorial review. [Greg Magruder, YOSE, 6/15] Friday, June 18, 1993 93-378 - Yosemite (California) - Assist on Homicide A body was dumped over a cliff just outside the park on the Briceburg Grade around 6 a.m. on June 9th. Mariposa County deputies recovered the body that same evening and discovered that the victim had sustained severe head trauma. Criminal investigator Fred Elchlepp and rangers Mike Lalone and Chris Pergiel assisted the deputies with their investigation and subsequent identified three primary suspects - R.S., 25, of Yosemite; his brother, B.O., 18; and a 17-year-old girl from Madera, California. On June 10th, the Madera County sheriff took the above suspects and R.S.'s mother, J.G., 46, into custody for homicide. The victim was identified as her husband, F.G., 48. The homicide occurred in their residence in Madera. An older model Cadillac with a blood-stained trunk an a blood-stained baseball bat were seized as evidence. [Fred Elchlepp, YOSE, 6/14] Tuesday, July 6, 1993 93-436 - Yosemite (California) - Burglary Arrests For the past several weeks, the bungalows at the Ahwahnee Hotel have been the object of numerous burglaries. Property stolen included expensive camera equipment, cash, credit cards, checks, fine gold, and jewelry. All items had been left in the bungalows while their occupants were gone. Among the victims was an assistant United States attorney and a family member of a person who sits on the board of directors for MCA, the former parent company of the park concessioner. Criminal investigator Fred Elchlepp conducted an investigation of the burglaries; on the evening of June 29th, Elchlepp and ranger Tom Wilson arrested R.B., 23, and Edward Feistel, 19, on several counts of burglary and possession of a controlled substance. R.B. is a former Ahwanhee Hotel housekeeping employee and is on probation for burglary from Texas, where he spent almost two years in prison. Feistel is currently employed as a busboy at the Yosemite Lodge; he had no criminal record until the time of his arrest, which was on his nineteenth birthday. The pair had most of the property which had been stolen in the burglaries in their possession when arrested. During interviews, the two men implicated two other former concession employees as burglary suspects and provided intelligence on other criminal activities in the park. [Mariann Brantley, YOSE, 7/2] Wednesday, July 7, 1993 93-448 - Yosemite (California) - Drug and Weapons Arrests On July 2nd, rangers established a checkpoint at the Big Oak Flat entrance to check vehicle operators for intoxication. and stopped 357 vehicles over a four-hour period from 7 to 11 p.m. Three people were arrested - two for possession of a controlled substance with intent to sell and possession of loaded, concealed handguns. Eight violation notices were issued for open containers of alcohol and another seven for possession of less than an ounce of controlled substance. Ranger seized two pounds of marijuana, 50 grams of methamphetamine, four pounds of fireworks, 25 containers of alcohol, two handguns, five blunt weapons, and nine edged weapons. [Wawona District Office, YOSE, 7/6] Thursday, July 8, 1993 93-460 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clouting Arrests On July 3rd, rangers received reports of auto burglaries at the Ten Lakes trail head and found a witness who'd seen an elderly man breaking into the vehicle. The reporting party provided a good description of both the suspect and his vehicle. A short time later, rangers Aufhauser and Page spotted the vehicle near the Tuolumne ranger station; rangers Casalengno and Cauthorn-Page responded and a high risk vehicle stop was made. The suspect, identified as J.C., 73, of no known address, was initially arrested for driving under the influence. During the investigation, recently stolen property was found in J.C.'s vehicle. The original reporting party confirmed that J.C. was the person who'd broken into the cars at Ten Lakes. J.C. is currently being held on several felony counts, including auto burglary, possession of burglary tools, and possession of stolen property. J.C. has a long and extensive history of car clouts in national and state parks. His M/O is to hit trail heads and use a screw driver to pry open vehicle wing windows. He has been ruled out as the suspect in the series of auto burglaries currently plaguing Western national parks and California state parks. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 7/7] Thursday, July 15, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Ranger Shot and Injured Between 9:00 and 9:30 p.m. last night, ranger Kim Aufhauser was on patrol on the Tioga Road east of Tuolumne Meadows when he spotted a transient at the side of the road and stopped his patrol vehicle to talk with him. The transient immediately ran into the woods; as Aufhauser crossed the road in pursuit, he was shot three times - twice in the chest and once in a leg - by a small caliber weapon. He was wearing a vest at the time, which deflected both of the shots to his chest. The third round went completely through his leg. Aufhauser returned fire with his .357 caliber service revolver, but there are no indications at present that he struck his assailant. Aufhauser then summoned assistance. He was medevaced to June Lake Hospital, then taken to Mammoth Hospital, where he's reported to be in stable condition. Indications are that he will probably be released from the hospital later this morning. The park has set up road blocks at Tenaya Lake and the Tioga Pass entrance and has called on resources to begin a search for Aufhauser's assailant. A California Highway Patrol helicopter with infrared capability and about 50 rangers (including a Western Region special event team) and officers from local jurisdictions will be deployed at first light. Hunter Sharp is the incident commander. Aufhauser is currently a seasonal law enforcement ranger at Yosemite, but worked for a number of years as a permanent law enforcement ranger there in the past. [Paul Ducasse, SA, RAD/WRO; Mike O'Neil, RLES, RAD/WRO; Dispatch, YOSE; Mammoth Hospital; 7/15] Friday, July 16, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Shooting of Ranger A major search is underway for the man who shot ranger Kim Aufhauser on the evening of July 14th. The area around Tuolumne Meadows has been sealed off, and about 1,000 visitors, concession employees and park staff have been evacuated because of the likelihood that Aufhauser's assailant is still armed and in the area. As of this morning, there are 116 rangers and officers on scene from the park, Western Region's ranger and Park Police SET teams, the FBI, Tuolumne and Inyo counties, the California Highway Patrol, the Sierra and Stanislaus National Forests, and California Fish and Game. There are also three California Department of Corrections dog teams and three helicopters. The strategy is to confine, evacuate and search the area. Five roadblocks have been set up at key highways and trail points - one each at Tenaya Lake, Olmstead Point, Tuolumne, Lee Vining Canyon and Tioga Pass - and listening and observation points have been established at several backcountry canyon junctures. Road and foot patrols are being conducted continuously and are being augmented with overflights during the daylight hours. Aufhauser was released from the hospital yesterday, and returned to the site of the shooting to assist FBI agents in their investigation of the crime scene. They were able to find three spent .22 cartridges from a semi-automatic weapon and the impact points from the three shots that Aufhauser got off from his .357. There were no indications that his assailant was hit by any of the shots. Nothing else was found at the scene. Efforts to track the assailant proved fruitless. Investigators talked yesterday to a visitor who said he saw a man in the Tuolumne campground with a distinctive tattoo which matches that on a man - 36-year- old J.S.R. - wanted for a homicide in nearby Douglas, Nevada, but have not been able to find any evidence of any kind to confirm that J.S.R. was Aufhauser's assailant. Aufhauser and ranger Joe Sumner received the Department of Interior's valor award last year for risking their lives to rescue a visitor from a creek in the inner gorge between Upper and Lower Yosemite Falls in 1991. [Paul Henry, ICS Team, YOSE, 7/16; Mike O'Neal, RLES, RAD/WRO, 7/15] Monday, July 19, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Shooting of Ranger On Saturday, July 17th, searchers determined that there was a very low probability that ranger Kim Aufhauser's assailant was still in the park. The Tioga Road and all facilities at Tuolumne Meadows were accordingly reopened. The Park Police special events team was released on Sunday morning, and Western Region's ranger special events team will be released today. The park is now back in normal operation at all locations. Some evidence pertaining to Aufhauser's assailant has been found. FBI agents and park investigators will be evaluating that evidence and continuing the investigation. [Mike O'Neal, RLES, RAD/WRO, on location at YOSE, 7/17] Tuesday, July 20, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Shooting of Ranger On Sunday, July 18th, Nevada Highway Patrol officers arrested a man thought to be a possible suspect in the shooting of ranger Kim Aufhauser. J.S.R., who was wanted for a murder which took place in Douglas, Nevada, prior to the Yosemite incident, was supposedly seen in the Tuolumne area just before the shooting; although investigators have not yet found any evidence to link him to the shooting, media reports erroneously indicated that Aufhauser's assailant had been captured. J.S.R. was driving a stolen vehicle south of Fallon, Nevada, when apprehended. He has reportedly admitted to the homicide, but has vehemently denied shooting Aufhauser. A team has been established at Yosemite to pursue the investigation of the shooting. It is headed by agent Paul Ducasse of Western Regional Office; members are Jeff Sullivan, criminal investigator, Yosemite; Brian Smith, criminal investigator, Grand Canyon; and Scott Hanson, criminal investigator, Hawaii Volcanoes. Greg Jablonski, also a criminal investigator at Yosemite, will assist the team on a part-time basis. They will be following up on about 50 leads and checking out about 15 potential suspects. Two FBI agents from Fresno have been assigned to the case, but will not be physically on scene. [Mike O'Neal, RLES, RAD/WRO, 7/19] Wednesday, July 21, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Shooting of Ranger The investigation into the shooting of ranger Kim Aufhauser is continuing. A toll free number has been established at the park's law enforcement officer for information pertaining to the incident, and investigators are continuing to check out numerous reports phoned in by the public during the initial stages of the search for the suspect and investigation into the shooting. A group of about 15 people will be interviewed in connection with the incident. [Paul Ducasse, SA, RAD/WRO, head of investigative team, 7/20] Wednesday, July 28, 1993 93-477 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Shooting of Ranger The investigation into the shooting of ranger Kim Aufhauser continues. As of this time, the original list of 25 suspects has been reduced to nine or ten. Physical evidence is being processed and evaluated in the hope that it will reveal more information regarding the shooting. The investigative team is attempting to employ the services of a hypnotist to help Aufhauser recall details of the incident that may not readily come to mind. Investigators estimate that they may need another one to two weeks to check out all leads and information in the case. [RAD/WRO, 7/27] Tuesday, August 3, 1993 93-554 - Yosemite (California) - Serious Employee Injury Dispatcher Pat Teague was bitten in the ankle while visiting the Lake Eleanor area of the Mather District on July 28th. He was treated by a park medic, then evacuated by emergency air transport to a hospital in Modesto, California, where he was admitted to the intensive care unit. Teague is now out of the hospital and recovering at home. Get well wishes can be sent to him care of P.O. Box 577, Yosemite, CA 95389. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 8/2] Wednesday, August 4, 1993 93-554 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Employee Injury Yesterday's report on the incident in which Yosemite dispatcher Pat Teague was bitten failed to indicate what bit him. It was a rattlesnake. We regret the omission. The error was at this end, not in the submission. Tuesday, August 17, 1993 93-608 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality J.L., 19, of Laguna Beach, California, was hiking with his brother on Yosemite Falls trail on August 15th when he became confused and wandered off the trail onto Sunnyside Bench. In an attempt to get back on the trail, J.L. fell between 100 and 300 feet. Rangers evacuated him to Yosemite Medical, but J.L. died en route. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 8/16] Wednesday, August 18, 1993 93-613 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Fatality Park dispatch received a report of a motorcycle accident on Highway 140 a half mile east of the Arch Rock entrance station around 2 a.m. on August 15th. Responding rangers found that the passenger, D.G., a long-time resident of Yosemite and employee of Yosemite Park and Curry Company, had been killed, and that the driver, J.E., also a concession employee in the park, had sustained serious injuries. J.E. was taken to Memorial North Hospital in Modesto, where he's in serious but stable condition. According to J.E., he lost control of the motorcycle when he swerved to miss a deer. The motorcycle slid across the eastbound lane and struck the end of a rock wall that borders the road. An investigation is underway. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 8/16] Wednesday, August 18, 1993 93-615 - Yosemite (California) - Oil Spill On the afternoon of August 16th, maintenance employees discovered an 1800 gallon diesel oil spill at the Crane Flat generator building. A temporary generator had been hooked up at the site two weeks earlier when its predecessor had burned out, and a valve in the temporary hookup had apparently malfunctioned. About 100 square feet of the building's floor was saturated with oil. The malfunction was corrected and power has been restored. Assessments are being made to determine the extent of the damage. [Mark Butler, YOSE, 8/17] Friday, September 10, 1993 93-690 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning On the evening of September 5th, rangers received a report of a drowning in the Chilnualna Creek drainage. Two rangers were flown to the area by helicopter and began a foot search for the victim, who was located around 9:30 p.m. The victim had apparently fallen 20 feet from a cliff while climbing on a rock outcropping, sustained major head trauma in the fall, then drowned when he slipped below the surface of the creek. Due to darkness and the remoteness of the area, the body was secured at the scene and evacuated by helicopter the following morning. The victim was identified by members of his party as a juvenile from Arvada, Colorado. [Greg Jablonski, YOSE, 9/9] Tuesday, September 28, 1993 93-737 - Yosemite (California) - Fraud; Impersonation of Officer On September 25th, a patrol ranger driving through the South Entrance area observed a man - later identified as Y.K. - standing directly alongside one of the entrance booths, which was closed during a lunch break. As the ranger watched, Y.K. gestured to the operator of a motorhome, who handed Y.K. what appeared to be money. This was subsequently confirmed after the motorhome was stopped and the driver questioned. He stated that he had paid Y.K. three dollars to enter the park, but that he had wondered why the fee was only three dollars and why vehicles in the other traffic lane were not paying a fee. Y.K. was subsequently arrested at the scene while attempting to charge another visitor three dollars to enter the park (or four dollars if they wanted to park their vehicle). Y.K. was dressed in a white shirt and tie, and it is believed that he had just begun this fraud when observed. Only four visitors are believed to have paid him. Prosecution is pending on charges of impersonation of a federal officer and misappropriation of property. [Pat Hattaway, YOSE, 9/27] Wednesday, September 29, 1993 93-742 - Yosemite (California) - Fatal BASE Jump Early on the morning of September 25th, K.J. called park dispatch and reported that he'd recently witnessed a BASE jumping accident at El Capitan. K.J. said that he feared that the accident involved a person he'd dropped off at the Yosemite Falls trailhead the previous day. K.J. claimed he didn't know the person's name, but that he knew she was planning to BASE jump off El Capitan on the morning of the 25th. He also said that he'd seen three parachutes deployed near the face of El Capitan that morning, but that he'd also seen what appeared to be a human body free fall all the way to the top of the tree line at the base of El Capitan. He'd lost sight of it, but thought he'd heard it strike the rocks there. Investigating rangers found severely traumatized human remains below the New Dawn Wall route on El Capitan with two parachutes tangled in the trees above. The victim had not been positively identified at the time of the report. Investigators subsequently determined that K.J. was a principal participant in the jump; he was arrested and placed in custody on charges of illegal air delivery and conspiracy. K.J. continues to deny any knowledge of the victim's identity, and claims to have no information of or connection with the three successful jumpers. [Leslie Crossland, YOSE, 9/28] Friday, October 29, 1993 93-782 - Yosemite (California) - Commercial Hunting Indictments An investigation into allegations of commercial hunters guiding hunts along the boundaries of and within the park was begun in 1991 and continued (along with surveillance operations) through the hunting seasons of 1991, 1992 and 1993. Thirteen suspects were identified and over 80 violations of federal and state wildlife laws were documented, including guiding without a license, conspiracy to guide without a license, sale of bear gall bladders and hides, closed season kills, and numerous violations of state fish and game codes. At sunrise on October 18th, NPS investigators and rangers, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service agents, and California Fish and Game Department wardens contacted these suspects at their residences. During subsequent searches and interviews, a bear hide and three deer heads were seized and a household marijuana cultivation operation was discovered. Indictments are currently pending on seven of the suspects through the Tuolumne County district attorney's office. Investigation into the remaining six suspects will continue. The man who was cultivating the marijuana was arrested along with his wife and son; 26 firearms were seized from their residence. All of the suspects are known to operate throughout central and northern California. Names are being withheld pending indictments. Criminal investigators Jeff Sullivan and J.R. Tomasovic initiated the investigation. [Steve Martin, RAD/WRO, 10/28] Thursday, December 30, 1993 93-867 - Yosemite (California) - Employee Death Ranger Ferdinand Castillo, 76, a well-known fixture at the park's Tioga Pass entrance for almost four decades, passed away on December 28th in Groveland, California. Castillo began working in the park in 1954 and had since spent every summer greeting visitors at Tioga Pass with corny jokes, stories and tips on enjoying the park as he collected entrance fees. To those visitors who passed through "his" entrance, Castillo's presence and energy provided a special introduction to the park. When the Tioga Road closed down in the winter, Castillo taught swimming in San Francisco. Plans for funeral services have not yet been completed. [YOSE, 12/29] Tuesday, January 11, 1993 93-875 - Yosemite (California) - Burglary Arrests Rangers pursuing information acquired during a resource violation contact on December 5th recovered a $425 leather jacket stolen from Yosemite Lodge. The theft was made during one of a series of 37 room burglaries from the lodge, all with a similar, non-forced entry MO. Further investigation led to the December 13th arrest of C.F., a roomkeeper for Yosemite Concessions Services, for the theft of the jacket. C.F. is on probation to Mariposa County for several previous burglary convictions. His residence in Mariposa was searched on December 14th by rangers and country probation officers, and they discovered stolen property valued at approximately $10,000 which linked C.F. to nine burglaries committed at the lodge. The investigation is continuing. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE, 1/10] Thursday, January 20, 1994 93-782 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Hunting Indictments Five individuals have been arrested to date by California Fish and Game Department officers as a result of a three-year-long investigation by park rangers and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officers which concluded last fall. The investigation into allegations of commercial hunters guiding hunts along the boundaries of and within the park was begun in 1991 and continued (along with surveillance operations) through the hunting seasons of 1991, 1992 and 1993. Thirteen suspects were identified and over 80 violations of federal and state wildlife laws were documented, including guiding without a license, conspiracy to guide without a license, sale of bear gall bladders and hides, closed season kills, and numerous violations of state fish and game codes. The people arrested and the charges filed against them are as follows: * S.W. - Commercial guiding of bear hunts without a guide license, sale of bear gall bladders, hunting tag violations, cultivation of marijuana. * M.L. - Commercial guiding of bear hunts without a guide license, hunting tag violations. * G.L. - Commercial guiding of bear hunts without a guide license, hunting tag violations. * R.S.L. - Commercial guiding of bear hunts without a guide license, hunting tag violations, conspiracy to sell bear gall bladders. * E.E. - Commercial guiding of bear hunts without a guide license. All five are awaiting trial in Tuolumne County. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 1/19] Friday, February 11, 1994 94-60 - Yosemite (California) - Larceny Arrest On February 3rd, G.T.B. was arrested for theft of government property following a four-day investigation by park investigators. A search warrant was secured for G.T.B.'s residence, which is just outside park boundaries in Mariposa county, and Mariposa deputies assisted in the warrant execution. Every item of suspected stolen property that was named on the warrant was seized, including an 8mm video camera and accessories belonging to visitors from Scotland and restaurant and kitchen equipment belonging to the park's Loft restaurant. G.T.B. was the head cook at the restaurant, which is owned by Yosemite Concession Services. Also in his possession was a stainless steel service for 87 persons. The total valuation of the stolen property has been placed at $1,800. G.T.B. was temporarily booked into the county jail, then taken to the park jail. The sheriff is continuing his investigation, as many items of suspected stolen property were seen in G.T.B.'s residence during the search. [Fred Elchlep, CI, YOSE, 2/10] Tuesday, February 15, 1994 94-64 - Yosemite (California) - Search Suspended The four-day search for skier S.C.K., 23, of Sacramento, California, was discontinued on the night of February 13th due to a lack of clues as to his whereabouts. S.C.K. was reported overdue from a ski trip into the Snow Creek/Ten Lakes area last Wednesday night. A massive ground and air search was begun the following day, but heavy snowfall - a total of about three feet fell - made the operation very difficult. It appears that a friend of S.C.K.'s dropped him off, then went on another trip; it has therefore been impossible to get comprehensive information on him. Although the search has been suspended, an investigation continues. [YOSE, 2/14] Friday, February 18, 1994 94-64 - Yosemite (California) - Search Suspended The park received word late Wednesday afternoon that S.K., the focus of a recent four-day air and ground search in the park, had notified family members that he was all right. The search for S.K. was begun on the 10th when he was reported overdue from a cross-country ski trip. S.K.'s family indicated at that time that it was highly likely that he was in the park's backcountry. Two helicopters and a total of 46 people from the park, two adjacent national forests, and two county sheriffs' departments participated in the search, which covered an area of about 60,000 acres. [PA, YOSE, 2/17] Friday, March 4, 1994 93-782 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Hunting Indictments On February 25th, seven individuals appeared in court in Tuolumne county on a variety of state and federal wildlife violations stemming from Operation Yosemite, a two-and-a-half year interagency investigation into allegations of commercial hunters guiding hunts along the boundaries of and within the park. Six of the seven pled no contest; charges against the seventh were dismissed: * S.W. - Convicted on one count of guiding without a guide's license and two counts of sale of bear gall bladders. Sentenced to 64 days in jail, a $4,500 fine, three years of supervised probation, and three years revocation of hunting privileges. * R.L. - Convicted on one count of guiding without a license. Sentenced to a year's probation, a $500 fine, and a year's revocation of hunting privileges. * M.L. and G.L. - Each convicted on one count of guiding without a license and one count of illegal deer tag transfer. Each sentenced to a year's probation and a $500 fine on the first charge, and to a year's revocation of deer hunting privileges and a $600 fine (suspended to $175) on the second charge. * J.T. and J.T. - Each convicted on one count of illegal guiding without a license. Each sentenced to a year's probation and a $500 fine. * E.E. - All charges dismissed. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 3/2] Monday, April 4, 1994 94-146 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning Park dispatch received a 911 call at 4:30 p.m. on the afternoon of March 29th in which the caller stated that a man who had been boulder-hopping in the Merced River - later identified as M.S., 19, of Greeley, Colorado - had slipped and fallen into the water, then had been swept away by the current. Witnesses said they saw M.S. resurface once before disappearing a second time in the fast-moving water. Rescue personnel arrived on scene within minutes, but were unable to locate M.S. until about 5:15 p.m., when he was found face-down and submerged about 200 yards below the Vernal Falls bridge. Basic life support was begun on M.S. and was continued until arrival at the clinic, where further measures were taken to revive him and raise his body temperature. All efforts to revive him failed, though, and he was pronounced dead just after 8:00 p.m. M.S. was a student a Point Loma Nazarene College in San Diego and was in the park on spring break. [Greg Jablonski, YOSE, 4/1] Thursday, May 5, 1994 94-206 - Yosemite (California) - Attempted Suicide On April 19th, rangers arrested 47-year-old J.J. for being under the influence of alcohol and providing false information. During the booking process, J.J. became increasingly belligerent and violent, and was placed in a holding cell by himself. About two hours later, ranger Dean Reasoner noticed that J.J. had a bed sheet wrapped around his neck. As Reasoner, ranger McJunkin and investigator Jablonski rushed into the cell, J.J. jumped off the bed. J.J. had wrapped the sheet through the wire mesh on the cell's ceiling and was suspended by the neck for several seconds until he could be lowered to the ground. He was taken to the park clinic and found to have suffered no injuries. Rangers then took him to Mariposa, California, where he was placed on a mental health hold. Two days later, rangers responding to a 911 call regarding a male subject yelling obscenities and engaging in threatening behavior at Yosemite Lodge discovered that the subject was J.J., who had apparently been released from a hospital in Fresno and had returned to Yosemite. After making threats of violence toward numerous rangers, he was arrested by ranger Cameron Sholly and kept in a high security cell until his release the next day. His case and charges are pending in Yosemite magistrate's court. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 5/4] Thursday, May 12, 1994 94-214 - Western Region - Arrest of Car Clouter On Tuesday, May 10th, law enforcement officers from numerous federal, state and local agencies served arrest and search warrants on H.M.H., 51, of Gresham, Oregon, who is suspected of committing over 1,200 burglaries of vehicles belonging to visitors camped in NPS, California state park, Forest Service and other camping areas around the United States, including Yosemite, Grand Canyon, Rocky Mountain, Crater Lake, Lassen Volcanic, Glacier and about 20 other NPS units. He's also suspected of committing hundreds of auto burglaries in dozens of California parks. H.M.H. is currently being held on a federal detainer for violation of probation and cannot be released from jail. Over the next few days and weeks, H.M.H. will be charged with numerous counts of theft, burglary, and other related criminal offenses. Additional charges may be filed following analysis of truck loads of evidence seized during the execution of the warrants. Tens of thousands of dollars worth of suspected stolen property was taken from his home and a storage locker in Oregon. NPS investigators have been working for approximately three years on this single investigation, which was initiated by the NPS and California State Park Service but eventually evolved into a multi-agency task force effort. The following agencies participated in the investigation: National Park Service, California State Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, Gresham Police Department (Oregon), Regional Organized Crime Narcotics Agency (Oregon), California Highway Patrol, California Department of Justice, California Department of Forestry, FBI, Multnomah County Office of the District Attorney (Oregon), Hillsboro Police Department (Oregon), Washington County Sheriffs Department (Oregon), Oregon State Police, and numerous California county law enforcement agencies. [Paul Ducasse, SA, RAD/WRO, 5/11] Thursday, May 19, 1994 94-223 - Yosemite (California) - Rock Slide; Closure Around 4:30 p.m. on Tuesday, May 17th, a rock and mud slide closed Highway 140 at Windy Point about a mile below the Arch Rock entrance station. The road has been closed except for administrative traffic. The park staff was to decide late yesterday on whether or not to reopen the road today. Highways 41 and 120, which lead into Yosemite Valley, remain open to the public. [Dispatch, YOSE, 5/18] Friday, June 10, 1994 94-285 - Yosemite (California) - Concession Employee Suicide On June 1st, the park received a call of a suspicious death in the Yosemite Concession Services employee housing area known as Boystown. Rangers found C.A., 20, of Ganado, Arizona, lying without pulse or respirations on a bed in his tent cabin. The reporting party said that he'd come into the tent and found C.A. hanging from the rafters. He'd freed him and attempted CPR without success. Evidence at the scene, including a farewell note, supported his story. Subsequent interviews revealed that C.A. had been extremely depressed for several days and had told people that he was going to die that day. Attempts to get family members to intervene had been unsuccessful. The death has been ruled a suicide. Because of the trauma to fellow employees observed during the investigation, the park's investigative team asked that counseling be provided for employees and friends of the deceased. The concessioner has accordingly initiated such counseling. [G.P. Jablonski, CI, YOSE, 6/9] Tuesday, June 28, 1994 94-336 - Yosemite (California) - Multiple Rescues Just before 4 p.m. on June 23rd, T.C., 19, the operator and sole occupant of a pickup truck, collided head on with a full-sized charter tour bus in the middle of the Wawona tunnel. T.C. sustained massive injuries and was pinned in the wreckage; after being extricated and receiving advanced life support at the scene, he was taken by ambulance to the park's medical clinic, where he coded twice before being stabilized enough to be evacuated by air to Memorial North Hospital in Modesto. At last report, he was in critical condition in the hospital's intensive care unit. Although the bus sustained considerable front end damage, none of its occupants were injured. At almost the same time, rangers completed several other SARs in Yosemite Valley, including the evacuation of two young men who had scrambled about 1200 feet vertically up Washington's Column without ropes or any other protection and with no prior climbing experience, the location of two separately lost children on the Vernal/Nevada Falls trail who were several hours overdue, and a response up the Four Mile trail to search for an elderly woman reported to suffering from medical problems. Then, around 8 p.m., rangers were called to another motor vehicle accident, this time at the west end of Yosemite Valley. A single vehicle with two occupants had gone off the road on a curve, glanced off a tree, and rolled over an embankment, almost ending up in the Merced River. A litter evacuation was required for one of the injured occupants, who was subsequently medevaced by air to the hospital in Modesto. The day concluded with the sole on-duty ranger responding to a psilocybin mushroom party in Little Yosemite Valley, confiscating the remaining mushrooms from two wilderness users whom other campers had complained about regarding alleged bizarre behavior, and detoxing the two campers. [Jim Tucker, YOSE, 6/27] Thursday, July 7, 1994 94-356 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Three Fatalities On the afternoon of the Fourth of July, rangers responding to a report of a single vehicle accident on Highway 120 above Crane Flat found a heavily damaged 1993 Lexus sedan about 60 feet down an embankment. The driver and rear passenger were dead, but the front passenger was alive and unconscious and apparently suffering from major chest injuries and internal trauma. Access to the vehicle and patient were extremely difficult and required considerable effort. Despite the best efforts of park EMTs and a paramedic, the patient expired before he could be removed from the vehicle. The three victims were subsequently identified as S.E., 63, W.W., 68, and E.W., 76, all of Sunnyvale, California. Preliminary investigation indicates that the vehicle was traveling at least 60 mph downhill in a posted 35 mph zone when it left the roadway on a curve. No skid marks or evidence of braking was found. Park investigators estimate that the car was completely airborne for over 140 feet before it struck some large trees and came to rest. The impact with two of the 60 foot pine trees was substantial enough to snap off their tops. Both airbags in the vehicle deployed and the driver and front passenger were wearing lap and shoulder belts. The cause of the accident has not yet been absolutely determined and the investigation continues. [Brian Smith, CI, YOSE, 7/6] Wednesday, July 20, 1994 94-399 - Yosemite (California) - Multiple Car Clouts During the afternoon and evening of July 12th and in the early morning hours of July 13th, Yosemite Valley was hit ten times by auto burglars. Reports were taken at the Ahwahnee Hotel, Yosemite Lodge, Curry Village, and Camp 6 overflow parking lots. The modus operandi in each of the cases was very similar. The vehicles which were hit were sport utility vehicles, such as Explorers, Land Cruisers, and Cherokees, small four-door sedans, or vans with sliding side doors. Many were rentals. Utility and four-door vehicles were entered by prying on the window moldings until the window glass broke; tool marks were consistent with a large flathead screwdriver. Vans were attacked on the sliding door window by prying at the glass. Glove boxes were left open and their contents thrown out on the vehicles' floors and front seats. Other parts of the vehicles were disturbed if things were hidden under blankets, deck covers, or similar coverings. Items were stolen from only three vehicles. They included wallets, purses, cameras and video equipment, portable video games, and an expensive set of golf clubs. It appears the main target may have been wallets in glove boxes. Cellular phones, stereos, CD's and tapes and other attractive items were not taken. Anyone who has had auto burglaries with similar MO's should contact investigator Dan Horner, Valley District, at (209) 372-0215. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/19] Tuesday, July 26, 1994 94-399 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Car Clouts During the afternoon and evening of July 12th and in the early morning hours of July 13th, Yosemite Valley was hit ten times by auto burglars. On July 20th, the park was again hit by car clouters, who broke into seven vehicles - five in the Valley, one at Mono Meadows, and one at Wawona Hotel. The MO matched the previous week's burglaries in which windows were opened with a pry tool that left marks consistent with a large, flat head screwdriver. All the vehicles in this round of break-ins were Ford Aerostar mini-vans. Later that night, Valley District rangers staked out several parking lots. Around 1:30 a.m., a 911 call came in of a vehicle break-in at Curry Village. While plain clothes rangers continued to watch this lot for suspects, ranger Chris Pergiel set up a check point on the only road leading to the area. The fifth vehicle to arrive at the check point was driven by a man wearing batting gloves. As Pergiel spoke with him, he noticed a large screwdriver on the floor at the driver's feet. Further examination of the car revealed property stolen in the earlier burglaries. The driver, M.H., and the passenger, J.J., were arrested for possession of stolen property. Both are from the Bay Area. M.H. has an extensive criminal history, including felony convictions for arson and burglary; J.J. has no history. Under counsel of the federal defender, J.J. agreed to assist the investigation in return for prosecutorial consideration. A search warrant is being sought for M.H.'s residence based on information provided by J.J. Also in the car at the time of the arrest was a credit card reported stolen from a Ford Aerostar van at Point Reyes on July 19th. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/25] Tuesday, August 30, 1994 94-508 - Yosemite (California) - Discovery of Aircraft Accident Wreckage On August 17th, park investigators examined the wreckage of a downed Piper single engine aircraft discovered in a remote section of Stubblefield Canyon, which is located in the northern section of the park. The wreckage was discovered by a trail crew member hiking cross-country on his days off. Working with the FAA and NTSB officials, park investigators discovered the aircraft was reported missing on July 20, 1962, by the families of the four men reported to be on board. The flight reportedly left Fresno on July 19, 1962, at about 11 p.m. after the conclusion of a Billy Graham concert attended by the four men, one of whom was to become an ordained minister the following week. The location of the wreck was outside the area of the normal return flight path between Fresno and Sacramento, and the intensive air and ground search for the aircraft that was subsequently conducted did not include the park. The wreckage was discovered at about 9,000 feet on a south-facing granite slope of between 35 and 50 degrees. The condition and location of the wreckage was such that the park's contract helicopter pilot was unable to locate the wreckage while examining the mountainside on his initial examination of the site. Trail crew members hiked and climbed for over an hour, covering extremely rugged terrain, to reach the crash site from their base camp, a distance of about 1,000 yards. They directed the helicopter with investigators to the site. Investigators enlisted the assistance of two park archaeologists to construct a map of the crash site as a part of the investigation. A grid search of the 100 by 200 yard wide debris field resulted in the location and collection of several identifying articles, human remains, and aircraft parts bearing serial numbers. The quantity and condition of the recovered human remains makes it unlikely the identification of any of the four men reported to be on board will be conclusive, according to county officials. [Greg Jablonski, YOSE, 8/29] Wednesday, October 12, 1994 94-598 - Yosemite (California) - Multiple Rescues In the early morning hours of October 4th, the park was hit by an unpredicted wet storm in which Yosemite Valley received approximately two inches of rain over a 24 hour period. Since fall is the peak of the big wall climbing season in Yosemite, there were many parties on El Capitan, and several were signalling for rescue by early afternoon. Because of the bad weather, helicopters were unable to fly. A ground approach to the top of El Capitan was accordingly begun that afternoon. Approximately 40 people and a string of mules were used to haul equipment over the eight miles of trail to the summit of El Cap in a continuous downpour. When it got dark, the rain turned to snow above the 7,000-foot level. It snowed most of the night, and the entire team spent an extremely unpleasant wet and cold night. About half a foot of snow fell in the area. The precipitation stopped by morning, permitting team members to set up a lowering operation at the top of the Nose. Rescuers were lowered 600 feet to Camp Six on the Nose route. Nine stranded climbers from four countries, who spoke three different languages, were squeezed on a ledge which is considered crowded with three people on it. Four of them were in early stages of hypothermia. With the assistance of rescuers, all nine ascended the ropes to the top. While the group from the Nose was ascending, a party of two Americans on the Salath) Wall route signaled that they also needed to be rescued. As a rescuer was being lowered the 700 feet to them, a third party, comprised of a Norwegian and an Englishman, yelled from their position on the Sunkist route that they could not make it through another night. They were hanging in a porta-ledge which was in a small waterfall and their gear was completely soaked. After NPS rescuers reached them and the weather improved, all 13 victims ascended the fixed ropes to the top under their own power and were eventually flown off by helicopter. Several were transferred to the Yosemite clinic for treatment of cold injuries to their hands and feet. All gear and personnel were flown off the following day. [YOSE, 10/11] Monday, December 19, 1994 92-342 - California and Arizona Parks - Follow-up on Butterfly Poaching On December 14th, R.J.S., of Redwood City and M.L.G. of Santa Rosa pleaded guilty in federal district court to charges of violating the Endangered Species Act and other international wildlife conventions. The two were arrested last year for poaching butterflies between 1983 and 1992 in Grand Canyon, Yosemite, Death Valley, Golden Gate, Point Reyes and a number of wildlife refuges. More than 2,200 butterflies, including 210 protected under the Endangered Species Act, were taken for commercial gain over the period. The case was developed after Fish and Wildlife agents and Grand Canyon rangers and investigators began an investigation two years ago into poaching of a rare species of butterfly from the park. Collectors have paid hundreds of dollars for some of the rarer butterfly species the two men collected, which included the San Bruno elfin, mission blue and Lange's metalmark. This is reportedly the first federal case ever made against butterfly poachers. R.J.S. and M.L.G. could receive fines of up to $250,000 and prison terms of up to five years. [San Francisco Chronicle, 12/16] Wednesday, January 11, 1995 95-06 - California Parks - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Several more initial and follow-up reports have been received from California parks regarding the storms that have been buffeting that state: * Yosemite - The park has been struck by heavy rains for the past seven days, but no flooding has yet occurred. An ICS operation has been established, and criteria defined for implementing management actions when conditions warrant. The saving grace to date has been the snow line, which remains below 8,000 feet. Should the predicted rains materialize and the snow line rise to the 9,000 foot level or higher, significant flooding and evacuation of some areas could occur. Several more storms are forecast for the area through the balance of the week. [Larry Carr, CR, WHIS; Acting Superintendent, PORE; Craig Dorman, Superintendent, LABE; Betty Knight, PAO, LAVO; Bob Andrew, CR, YOSE; all reports, 1/10] Friday, February 3, 1995 95-44 - Yosemite (California) - Poaching Conviction On January 31st, R.M., 54, of Riverbank, California, was sentenced for his conviction on charges of shooting four male mule deer in the Wawona front country in June of 1994. R.M. had been at large since the incident, but was arrested on November 28th on a $10,000 warrant for violation of 16 USC 60. He was sentenced to 30 days in custody, 24 months probation, and 200 hours of community service; his hunting privileges were also revoked and he forfeited weapons involved in the incident. R.M.'s accomplice, L.S., 32, also of Riverbank, was apprehended on a similar warrant last September. L.S. was convicted of assisting R.M. and illegally killing the deer; he was sentenced to 10 days in custody, 24 months probation, and 200 hours of community service, and banned from hunting or associating with anyone hunting for two years. Both subjects plead guilty with no trial after their attorneys were presented with key evidence - blood samples from the animals which matched traces of blood found on a knife in R.M.'s possession. Wawona rangers and investigators worked with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service laboratory in Oregon in preparing the evidence. [Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 2/1/95] Wednesday, February 15, 1995 94-697 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Fatal and Multiple Injuries On the afternoon of December 29th, a Dodge mini van collided with a park snow plow on the Badger Pass Road. All eight passengers in the van, an extended family from California and Connecticut, suffered varying degrees of injury and required medical treatment. Two were flown from the scene by helicopter to a hospital in Modesto; one of them, a 70-year-old male, had suffered massive chest trauma and was pronounced dead upon arrival. Six ambulances, two helicopters, and two structural engines and their crews were required to manage the patient extrication and transport. Over 40 park personnel were involved. The roads were covered with packed snow at the time of the accident, but the weather was clear and both vehicles were equipped with tire chains. The accident occurred shortly before the lifts closed at the Badger Pass ski area and completely blocked access to the area. Over 900 cars were trapped at Badger Pass for several hours. Investigation into the cause of the accident continues. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 2/14 - Editor's Note: Yosemite is catching up on incident reports. This is the first of several from the past month or so that will appear in the Morning Report over the next few days] Thursday, February 16, 1995 95-66 - Yosemite (California) - Hypothermia; Life Saved Around 4:30 a.m. on New Year's Day morning, rangers Tom Wilson and Cameron Sholly found an unconscious and unresponsive man face down in the snow near one of the concession employee dorms. The man, who had a very strong odor of an alcoholic beverage about him, could not be awakened, and was taken by ambulance to the park's clinic. He was found to have a core body temperature of 90 degrees and a blood alcohol level of .35 percent. He was rewarmed and eventually regained consciousness. After release from the clinic, he was placed under arrest for public intoxication and booked into the Yosemite jail. This was his fourth arrest for public intoxication in the park. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 2/14] Thursday, February 16, 1995 95-67 - Yosemite (California) - Bomb While conducting a consent search of a vehicle occupied by two juveniles, R.H. and J.F., ranger Mary Litell recovered two fully functional pipe bombs and several items of stolen property. After the two were arrested and jailed, park investigators contacted the Madera County sheriff's office and asked officers to go to their residences. A consent search was conducted at J.F.'s residence, during which officers seized three homemade bombs, six pounds of explosives, materials for bomb construction, and satanic cult materials. They also found a marijuana plantation. R.H. has been charged in the park with various felonies associated with possession of explosives and stolen property; J.F. has been arrested by the county and charged with multiple felonies. The explosives device recovered in Yosemite was disabled by personnel from the state fire marshall's office. An inter- agency investigation of the pair is underway. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 2/14] Friday, February 17, 1995 95-68 - Yosemite (California) - Structural Fire Maintenance workers spotted a fire in the kitchen of a 60-year-old park residence early on the afternoon of January 25th. An employee attacked the fire with a garden hose until park and concession engines arrived a few minutes later. The three engine companies were able to extinguish the fire fairly quickly. Damage to the structure and its contents was limited to about $9,000, largely due to the quick action of the maintenance employee and the rapid response of the engine companies. Investigation indicates that work crews in the residence had placed a tarp over a kitchen counter, that the weight of the tarp had activated a toaster switch, and that the overheated unit had eventually caused the counter to ignite. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 2/14] Friday, February 17, 1995 95-71 - Yosemite (California) - Drug Arrests On January 21st, rangers Cameron Sholly and Chris Pergiel stopped a vehicle that had been identified as one associated with transport and sales of illegal drugs. Both the driver and passenger were arrested for driving under the influence; the driver was also arrested for possession of drugs when a search of the subjects and vehicle led to the discovery of methamphetamines, cocaine and marijuana, all packaged for sale. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 2/14] Monday, March 13, 1995 95-96 - Western/Pacific Northwest Regions - Storm Damage The heavy rains which have fallen along the West Coast since the middle of last week have had significant impacts on at least three parks; additional reports are anticipated: * Yosemite (California) - Over eight-and-a-half inches of rain fell on the park during a 48-hour period that began on Thursday, March 9th. Highways 41 and 140, the park's two primary access roads, were heavily damaged by rock slides, mud slides and undermining of the roadway in numerous areas. The main park sewer line was threatened as a portion of Highway 140 above the line slid into the Merced River. The Badger Pass ski area and park communities of Wawona, El Portal and Yosemite West were cut off by blockages of access roads. Power was lost in some areas for an extended period and the water storage for Wawona was damaged, leaving that community with only minimal drinking water and inadequate water for structural fire protection. Preliminary estimates place the damage to roads, utilities and some buildings in excess of $1 million. At present, Yosemite Valley can only be reached by Highway 120. Minimum estimates for the length of time it will take before Highways 41 and 140 can be reopened are, respectively, five days and over two weeks. Damaged areas of these roads will require extensive engineering and repairs. All estimates, however, are predicated on no further rains or other damage. About 300 park, concession and other employees will have significant problems getting to either their homes or work places over the next few weeks. The park completed a comprehensive ICS plan for potential spring flooding from heavy rains and snow runoff just prior to the storm's arrival; on March 10th, non-essential park employees were released from duty early in the day and the ICS plan was put into effect. As of yesterday, about 150 park employees were involved with the incident. The park has received mutual aid assistance from the Forest Service. [Brian Smith, YOSE; Bill Lester, CR, PINN; Carl Christensen, WRO; Larry Nickey, EOC, OLYM; 3/10-3/12] Thursday, March 16, 1995 95-96 - Western/Pacific Northwest Regions - Follow-up on Storm Damage Additional reports have been received from parks struck by last week's storm: * Yosemite (California) - It's now estimated that it may take up to six weeks to complete repairs on Highway 140. Highway 41 may reopen a bit sooner. Highway 120 into the valley is still open, however, and the park remains open. [Carl Christensen, RAD/WRO; Don Neubacher, Superintendent, PORE; Gary Candelaria, PINN; 3/14-15] Friday, March 24, 1995 95-96 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Storm Damage The park continues to receive heavy rains and snow at higher elevations. Moisture content in the snow pack is about 160 percent of the average level for this time of year. Highway 140 remains closed, and work has stopped because of the danger to workers and the continuing rain fall. Highway 41 was reopened on March 19th, but was closed again early yesterday morning because of heavy snow and falling trees. It was to be reopened later in the day. Many employees have been assigned tasks outside their normal jobs because of their inability to get into the park. Essential personnel are being shuttled into the Valley via Highway 41. This practice will continue until Highway 140 is reopened, probably two weeks from now, possibly later. [Bob Andrew, CR, YOSE, 3/24] Tuesday, April 18, 1995 95-157 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On April 2nd, Valley rangers received a report of an unconscious and seriously injured visitor who had fallen about 25 feet into the Merced drainage below the Vernal Falls foot bridge and suffered multiple fractures and head trauma. A 15-person rescue team reached and stabilized the victim in an operation that took about three hours. A Lemoore Naval Air Station rescue helicopter assisted in a 150-foot winch extraction from a narrow and confined area. Ranger Chris Pergiel lead the team. [CRO, YOSE, 4/17] Tuesday, April 18, 1995 95-158 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue A 39-year-old male suffered a fractured femur and hip from an approximately 150 foot fall near the top of the Yosemite Falls trail on April 11th. An 11-person rescue team responded; due to snow and ice, it took them about eight hours to stabilize and evacuate him. A California Highway Patrol helicopter flew him from the scene to the park clinic. Ranger Mary Litell led the team. [CRO, YOSE, 4/17] Tuesday, April 18, 1995 95-159 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On April 13th, rangers were notified of four distressed climbers at Camp Six on the nose of El Capitan. It had been snowing and raining throughout the day, and it appeared that the climbers, who were suspended about 3,000 feet from the Valley floor on a vertical wall, were suffering from hypothermia. A major rescue operation involving over 60 people was initiated. Rescue team members on snowshoes and skis and in snow cats were unable to reach the top of El Capitan due to deep snows covering the 16-mile route. During a break in the weather, a Lemoore NAS helicopter and an NPS contract helicopter flew an 11- person rescue team to the top of El Capitan. Team members were lowered 600 overhanging feet to the stranded climbers. The climbers were able to ascend to the top, but only with extreme difficulty and through the assistance of the team members. All four recovered from their hypothermia. The rescue operation and ascent were hampered by high winds, frozen ropes, and sheets of ice dropping on rescuers. Investigation showed that the victims were grossly under prepared for what was a typical Yosemite spring storm. Ranger Mary Litell led the rescue. [CRO, YOSE, 4/17] Wednesday, April 19, 1995 95-163 - Yosemite (California) - Assault; Attempted Armed Robbery Rangers received a report on April 7th of a young man on a park shuttle bus threatening a visitor with a knife. Investigation revealed that two Yosemite residents, one 16 and the other 17, had confronted several other juveniles, all visitors, and ordered them to leave their seats at the back of the bus. When the latter refused, the 16-year-old brandished a knife, threatened to kill one of the visitors, and ordered him to hand over his money. The victim refused to give him any money, but yielded his seat. Both boys were arrested. The 16- year-old was charged with aggravated assault and attempted armed robbery; the 17-year-old was charged with aiding aggravated assault and attempted robbery. The county will prosecute the 16-year-old, who is already on probation. [CRO, YOSE, 4/19] Thursday, April 20, 1995 95-167 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Multiple Injuries Four visitors were injured in an accident on Northside Drive on April 9th in which a small car crossed into the path of a one-ton Dodge pickup. Two suffered serious injuries. It took park firefighters and medics over an hour to extract one victim due to extensive damage to the car. All four were taken to the park clinic; the two who were seriously injured were subsequently flown to a hospital in Modesto. [CRO, YOSE, 4/17] Friday, April 21, 1995 95-174 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue On March 23rd, Wawona rangers received a report of two skiers - J.L. and A.B. - who were overdue from a planned eight-day trip to the Triple Divide Peak area. A three-day search was begun by two helicopters and about ten park employees. The crew of a rescue helicopter from Lemoore NAS spotted the skiers on the morning of March 25th. Both were in good condition. J.L. and A.B. had spent four days and nights holed up in a tent while up to ten feet of new snow fell around them. J.L. created a chess set from raisins, nuts and moleskin to pass the time in between clearing snow off the tent. J.L. has since written to the park to report his shock at all the attention the incident received. He's been interviewed on cable TV and several radio talk shows, has had articles about him appear in several papers, and was even asked to come up on stage at a local folk music performance to tell his story. [CRO, YOSE, 4/25] Wednesday, April 26, 1995 95-180 - Yosemite (California) - Agency Assist; Arrests On April 15th, dispatch received a request from the California Highway Patrol for assistance in apprehending two suspects in a stolen vehicle which was believed to be heading toward the park. Rangers responded and located the vehicle five miles west of the park entrance. It had crashed and overturned and was a total loss. The two occupants, both 17-year-olds from Sonora, California, were found about a mile away and were taken into custody. Both had previous arrest records. [Dave Lattimore, DR, Mather District, YOSE, 4/21] Monday, May 1, 1995 95-187 - Yosemite (California) - Serious EMS Incident On the morning of April 20th, M.P., 33, the daughter of a retired Yosemite magistrate, began suffering seizures while in Yosemite West. Ranger/medics determined that she was suffering from status epilepticus, a serious condition in which multiple seizures occur in rapid succession. She was stabilized and taken by ambulance to the park clinic, then transferred to a hospital in Modesto, where she was treated and subsequently released. [Kevin McMillan, YOSE, 4/28] Friday, June 2, 1995 95-246 - Yosemite (California) - Employee Fatality Kelly Gleason, 33, a nurse at Yosemite Medical Clinic, died of severe head injuries sustained in a fall while hiking near Mirror Lake on the afternoon of May 30th. Gleason and two other clinic employees were returning from a day hike to Hidden Falls, a small cascade on Tenaya Creek about a mile and a half upstream from the lake, when she slipped on angled, wet granite and fell about 50 feet. Gleason was unconscious when reached by her hiking companions, and was pronounced dead at the scene. She had worked as a registered nurse at the clinic since 1993. [PAO, YOSE, 6/1] Wednesday, June 7, 1995 95-270 - Yosemite (California) - Attempted Assault on Ranger; DUI On May 30th, park dispatch received a report of a woman operating a vehicle while under the influence. Ranger Katherine Korte, who was on bicycle patrol at the time, spotted the vehicle in Curry Village and directed the driver to stop. The woman instead drove straight at Korte at about 40 miles per hour. Korte took evasive action, and the vehicle passed within six to twelve inches of her bike. The car then headed on toward Mirror Lake, an area closed to motor vehicles but full of pedestrian and bicycle traffic, but was stopped before reaching that location. The 24-year-old driver, a park concession employee, was taken into custody and charged with assault on a federal officer, DUI, refusal to submit to a chemical test, resisting arrest, and failure to yield to an emergency vehicle. [CRO, YOSE, 6/6] Wednesday, June 7, 1995 95-271 - Yosemite (California) - Disorderly Arrest; Civil Disturbance On May 17th, rangers Chris Pergiel and Keith Lober contacted a man in the concession housing area regarding an alcohol violation. While attempting to identify the man, he began to display violent behavior towards the rangers, refused to comply with any of their requests, and fought efforts to take him into custody. A disorderly crowd of about 30 people followed the two rangers and their prisoner as they walked to the patrol vehicle. Several members of the group threatened to incite a riot and to take the prisoner away from the rangers, but a third ranger was able to keep the crowd away until the prisoner was placed in the vehicle. One person was arrested for interfering with the arrest. The third ranger was followed by the crowd as he walked to his car and was intermittently heckled and threatened. Off-duty units were called to the scene to assist him and disperse the crowd. About ten people were identified as having either interfered with the arrests or incited the crowd, but could not be taken into custody due to the initial lack of available resources. Two of the involved rangers returned to the concession housing area two nights later and spoke to a group of about 45 people, most of whom had been present at the incident. The majority were receptive to the follow-up contact. Since that time, rangers have reported no unusual difficulties or interference during patrols and contacts in the area. [CRO, YOSE, 6/6] Wednesday, June 14, 1995 95-294 - Yosemite (California) - Accidental Death of Employee Barry Hance, 43, the Mather District roads foreman, died of injuries suffered yesterday morning in an avalanche that occurred near Olmstead Point on the Tioga Road. Hance was in a bulldozer removing snow from the road's shoulder when the dozer was hit by the avalanche. He was extricated from the bulldozer and transported by helicopter to Yosemite Valley, where he was pronounced dead. Park and county road crews have halted plowing operations, and work has been suspended indefinitely. Investigators are currently on the scene and the entire road corridor will be assessed for additional hazards. It's not yet known when work will resume. An opening date for the Tioga Road has not been established. Further details will appear in tomorrow's morning report. [Kris Fister, Hal Grovert, YOSE, 6/14] Wednesday, June 14, 1995 95-295 - Yosemite (California) - Search; Drowning A raft crewed by four professional river guides capsized on the Merced River near El Portal on June 29th. The Merced was running at a high flow rate at the time due to runoff from a near record winter snow pack. Three of them swam to shore, but 36-year-old J.U. was carried down the river. Rangers initiated a hasty search and notified the Mariposa County SAR team, which took over command of the search operation. The park continued to provide personnel and other logistical support, including the park helicopter, through that night and the following day. J.U.'s life vest was located on the afternoon of June 30th; his body was later found a mile downstream from the point last seen. Initial reports indicate that he died from drowning. A contributing factor may have been his life vest, which provided only 12 pounds of flotation and was not Coast Guard approved. [Mary Coelho, YOSE, 6/13] Thursday, June 29, 1995 95-294 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Employee Death A graveside service was held on June 19th for Mather District roads foreman Barry Hance, who died of injuries suffered on June 13th in an avalanche that occurred near Olmstead Point on the Tioga Road. A memorial service was held for park employees at the Yosemite Institute campus in Crane Flat the same day. A trust fund has been established for the Barry Hance Family at the Yosemite Bank (account number 2043985). If you would like to make a donation toward the fund, you may do so by contacting the Groveland branch of Yosemite Bank at 209- 962-7853. [YOSE, 6/28] Thursday, June 29, 1995 95-344 - Yosemite (California) - Multiple Rescues Four people were rescued from climbing routes on the face of El Capitan on June 15th after an unseasonable but predicted storm passed through the area, dropping rain and snow. Climbers D.M., 26, and C.C., 25, were on the Zodiac route about 400 feet from the top when they became cold, wet and hypothermic. Due to low clouds, visual observation of the team proved impossible; their location was established by having them drop water bottles in response to PA calls from rangers. When the weather cleared, rescuers were dropped at the top of El Capitan by park and Lemoore NAS helicopters, whose crews subsequently spotted two other climbers - B.L. and E.S. - who were about 600 feet from the top on the Shield route and were in similar distress. Another team was helicoptered to the top to rescue them. A total of about 80 rangers and other rescuers worked through the night to get the four climbers to the top. All parties were airlifted to the Valley the following morning. Criminal charges may be lodged against all four for disorderly conduct. [Mary Coelho, YOSE, 6/29] Thursday, July 6, 1995 95-373 - Yosemite (California) - Equine Rescue On the morning of June 21st, park SAR personnel were en route on Highway 140 to assist a county SAR team in the search for a drowning victim outside the park when one of the searchers saw a saddled horse swimming downstream through class 4 and 5 rapids. It was later learned that the horse had fallen in the river three miles upstream, and that the rider had jumped clear of the animal before it fell in. The horse was able to swim into an eddy along the stream bank, where it became stranded on its side on submerged rocks. One of the searchers was able to reach the horse, lead it upstream in the eddy to a flat rock shelf, then help it to struggle out of the water onto the shelf. The horse was tranquilized by a veterinarian and lifted out of the river by a utility boom truck. Although bruised and cut, the horse survived and is reportedly doing well. [Mary Coelho, YOSE] Friday, July 7, 1995 95-383 - Yosemite (California) - Fourth of July Weekend Events Over the Fourth of July weekend, rangers in the Wawona District responded to a variety of incidents, including: * Two accidents on Highway 41, both of which involved motorcycles and significant injuries, mitigated by the fact that both motorcyclists were wearing helmets. * The rescue of a hiker with a fractured ankle on the Chilnualna Falls trail and of another visitor with a possible fractured ankle from the park's backcountry. * Advanced life support and transport for an employee of a private business who suffered angina and chest pains. * Advanced life support and transport for a visitor to a private camp who suffered an acute asthma attack. * Capture and relocation of a black bear who broke into several homes, including the district ranger's (the bear subsequently returned, again broke into homes, and was captured and euthanized). * The rescue of three people from the high and fast flowing (due to winter runoff) South Fork of the Merced River after they became stranded while tubing without proper equipment. [Mary Coelho, YOSE] Wednesday, July 12, 1995 95-399 - Yosemite (California) - Felony Theft; Arrest On June 17th, rangers received a report of a man cutting a cable and lock and removing a mountain bike from a rack attached to a vehicle at the Lower Yosemite Falls parking lot. They subsequently spotted the man and the bike, but were unable to catch him. On the following day, ranger Kathy Korte saw a man fitting his description riding on one of the park's bike paths. She was unable to contact him because she was on the other side of the river, but radioed his position to other rangers. Ranger Cameron Sholly soon spotted him riding with a second person and ordered both of them to stop. They split up, however, and pedaled away in different directions. Sholly pursued and caught the original suspect after he fell off his bike and fled. The man violently resisted arrest, but was subdued and taken into custody. He was charged with felony possession of stolen property and interfering. It's believed that the person who escaped was also involved in a large number of mountain bike thefts that have taken place over the past several months. The investigation continues. [Mary Coelho, YOSE] Thursday, July 13, 1995 95-405 - Yosemite (California) - MVA; Search On the afternoon of July 4th, J.B., 35, was riding his motorcycle on Highway 140 when he went off the road, struck a large rock, and was thrown into a side channel of the Merced River. Witnesses saw him float down the channel to its confluence with the main channel of the river, where he was quickly swept downstream. He was face down in the river and was not moving. The river is running at an extremely high flow rate due to runoff from a near record snow pack. A ground and air search was begun of the river and continued the following day. They found no sign of J.B.. The search has accordingly been suspended until river conditions improve later this summer. [CR, YOSE] Monday, July 17, 1995 95-415 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue On the afternoon of July 8th, rangers responded to the report of a rafting accident on the Merced River in the El Portal area. Upon arrival, they found D.D., 43, stranded in a tree midstream in the river. D.D. was an occupant of a raft which had overturned about a half mile upstream; two other occupants, aged 42 and 13, swam to shore, but the fourth occupant, a 16-year- old girl, was missing. Search and rescue operations were begun immediately, and additional assistance was sought from the county SAR team and from BLM river rangers. The 16-year-old was found on the shore two miles downstream within a half hour. BLM river rangers brought D.D. to shore. D.D. and the two juveniles were treated for minor injuries and released. [CRO, YOSE] Friday, August 4, 1995 95-491 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality On July 31st, H.H., a 70-year-old park visitor, fell down a flight of stairs in one of the rental cottages at Wawona. Four park EMTs and three doctors who were guests of one of the EMTs responded with the Wawona ambulance. ALS procedures were employed, along with C-spine precautions. H.H. was transferred by ambulance and helicopter to the Valley Medical Center in Fresno, where she died from her injuries. Preliminary findings on scene indicated that she'd suffered a depressed skull fracture which probably caused a severe intercranial bleed. [CRO, YOSE] Wednesday, August 9, 1995 95-497 - Yosemite (California) - Kidnapping On the morning of August 3rd, investigators received a call from Utah from a Boulder, Colorado, man who said that he'd been assaulted and abducted from the Valley the previous morning. He said that he was approached by a man in civilian clothes who said he was a ranger and was placing him under arrest. The victim said that he believed the man really was a ranger because he had handcuffs and because he walked off into the bushes for a minute and appeared to call dispatch on a portable radio. In any case, the "ranger" threatened him with violence if he refused to cooperate, so the victim allowed himself to be handcuffed. The man then beat him severely about the head, neck and chest with a large flashlight, forced the victim to drive him from the park in his (the victim's) pickup truck, and made him withdraw cash from an ATM in Mariposa. The victim was able to escape when they stopped for gas in Merced, but did not call the park until he reached Utah. A search of the crime scene produced a backpack which the assailant had left behind. He is described as a white male adult, 26 or 27 years old, about 6'3" tall, and weighing around 200 pounds. He has a "white wall" hair cut with short, light brown curls on top; his eyes are hazel or blue with flecks in the iris. Investigators have determined that the suspect used three different names while staying in the park, and believe that he may be AWOL from the Army. A joint investigation involving the park, FBI, Army and several local agencies is now underway. [CRO, YOSE] Monday, August 28, 1995 92-342 - California and Arizona Parks - Follow-up on Butterfly Poaching On August 1st, R.S. of Redwood City, California, and T.K., of Tucson, Arizona, pled guilty to felony violations of the Endangered Species Act before a federal district court judge. R.S. was sentenced to five months in a work-furlough facility, five months in a halfway house, and two years' probation. T.K., considered less culpable, was given three years' probation. Both were also fined $3,000 and their collections were confiscated. A third man, M.G. of Santa Rosa, California, pled guilty to similar charges at an earlier date and was sentenced to three years' probation. The charges against the three men stemmed from nine years of poaching rare butterflies from federal lands, including Golden Gate, Grand Canyon, Point Reyes, Death Valley, Yosemite, and other areas. The conspiracy was uncovered when a Stanford University biologist contacted the Fish and Wildlife Service and advised agents that an employee had been poaching rare butterflies from the Grand Canyon. A search of R.S.'s house revealed more butterflies, as well as correspondence linking the three men and other collectors around the country. FWS special agent John Mendoza was the case agent, and was assisted by numerous NPS criminal investigators and rangers. The investigation spanned a four-year period. While T.K. conceded to the judge that there was no excuse for such illegal activity, he said that the Endangered Species Act was sometimes ambiguous. The judge agreed and directed T.K. to help dispel the confusion by teaching other collectors about the law. [Rod Suarez, CI, GOGA] Tuesday, August 29, 1995 95-559 - Yosemite (California) - Rangers Assaulted Rangers Cameron Sholly and Keith Lober responded to a report of a possible drunk in the area of North Pines campground on August 20th and came upon a man in boxer shorts dancing on one of the bridges and blocking the roadway. Sholly told him to move to the side of the road; he refused to comply, took a fighting stance, and began screaming "Come on, let's go!" Sholly employed capstun spray on him, but he nonetheless violently resisted efforts to arrest him. A struggle ensued which lasted until other units arrived on scene about four minutes later. It ultimately required the concerted efforts of four rangers and three bystanders to restrain the man. Lober suffered four puncture wounds from a bite to his hand, all of them penetrating to the bone. Sholly's wrist was sprained. Both rangers received a number of minor abrasions and other scrapes. Their assailant was subsequently identified as a man who had once assaulted a police officer in southern California while under the influence of drugs. Witnesses said that the man had ingested a large amount of an unknown drug before the incident. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, August 29, 1995 95-566 - Yosemite (California) - SAR; False Report Wawona District rangers received a report of a missing hiker on August 23rd. Two campers reported that the third member of their party, a 20-year-old woman, had left the campground at 6:30 p.m. for a short hiker and had not returned by 10 p.m. After being told that a search would not begin until daylight, they told investigating rangers that the missing woman had severe asthma and showed them an inhaler they said they'd found in her pack, which had been left behind. They also said that she had severe attacks about once a week, and had used the inhaler twice that day. A hasty search was accordingly initiated, and the victim was found at 4:15 a.m. the next morning. A field medical evaluation revealed that she had never suffered asthma, and that one of the two reporting parties was in fact the person who suffered from the affliction. The two were cited for making a false report (36 CFR 2.32) and agreed to $500 in restitution and three months probation each in return for deferred prosecution. [CRO, YOSE] Wednesday, September 6, 1995 95-591 - Yosemite (California) - Assault with a Deadly Weapon A fight broke out in a campsite in Hodgdon Meadows between members of a church group just after midnight on September 3rd. V.B., 22, suffered a stab wound from a ten-inch-long knife and began bleeding profusely because the knife hit an artery. Responding rangers from the Mather District provided advanced life support for V.B. and arrested Mark Remizov, 24, for assault with a deadly weapon. V.B. and Remizov are both recent Russian immigrants and reside in San Leandro, California. The altercation apparently stemmed from competition for the affection of a young woman from the church group. [CRO, YOSE] Monday, September 11, 1995 95-601 - Yosemite (California) - Methamphetamine Distribution Arrests On September 1st, rangers and investigators from the Wawona and Valley Districts executed search warrants and arrested two people - P.M.-F., 37, and J.D., 34, both of Wawona - on charges of possession of methamphetamine with intent to distribute, conspiracy to distribute narcotics, and being under the influence of narcotics. An ounce of methamphetamine, paraphernalia, business records, scales, packaging material and a vehicle were seized in the raid. The arrests capped a four-month investigation by criminal investigator Greg Jablonski and ranger Evan Jones which was begun following receipt of complaints by local residents and the suicide of another local resident who was a client of the methamphetamine distribution network. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Wednesday, September 13, 1995 95-612 - Yosemite (California) - Search; Victim Found On July 9th, J.H. disappeared while walking in Summit Meadow along the Glacier Point road. An extensive, week-long search was conducted, but failed to turn up any clues as to her whereabouts. On September 3rd, two fishermen found a body in the Bridalveil Creek drainage above the falls. The body was positively identified as J.H.'s. An autopsy was conducted; preliminary findings are consistent with drowning, and there were no indications of foul play. It appears that the body was underwater at the time of the search. [CRO, YOSE] Thursday, September 14, 1995 95-619 - Yosemite (California) - Gang Activity Rangers Keith Lober and Brent Taylor contacted a man engaged in disorderly conduct at the Curry Village amphitheater on August 26th. The large crowd present mandated a call for additional assistance, and rangers Brian Smith, Cameron Sholly and Chris Gomez responded. Initial efforts to keep the crowd under control were successful, and the man was arrested for possession of marijuana. As the rangers attempted to get him into a vehicle, they were suddenly surrounded by about 60 people, most of whom new the man who'd been arrested. Two of them turned to the others and said that they weren't going to allow anyone to be arrested; one of them employed gang signs indicating a challenge to fight rangers as he blocked the path of the patrol vehicle. The crowd was ordered to disperse. Additional rangers arrived and formed a skirmish line. One of the men inciting the crowd to riot was placed under arrest after he successfully blocked the arrest of another instigator. The skirmish line moved the crowd backward and escorted the patrol vehicle out of the area. The crowd then quickly dispersed; several people wanted by rangers were able to evade arrest by blending into the crowd. At about the same time, a visitor entering the bathroom at Lower Rivers campground was confronted by six men who he verbally challenged for defacing the building with gang graffiti. The man was struck across the head with a flashlight or metal pipe. He was taken to the park clinic and treated. The six men were described as males in their late teens or early 20s, all with shaved heads and baggy clothing. Their gang initials, BSK, have been connected with three different southern Californian gangs. While stopping and identifying possible suspects in the assault on the following day, ranger Mark Harvey was able to get ten gang members from the near riot at Curry Village to stand and pose while making their respective gang signs. These two incidents were among many involving gang or suspected gang activity that have occurred in Yosemite in recent months. [Brian Smith, Valley Patrol, YOSE] Thursday, September 21, 1995 95-636 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Multiple Injuries On the evening of September 10th, the driver of a 4 x 4 pickup was heading southbound on Highway 41 at a high rate of speed, passing vehicles over the double yellow line and around curves. As the truck entered a curve near the Wawona campground, it slammed head on into an oncoming Audi occupied by two German visitors. The impact was such that the cab of the pickup was nearly torn loose from its frame. The front of the Audi was pushed back into the passenger compartment, trapping the driver's legs. All occupants were wearing seatbelts. The driver of the Audi suffered a fractured femur; the other victims suffered relatively minor injuries. Several units from the park and a unit from Sierra ambulance responded and provided extrication, medical care, and accident investigation. All victims were transported to Fresno - one by helicopter and two by ambulance. The investigation is continuing, but neither alcohol nor drugs not appear to have been contributing factors. The driver will probably be charged with reckless driving. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, October 10, 1995 95-669 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On the evening of September 26th, Wawona District rangers received a report of an injured woman at lower Chilnualna Falls. L.F., 32, had fallen about 30 feet onto a granite slab and sustained multiple injuries. Two park medics provided advanced life support; a rescue team comprised of 14 employees, including the Wawona fire crew, performed a difficult litter evacuation in darkness to get her to a waiting ambulance. Doctors determined that L.F. had suffered a punctured lung, broken ribs, ruptured spleen and fractured humerus, elbow, clavicle and toes. Alcohol is suspected as a contributing factor. [CRO, YOSE] Monday, October 16, 1995 95-683 - Yosemite (California) - Special Event On September 22nd, John Garamendi, new deputy secretary of the Department of Interior, was sworn into office by superintendent B. J. Griffin in a ceremony in Yosemite Valley. Garamendi said that he choose to be sworn in at Yosemite because he wanted to make a statement. He paid tribute to all the rangers who serve in the 369 national parks, monuments and historical sites, and said that our nation's resources must be protected for future generations to enjoy. He also said that it is the public's moral obligation to safeguard the treasures that our ancestors were perceptive enough to place under protection, and that we must work to find an environmentally sound balance between business and protection of natural resources. [Debi Drake, YOSE] Tuesday, October 17, 1995 95-684 - Yosemite (California) - Employee Abducted, Assaulted On the afternoon of Friday, October 13th, a female park employee was abducted from Yosemite Valley and assaulted near the trailhead parking area for May Lake, about two miles off the Tioga Road. She was able to escape from her attacker, subsequently identified as P.L., 56, of San Francisco, and called 911 from a nearby pay phone. P.L. fled the scene on foot with the victim's park radio, a stun gun, a hand gun, and, possibly, a long gun; he left his personal belongings behind. Rangers were quickly dispatched to all trailheads and Tioga Road was closed to all traffic. Roadblocks were established at park exits, and all departing vehicles were searched. The Pacific West Field Area's all risk incident management team (IMT) was dispatched to the park, and a SET team and additional law enforcement resources were requested from other parks and agencies. The IMT arrived in the park early on Saturday and began the process of clearing the May Lake area of all backcountry campers, providing for visitor safety, and facilitating the intensive investigation of the assault and the search for P.L.. Investigators learned that P.L. has an extensive criminal history of assaults and rapes and that he has spent most of his adult life in prison. P.L.'s record makes him a candidate for life imprisonment under "three strikes" repeat offender provisions; he told his probation officer that he would not go back to prison. Investigation also revealed that P.L. had been employed by the park concessioner in the early 1980s and therefore had knowledge of the park and its trails. Late on Saturday, two backcountry hikers reported that equipment and food had been stolen from their campsite that afternoon. Available evidence indicated that P.L. was heading for Yosemite Valley, so rangers and other officers were moved from the Tioga Road corridor to the Valley and rim area above Yosemite Falls trail. Roadblocks were maintained throughout the weekend, and traffic was delayed up to four hours on Sunday afternoon. No sign of P.L. was found. By early Monday morning, the likelihood of finding him had diminished to the point where a decision was made to turn the incident back over to the park. The SET team remained, however. Another assessment of the situation will be made early tomorrow to determine what course of action to take. At the peak of the incident, 122 people and two helicopters were assigned to the incident. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, October 17, 1995 95-685 - Yosemite (California) - Car Clout/Bike Theft Arrest Numerous car clouts and thefts of bicycles from vehicle racks occurred in the park this summer. The MO was the same in each case - windows were broken out, locks punched out, and cable locks cut and removed while vehicles were parked overnight. Yellowstone and Grand Canyon had similar incidents over the summer. A suspect was identified when a camper informed rangers that an unidentified woman had told her that "Jetson" was stealing property in Yosemite. That name was known to investigators in Grand Canyon, Yellowstone and Grand Teton. J.D., a criminal with a long history of arrests in California, Texas and Idaho, was a suspect in thefts that occurred at Grand Canyon in 1992, and had been convicted of car clouts in Yellowstone and Grand Teton in 1993. He had served time in federal prison, and was released in September of 1994. On October 7th, a Volkswagen Vanagon pop-up camper was stolen from a lot in Yosemite Valley. Two days later, rangers found another Vanagon, this one abandoned and missing its license plates, VIN (vehicle identification number) plate and ignition switch. It was eventually traced to Texas and to its owner - J.D. It appeared that J.D. had stolen the matching vehicle and replaced the plates, VIN and ignition with those from his vehicle. That same night, four more bicycles were stolen from car racks in the valley. On October 12th, entrance station personnel spotted J.D. entering the park in the stolen van. He was stopped and arrested by patrol rangers. A search of the Vanagon led to the discovery of property taken in two Yosemite car clouts. The investigation is continuing. If you have had thefts or car clouts with similar Mos in your area, please contact criminal investigator Dan Horner at 209-372- 0614. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, October 17, 1995 95-686 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue On October 6th, B.J.M., 27, a Korean national, fell while climbing the Nose route on El Capitan. B.J.M. and his partner, M.Y.S., did not call for assistance until early the next morning, when park personnel working at the commercial bus safety inspection area heard cries for help. Communications were established via PA system, but were hindered by the climbers' limited knowledge of English. Other climbers on the Nose route moved to their location, assessed their injuries, and advised rangers that B.J.M. had suffered possible back, ankle and wrist injuries. Park SAR personnel and a helicopter from Lemoore NAS responded. Climbing ranger and paramedic Keith Lober and a rescue team were taken to the top of El Capitan. Lober was then lowered to the victim. He provided medical aid and packaged B.J.M. in a split. B.J.M. was subsequently hoisted from the Camp 5 ledge and short-hauled to El Capitan Meadow. He was treated for ankle and wrist fractures at the park clinic, then released. [CRO, YOSE] Thursday, October 26, 1995 95-684 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Employee Abduction, Assault P.L., 56, the prime suspect in the assault on the female National Park Service employee which occurred on October 13th, was taken into custody yesterday afternoon in upper Tenaya Canyon, a wilderness area about five miles east of Yosemite Valley and about three to four miles from the point where he was last seen after the assault. Rangers received a report of a man matching his description in the canyon area late Tuesday night; a search of the area was initiated at first light, and P.L. was apprehended. P.L. is temporarily in the holding facility in Yosemite Valley. He will be charged with felony counts of kidnapping and assault with a dangerous weapon. The maximum penalty is life imprisonment. [Lisa Dapprich, YOSE] Monday, October 30, 1995 95-708 - Yosemite (California) - Attempted Armed Robbery, Assault Valley rangers responded to a report of an attempted strong arm robbery on Sentinel Bridge on October 20th. A woman was attacked form behind by a man who grabbed her face, pushed her into the bridge railing, and attempted to remove a Vivitar camera which was hanging around her neck. Her husband grabbed the attacker, got him into a headlock and wrestled him to the ground. The man was able to break free, however, and ran away. Rangers immediately set up a perimeter and took the suspected assailant into custody within 15 minutes of the attack. He was positively identified as the attacker, and was charged with assault and with attempted robbery by force or fear. [Cameron Sholly, YOSE] Monday, December 11, 1995 95-765 - Yosemite (California) - Burglary Arrest On December 6th, J.A., 22, a resident of Yosemite, was taken into custody and charged with burglary and possession of stolen property. The arrest followed a three-month-long investigation into about 30 burglaries in Yosemite Valley by criminal investigator Doug Roe. The investigation involved an extensive, multi-day surveillance operation and the pursuit of numerous leads. The break in the case came when a suspect in a narcotics distribution case identified J.A. as the burglar. J.A. has since confessed to at least six of the burglaries, and investigators have found numerous items stolen in the burglaries in his possession. A detention hearing will be held on Wednesday. The investigation is continuing in an effort to locate J.A.'s accomplice. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Monday, January 8, 1996 95-779 - Systemwide - Impacts of Government Shutdown As was noted on the December 18th Morning Report, the governmental shutdown has been classified as an incident for incident reporting purposes. Several parks have submitted reports of the impacts of the shutdown on their areas; reports from other areas will appear in coming days. * Yosemite - On December 26th, the Mariposa County board of supervisors declared a local state of economic emergency, declaring that the county's communities were suffering significantly from the loss of tourist dollars due to the park's closure. California Governor Pete Wilson did not approve the county's declaration, which might have yielded financial support to local businesses from state and federal agencies. According to a local paper, county officials have estimated that 25 percent of the county's work force were laid off as a direct result of the closure. Over 480 NPS employees were furloughed, while 100 continued to provide resource, human health and safety, and property protection. The majority of the 1,300 concession employees were also temporarily laid off. Other impacts: o The Bracebridge dinner, held in the historic Ahwahnee Hotel, was canceled for only the sixth time since its inception in 1927. As many as 40,000 people seek reservations for the banquet each year. The 1,600 tickets, spread among five seatings, are awarded by lottery. o A Fresno paper reports that park concessions incurred losses ranging from $200,00 to $300,000 per day. Lost concessions sales translate into lost funding for the park, since a percentage of gross receipts are put into a capital improvement fund, which is used to improve visitor facilities. o At least 110 formal interpretive programs were canceled, plus unknown numbers of interpretive opportunities with visitors in the park and at visitor centers. The Yosemite Institute canceled several week-long environmental education programs affecting 120 children and adults, resulting in approximately $50,000 in lost revenue. Resource management and research activities were also curtailed. o Despite favorable burning prescriptions, the two furloughs caused a 25 percent shortfall from targeted levels in acreage burned by management ignited fires. This included approximately 100 acres deemed of significant ecological importance (including sequoia groves), and hazard fuel reduction to protect real property. Although Yosemite was frequently the lead story in California media reports about the shutdown, it was the sum total impact of park closures that caused the greatest impact. The California State Trade and Commerce Agency estimated that the potential economic loss from park closures statewide was about $5.1 million per day. [Chip Jenkins, MA, YOSE; Denny Davies, PIO, ZION; Maureen Oltrogge, PIO, GRCA] Friday, March 22, 1996 96-107 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Fatality and Rescue On March 16th, off-duty park dispatcher Rick Foulks came upon a rollover accident on Highway 140 in the El Portal area. Foulks, a park medic, conducted the initial assessment and triage of the three victims. The driver had been ejected from the pickup and killed. A six-year-old with only minor injuries had been removed from the truck by bystanders, but a female passenger with serious injuries remained trapped inside. Park patrol, fire and EMS personnel responded, extricated the woman, and transported her by ambulance to a helicopter landing area, where she was picked up and flown to a local trauma center. Doctors later determined that she'd suffered cervical spine injuries. The six-year-old was taken to a local hospital, where he was treated and released. [CRO, YOSE] Thursday, April 18, 1996 96-147 - Yosemite (California) - MVA with Serious Injury On Wednesday, April 17th, S.M., 88, was driving west on a narrow, winding stretch of Highway 140 below the Arch Rock entrance station when he passed a vehicle in a no passing zone, lost control of his car, and struck a rock outcropping, causing his car to overturn. S.M., the sole occupant of the vehicle, suffered multiple fractures and chest injuries. A 20-minute- long extrication effort, including the removal of the vehicle's roof, was required to free him. He was transported to Mariposa by ambulance, then flown to a regional trauma center. S.M. arrested during the flight, but was revived and subsequently admitted to the center's intensive care unit. During the accident investigation, rangers learned that a missing person report had been filed for S.M. in his hometown of Placentia, California, the previous day. [CRO, YOSE] Monday, April 22, 1996 96-150 - Yosemite (California) - Climbing Fatality M.B., 26, an employee of the Yosemite Institute, died in a solo climbing accident on El Capitan on April 1st. M.B. began fixing pitches on the Zenyatta Mondatta route that morning and successfully climbed the first two pitches of the difficult direct aid climb. Evidence left on the third pitch and found on the ground indicate that he pulled out several pieces of protection and broke a carabinier during a 25-foot fall, then fell another 300 feet to the ground when his rope jammed behind a flake of rock and was severed. His body was discovered in the morning and removed by a Navy helicopter that was in the park on another rescue (below). [CRO, YOSE] Monday, April 22, 1996 96-151 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue S.J. and A.J. were descending the North Dome gully on April 1st after a three-day climb on Washington Column when a cold front passed, several inches of hail and snow covered the terrain, and the climbers lost the route. They became stranded and employed a cell phone to call for help. A nine-member rescue team began attempts to reach them that night by fixing ropes up the gully. Their progress was checked by snow-covered rocks and a significant flow of water down the gully, and they were eventually forced to retreat, with the intent of resuming the rescue in the morning. The soaked victims sat out the night in freezing conditions with extremely cold hands and feet, but reported in by phone that they were getting by. The weather cleared the next day, and a helicopter from Lemoore Naval Air Station was able to hoist the two men out of the gully. They were treated at the park clinic, but suffered no permanent injury to their extremities. [CRO, YOSE] Monday, April 22, 1996 96-152 - Yosemite (California) - Drowning On April 12th, J.D., 31, was walking across a log with his wife and dog when the dog fell into the stream. While attempting to rescue it, J.D. fell off the upstream side of the log and was washed underneath it, where he became trapped. Bystanders removed him within minutes, brought him to shore, and began CPR. Rangers arrived within ten minutes and took over the resuscitation efforts. They were in turn joined by medics from the Valley's contract ambulance. J.D. was taken to the park's clinic, where he was pronounced dead upon arrival. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, April 23, 1996 96-156 - Yosemite (California) - Search; Fatality On the evening of April 18th, rangers received a report of an overdue hiker. S.L., 38, a noted Yosemite artist and an avid hiker and rock scrambler, was reported missing after he failed to meet an interviewer to promote his recently released book. A hasty search was begun that evening after his vehicle was found parked near the base of Cathedral Rocks in Yosemite Valley; he was not found, so the search continued the following day. S.L.'s body was discovered late in the day by two climbers who were descending Middle Cathedral Rock. He apparently fell about 50 feet into a steep, rocky gully between Middle and Upper Cathedral Rocks and suffered massive, traumatic injuries. The search included about 70 ground searchers and support staff, four search dog teams, and a helicopter. Weather, characterized by periods of rain, snow and freezing temperatures, may have contributed to the accident that led to his death. [CRO, YOSE] Wednesday, April 24, 1996 95-685 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Car Clout Arrest On October 10, 1995, rangers arrested J.L.D. for driving a vehicle which had been stolen in the park six days previously. The arrest culminated an auto burglary investigation which had been going on for several months and led to the closure of 61 thefts and burglaries at Yosemite and another 43 at the Grand Canyon. The combined value of items stolen in those cases was over $112,000. At the time of his arrest, J.L.D. had none of these items in his possession, and none of it was subsequently recovered. J.L.D. was indicted on one felony count for stealing the vehicle (18 USC 661). He pled guilty to the charge, and on March 25th was sentenced in district court to six months in jail and another three years of supervised release. He was also ordered to immediately pay $1,800 in restitution to the owner of the stolen vehicle. [Dan Horner, LEO, YOSE] Thursday, April 25, 1996 95-685 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Car Clout Arrest Yesterday's Morning Report contained a report of the conviction of car clouter J.D. on a vehicle theft charge and his March 25th sentencing to six months in jail and another three years of supervised release. Since the original report said that he was to be released this month, clarification was sought from the park prior to inclusion of that information in the MR. Dan Horner has elaborated on what transpired and provided some additional information on Mr. J.D.'s fate. Since J.D. was arrested six months ago and held until his sentencing, he had accrued almost six months of "credit for time served." That meant he would be freed on April 12th. Unfortunately for J.D., that event did not take place. A federal arrest warrant from Wyoming was served on him before he was released, and he is still in custody. It appears that J.D. was on supervised release probation from federal district court for auto burglaries in the Tetons and Yellowstone. His probation has been revoked because of the Yosemite arrest, and he will probably serve the rest of his full sentence (three years of supervised release) in custody. [Dan Horner, LEO, YOSE] Friday, May 17, 1996 96-209 - Yosemite (California) - Flooding The park was closed yesterday morning due to flooding from the Merced River. At the time of the report in mid-morning, the river was two feet above flood stage and still rising. Some people in campsites were evacuated to higher points, and there was only limited travel in and out of Yosemite Valley. The park was on flood watch until noon. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, May 21, 1996 96-214 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue During the evacuation of Yosemite Valley due to the flooding of the Merced River on May 16th, the park's search and rescue office was advised that two parties of climbers were apparently in distress on El Capitan. The first party, comprised of Austrian climbers C.Z. and C.W., was perched on a small ledge on the Shield route; neither had storm gear, and they had spent the previous night exposed to heavy rain and wind. An attempt to deliver survival equipment to them by helicopter was aborted due to severe downdrafts. A SAR technician was then lowered 1,000 feet from the top of El Capitan. He was able to rig the climbers onto ascenders and evacuate them. They were flown to the valley for medical evaluation and treatment. The other party, which was on the North American route, appeared to be in better condition. The rescue was canceled when the climbers decided that they could rescue themselves. [CRO, YOSE] Thursday, May 23, 1996 96-214 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Search and Rescue On May 16th, Austrian climbers C.Z. and C.W. were rescued from El Capitan, where they were stranded and suffering from exposure caused by a storm which hit the park the previous day. Investigation of the incident and interviews with the pair revealed that they were inadequately equipped to endure bad weather on a multi-day, "big wall" climb. On May 20th, criminal complaints were filed with the federal magistrate in Yosemite, charging C.Z. and C.W. with creating a hazardous condition (36 CFR 2.34(a)(4)). The climbers appeared in court two days later and pled guilty. They were placed on a year's summary probation with the condition that restitution of $13,325 be made to reimburse the park in full for the cost of the rescue. The funds will be used to replace SAR and EMS equipment and help pay for training in these two fields. [Evan Jones, SAR Officer, YOSE] Friday, May 24, 1996 96-209 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Flooding On the evening of May 15th, rangers began evacuating campers from the group camp in North Pines campground and from other sites in campgrounds adjacent to the Merced River when the river began rising quickly due to a tropical storm that dropped an inch and a half of rain at higher elevations and melted much of the snowpack. By 5 a.m. on the 16th, access roads in and out of Yosemite Valley were flooded by as much as three feet of water. The river crested at two feet above flood stage at 10 a.m.. The rains subsided by late afternoon, and the river receded sufficiently to evacuate all campers and day-use visitors out of the valley by turning Southside Drive into a two-way road. Northside Drive was still underwater at three or four locations at the time. Those with room reservations at the concession-owned operation were allowed to stay. Although the river fell below flood stage that evening, the park remained closed to all except administrative and emergency traffic throughout the following day because of damage to the campgrounds and roadways and predictions of more rain. At the flood's peak, almost two-and- a-half feet of water was flowing through some campsites. Many vehicles were stalled and damaged by the high water; visitors camped in group sites suffered damaged and lost gear. The force of the water was strong enough to move dumpsters inside the campground, and many large logs floated down the Merced and lodged against bridges. All roads were reopened on Saturday, May 18th, but campgrounds remained closed through the weekend due to the saturated ground and road and campsite damage. Maintenance crews worked throughout the weekend to open campgrounds by Monday. Lower Pines received the most damage and may reopen this weekend. Cleanup will continue, as all sorts of items - from tennis balls to mattresses - have been deposited in various locations along the river. [CRO, YOSE] Thursday, June 6, 1996 96-261 - Yosemite (California) - Climbing Fatality On Sunday, May 25th, the park was notified of an injured climber on the Beverly's Tower route near Cascade Creek on Highway 140. Responding rangers found S.R. at the base of the climb. He was suffering from severe head injuries and was in respiratory arrest. Advanced life support measures were begun, including insertion of an endotracheal tube. S.R. was then lowered approximately 350 feet to the road, taken by ambulance to a helicopter at El Capitan Meadow, then flown to a hospital in Modesto, where he later died of severe head trauma. Investigation revealed that the fall was caused by the failure of several pieces of protection. [Cameron Sholly, YOSE] Thursday, June 6, 1996 96-262 - Yosemite (California) - Rescue E.I. and J.U. were fixing a rope one pitch above their bivouac on the south face of Washington Column early on the evening of May 26th when J.U. slid and fell about 20 feet, landing on top of E.I.. Both hit their heads and were dazed by the impact. J.U. rappelled off three pitches to report that E.I. had suffered chest trauma and was having difficulty breathing. A rescue effort was immediately initiated. A team comprised of medics and a dozen climbers reached E.I. by midnight. He was stabilized, placed in a litter, and lowered over 600 feet off the cliff. A two-hour-long ground evacuation down the talus slope to a waiting ambulance followed. E.I. was treated at the park clinic, where his injuries were found to be much less serious than initially reported by his partner. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, June 11, 1996 96-274 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue Park dispatch received a 911 call via cellular phone from the backcountry on the afternoon of Sunday, May 26th. The caller reported that her daughter, 14-year-old A.W., had become separated from their group near Ostrander Lake. Wawona rangers immediately began a search which involved four hasty teams transported to the area by helicopter. Rain, hail and below freezing temperatures set in on Monday. Search efforts continued and expanded over the next two days. At the height of the search, over 200 personnel were involved, including nine dog teams and three helicopters. Twelve agencies joined the NPS in the search effort. On the afternoon of 28th, A.W. was found by a ground search team along Illilouette Creek, about five air miles from the point last seen. She was uninjured and walked to a landing zone to be flown out. Media interest was extremely high, and the search received major coverage in central California. Several magazines are planning articles, and a move producer phone to acquire rights for a TV movie. Mike Durr served as incident commander. [Kevin McMillan, YOSE] Tuesday, June 11, 1996 96-275 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue W.D., 40, and J.M. began a backcountry trip into the Laurel Lake area on June 1st. W.D., a diabetic, became sick and began vomiting after they reached the lake on the first day. They waited for two days to see if his condition would improve, then began the hike out on June 4th. W.D. was unable to eat and was vomiting almost hourly; after a few miles, he was unable to go any further. J.M. hiked out and contacted park dispatch the following day. A park helicopter transported rangers Greg Lawler and Tim Palmer to W.D.'s reported location, but the rangers were unable to spot him due to heavy vegetation. They landed at a helispot a mile away, then hiked down the Frog Creek drainage until they found him. W.D. was severely dehydrated and disoriented, and his vital signs were diminished. An IV was started to rehydrate him. An eight-person carryout team was flown in; they carried him to the helispot, where he was flown out to the park clinic for treatment and recovery. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, July 9, 1996 96-346 - Yosemite (California) - DUI Arrests A DUI (driving under the influence) checkpoint was set up in the Crane Flat area of the Mather District on the evening of July 5th. Over 800 vehicles were stopped and their drivers and occupants contacted during the five-hour operation. A total of eight DUI arrests were made, and several more violation notices were issued for open containers of alcohol and possession of controlled substances. Four more arrests were made when a vehicle driving toward the checkpoint broke down and the ranger who offered assistance determined that the driver and occupants were highly intoxicated. [CRO, YOSE] Tuesday, July 9, 1996 96-347 - Yosemite (California) - Arrest; Disorderly, Threats to Rangers M.A-S.P., 32, of Charlottesville, Virginia, was arrested in the Crane Flat campground on the night of July 3rd on disorderly conduct and other misdemeanor charges. M.A-S.P. physically threatened rangers after being approached about numerous conduct complaints from other campers. He was found guilty at his court appearance on July 5th; the magistrate fined him and banned him from the park for a year. M.A-S.P. has several past convictions for assaults, for resisting arrest, and for misdemeanor and felony stalking. He lives in his vehicle, a 1980 green Dodge van, and told rangers that he routinely stays in National Park Service and Forest Service campgrounds. [Dave Lattimore, DR, Mather District, YOSE] Wednesday, July 10, 1996 96-350 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality A.F., a Spanish national, fell to his death in Tenya Canyon on July 5th. According to his brother, the two had been hiking from Tenya Lake to Yosemite Valley when they became lost and ended up in the canyon. A.F. was attempting to locate a route around a waterfall when he apparently slipped on some wet, moss-covered granite, fell about 150 feet into the creek gorge, and suffered massive head injuries. His body was recovered on July 6th. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Thursday, July 11, 1996 96-354 - Yosemite (California) - Major Slide; Multiple Fatalities, Injuries Preliminary information has been received through an on-line news service (Modesto Bee) of a massive rock slide which fell near and on the Happy Isles Nature Center. A 200-foot portion of the sheer granite cliff at Glacier Point broke loose just after 7 p.m., sending a half-mile-wide section of rocks down the cliff. A portion of the nature center was buried. Rangers confirmed one fatality and seven injuries by midnight, but the number is likely to rise significantly. Restrooms, a shuttle bus stop, a snack stand, and the Vernal and Nevada Falls' trail head are all located at the site of the rock fall. Much of the damage apparently was caused by the huge blast of air pushed by the rock slide. The wind knocked over trees and sent debris flying. Every search and rescue ranger in the park was called to the scene immediately, as were the four nurses from the park's clinic. Dog teams were brought in, and, at the park's request, the state dispatched an urban search and rescue team to Yosemite. Numerous helicopters were employed to evacuate victims to area hospitals. Additional reports will follow. [Modesto Bee, based on on-scene reports and comments from Mary Vocelka of YOSE] Friday, July 12, 1996 96-354 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Major Rock Slide A large slab of rock from high on Glacier Point fell about 2,500 feet to the Happy Isles area in Yosemite Valley at 7 p.m. on Wednesday July 10th, striking the ground with explosive force. The blast of air from the rock slide caused hundreds of trees in the Happy Isles area to fall. The fall killed 20-year-old Emiliano Morales, of Montebelo, California, severely injured two women, and caused relatively minor injuries to other visitors. Morales was caught and pinned under a falling tree. A 17-year-old girl was trapped under a tree, and her foot was severed. She was flown in an air ambulance to Doctors Hospital in Modesto California, and went into surgery to attempt to reattach the foot. Another four visitors remain missing or unaccounted for. The natural process which caused the 300 to 400-foot-wide granite arch to fall is known as exfoliation. The fall and associated wind put so much dust in the air that it took an hour before it was possible to see for more than 100 feet. The area of devastation caused by the rock fall is about 50 acres in size; within it, trees are stacked eight to ten deep. The debris and dust pile where the rocks hit the valley is estimated to be about 50 feet deep. There's a foot and a half of pulverized dust on the ground at the scene; the Upper Pines campground, located about a half mile away, has between an inch and an inch and a half of dust on the ground. The rock slide damaged the new Happy Isles Nature Center, destroyed a concessioner snack stand, and took out an 18-inch water main, cutting off the park's water system. The park will be able to pump needed water from existing wells to make up the shortfall of water caused by the damage to the main water system. Rocks are still falling on the area. About 200 emergency services personnel continue to search for possible victims. Park staff are being assisted by many other state and local agencies. It's expected that it will take at least four more days to complete the search for victims. Don Coelho and Hunter Sharp are incident commanders. [Hal Grovert, Acting Superintendent, YOSE; Bob Andrews, CR, YOSE; PIO, IMT, YOSE] Tuesday, July 16, 1996 96-354 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Major Rock Slide The search for further casualties in the area surrounding Happy Isles is being scaled back. Over 40 searchers and four dog teams thoroughly combed the area and found no indications of any other victims. The Happy Isles area will remain closed to all use until extensive cleanup and repair work to facilities, trails and bridges is completed. An evaluation of the nature center indicates that it suffered structural damage from several falling trees and that dust and debris cover all interior surfaces. The nearby snack stand was completely destroyed. The Vernal-Nevada Falls trailhead, which originates in this area, will remain closed to all uphill day hikers and backpackers, but downhill use will be permitted for those exiting the park's wilderness via either these trails or the John Muir trail to the east of the Isles. Trail users will be directed to exit the area via the eastbound segment of the Happy Isles loop road past Mirror Lake. The Panorama trail from Glacier Point remains open to the top of Nevada Falls. Sporadic down- canyon winds continue to send powdered granite dust billowing from trees in the Happy Isles area, severely limiting visibility. A detailed assessment of the fall reveals how powerful it was. The size of the scar indicates that the rock which fell measured about 400 feet by 100 feet by 60 feet and weighed about 400 million pounds. The terminal velocity after falling 2,500 feet was probably close to 150 mph. The energy released on impact was equivalent to 310 trillion foot pounds or 100 trillion calories, or about 250 tons of TNT - equivalent to one quarter the size of the largest non-nuclear explosion ever produced. [PIO, YOSE; Chris English, YOSE] Tuesday, July 23, 1996 96-354 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Major Rock Slide The Vernal-Nevada Falls trail, which begins in Happy Isles, site of last week's rock slide, reopened on Saturday, July 20th. Trail users will be required to access the trailhead by walking along the Happy Isles loop road rather than by following the foot trail through Happy Isles to the trailhead, as the area remains closed while damage assessments are being conducted and priorities for clean-up and repair are set. Hazardous conditions still exist at the location, which is roped off and signed. [PIO, YOSE] Wednesday, July 31, 1996 96-425 - Yosemite (California) - Two MVAs with Injuries Employees in the Wawona district responded to a report of a cement truck that went off the road near Glacier Point on June 24th. The driver was trapped in the truck, which had rolled on its side and struck a large tree. He was extricated and taken to the park clinic with minor injuries. The truck was separated from its cement barrel and removed that day, but a crane was required to remove the 25-ton barrel. On June 30th, Wawona rangers responded to an accident on the Mariposa Grove road. A vehicle with four occupants went off the road, rolled over several times, then came to rest 65 feet down an embankment. The driver suffered a severe head injury and was flown by air ambulance to a trauma center in Fresno, where he is now in stable condition. [Todd Brindle, Wawona District, YOSE] Wednesday, July 31, 1996 96-426 - Yosemite (California) - Apparent Suicide On June 28th, park dispatch received a phone request to locate and check on 36-year-old L.W. of Fresno, who had not shown up for work and had a history of depression and suicide attempts. A Wawona ranger found her car on the Glacier Point Road within an hour. She had apparently committed suicide through a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. Members of the park's investigations unit investigated the incident. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Thursday, August 15, 1996 95-497 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Kidnapping On the morning of August 3, 1995, park investigators received a call from a Colorado man who said that he'd been assaulted and abducted from the Valley the previous morning. He said that he was approached by a man in civilian clothes who said he was a ranger and was placing him under arrest. The victim said that he believed the man really was a ranger because he had handcuffs and because he walked off into the bushes for a minute and appeared to call dispatch on a portable radio. In any case, the "ranger" threatened him with violence if he refused to cooperate, so the victim allowed himself to be handcuffed. The man then beat him severely about the head, neck and chest with a large flashlight, forced the victim to drive him from the park in his (the victim's) pickup truck, and made him withdraw cash from an ATM in Mariposa. The victim was able to escape when they stopped for gas in Merced. An investigation was begun, but the man's assailant remained at large. On July 19th, criminal investigators in Wichita, Kansas, called the park and advised that they had a man in custody for a double homicide who had confessed to a kidnapping and robbery in the park in August, 1995. The description of the man - M.M, 20, of that city - and his personal background were identical to the information worked up by FBI and park investigators. M.M. was AWOL from the Army at the time of the Yosemite abduction. The NPS and FBI are currently working together to get an indictment on M.M. for kidnapping and assault on a federal reservation. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Thursday, August 15, 1996 96-464 - Yosemite (California) - Search and Rescue When M.D. and R.D., both 14, failed to return from a trip to go fishing in Bridalveil Creek on the evening of Tuesday, August 6th, the park initiated a hasty search of the area in an effort to find them. The effort proved fruitless, so a full-scale, multi-agency search was begun the following morning. Fifty ground searchers, eight to ten dog teams and three helicopters were utilized to work a search area of 77 square miles, running from Glacier Point to Highway 41 and from Wawona north to the Valley rim. On Wednesday, a woman who recognized the description of the missing boys given on the evening news called the park to say that she'd given them a ride to Glacier Point on Tuesday morning. The call was instrumental in focusing search efforts on the Glacier Point area. Just before noon on Thursday, August 8th, the two boys were spotted from a helicopter. They were found in a precipitous area below the Panorama Trail near Illilouette Fall, several miles from Glacier Point. Both were okay. [Nikyra Calcagno, YOSE] Wednesday, August 21, 1996 96-481 - Yosemite (California) - Suicide On the morning of August 7th, maintenance employees discovered some personal items sitting on the railing at Glacier Point with a note attached which said: "At the bottom of this hill lies a big, big man - Big John." Rangers were summoned to the scene and found other handwritten messages in the property which indicated that J.D. of Fresno intended to end his life by jumping over the edge. A search of the ledges about 1,000 feet below the point led to the discovery of his remains. A climbing team rappelled to the ledges the next day and recovered the remains of the 300-pound victim. A positive identification was made by taking a fingerprint and comparing it with the thumbprint on J.D.'s license on file with DMV in Sacramento. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE] Friday, August 23, 1996 96-486 - Yosemite (California) - Illegal Killing of Wildlife On Monday, August 12th, a group of Boy Scouts camped near Little Yosemite Valley. During the night, bears broke into their food supply. Group leaders attempted to scare the bears by yelling at them, but their efforts proved ineffectual since the bears had already acquired the food. Group leaders then threw "grapefruit" sized rocks at the bears, one of which struck and killed a juvenile male. Charges have been filed against the individuals who threw the rocks. [CRO, YOSE] Friday, September 20, 1996 96-544 - Yosemite (California) - Search; Fatality On Sunday, September 15th, the Mono County sheriff's department received a report that R.M., 74, of Gardnerville, Nevada, was missing in the park and had not been seen since early the previous afternoon. R.M., who had Alzheimer's disease, was hiking up Slide Canyon in the northeastern section of the park with her husband and a friend when she became separated from them. R.M. had previously hiked in the area a dozen times and was reported to be in good physical condition. Her husband and friend searched the immediate route for two hours, then completed the hike, hoping to meet her along the way. When they failed to find her, they notified the sheriff's department. A search was begun which employed a tracker, 26 ground searchers, two trail blocking teams, three dog teams and a pair of helicopters. Her body was found in Paiute Canyon in the wilderness north of Tuolumne Meadows on the afternoon of the 16th. The exact cause of death has not been determined; an autopsy will be conducted. [PIO, YOSE] Tuesday, September 24, 1996 96-550 - Yosemite (California) - Pipe Bomb On the morning of September 11th, rangers received a report of a male concession employee carrying a pipe bomb. Two informants said that they'd just seen the bomb and that the employee, G.W., had threatened another employee and was en route to plant the bomb at the person's residence. Rangers Gary Ingram and Brian Smith subsequently confronted G.W. as he left a dormitory room. A partially disassembled but functional pipe bomb was found on his person. He was taken into custody and booked into the Yosemite jail on charges of carrying an explosive device in an occupied residential dormitory. G.W. had been arrested two days previously for being under the influence and for interfering with agency functions. On September 18th, he pled guilty in federal court to multiple counts in both cases and was sentenced to 120 days in custody and 24 months' probation. [Brian Smith, YOSE] Thursday, September 26, 1996 95-684 - Yosemite (California) - Follow-up on Employee Abduction, Assault On October 13, 1995, a female ranger was abducted from Yosemite Valley and assaulted near the trailhead parking area for May Lake, about two miles off the Tioga Road. She was able to escape from her attacker, subsequently identified as P.L., 57, of San Francisco. He was arrested in the park two weeks later following an intensive manhunt. P.L. subsequently pleaded guilty to aggravated sexual abuse in federal district court. On September 23rd, he was sentenced to 30 years and five months in prison. He has requested and will receive mental health treatment while incarcerated. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Thursday, October 3, 1996 96-575 - Yosemite (California) - Theft Convictions On September 18th, M.R. pled guilty in magistrate's court to three counts of theft from rooms at the Ahwahnee Hotel. He was arrested on September 10th after a six-week-long investigation. M.R. was employed as a housekeeper by Yosemite Concessions Services and had keys to rooms at the hotel. He admitted to a total of ten thefts of cash from rooms, but only three guests reported being victimized. M.R. was ordered to pay $615 in restitution to the three victims, pay a $530 fine, and perform 40 hours of community service; he was also placed on two years' probation. The chief of security for the concessioner was in the courtroom during M.R.'s appearance. His employment was terminated that afternoon. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE] Thursday, October 3, 1996 96-576 - Yosemite (California) - Theft Convictions J.P. and S.P. pled guilty to several charges, including theft and possession of stolen property, at magistrate's court on September 23rd. The two were living off the land in remote areas of Yosemite Valley and were surviving by shoplifting jewelry from six valley gift shops. They would later return the jewelry for cash refunds. At the time of their arrest, they had over 40 pieces of Native American jewelry in their possession, all with price tags still attached. J.P. and S.P. have criminal histories that include thefts of all kinds. They allegedly left Glendale and Chino Valley, Arizona, a month ago, and arrived in the park around September 10th. They had been traveling together for over a year. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE] Wednesday, October 23, 1996 96-613 - Yosemite NP (California) - BASE Jumping Fatality J.C., 42, of Phoenix was killed early on the morning of October 22nd while BASE jumping off El Capitan. BASE jumping is illegal in the park. J.C. was one of several jumpers on El Capitan that day; six others were arrested. BASE jumping was permitted in the park on a trial basis in 1980, but was discontinued due to the high number of injuries, illegal jumps, resource damages, and problems with spectator and visitor management. [Scott Gediman, YOSE] Wednesday, October 23, 1996 96-614 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescue On October 9th, rangers received a report of a seriously injured climber on Sunnyside Bench. Ranger/paramedic Keith Lober was first on scene and found that climber J.P. had fallen over 50 feet and was unconscious and suffering from an unstable head injury. A blood trail was visible on the wall which suggested that J.P. had not worn a helmet and that he'd landed on his head. Lober climbed about 80 feet up a cliff wall to reach J.P. ALS was begun and J.P. was lowered to the ground with the assistance of rangers, the park SAR team and ambulance personnel. He was flown to a hospital in Modesto, where it was determined that he'd suffered a basal skull fracture and basal ganglionic contusion with resulting right side paralysis. J.P. continues to show improvement and is recovering. [Brian Smith, YOSE] Wednesday, October 23, 1996 96-622 - Yosemite NP (California) - Disorderly; Resisting Arrest Ranger Keith Lober was on patrol near Yosemite Lodge on October 4th when the manager of the lodge's bar asked him for assistance in evicting an extremely intoxicated and belligerent customer who'd been ordered out of the bar. The customer, G.R., 39, an Australian national, was contacted by Lober and ranger Jason Torlano in the hotel's lobby. G.R. openly defied numerous, repeated directions and was eventually told that he was under arrest. He twice charged the rangers, then retreated. Backup was requested, but G.R. again approached Lober before they arrived and was accordingly sprayed with OC spray. G.R. was able to block the spray with his hands, then attempted to flee. He tried to slam a door into the rangers, then swung at Lober with his fist. Lober deflected the blow with his baton. The rangers pursued him for about 150 feet, then caught him and brought him to the ground. G.R. resisted efforts to handcuff him and engaged in a protracted physical struggle with the rangers. He was eventually taken to jail. On October 10th, he pled guilty to resisting arrest, disorderly conduct, and being under the influence of alcohol. The magistrate told him that he would have spent 30 days in jail if he hadn't been traveling with his wife and children. [Brian Smith, YOSE] Tuesday, November 5, 1996 95-497 Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Kidnapping On October 31st, M.M., 21, was indicted in federal district court in Fresno for the kidnapping of a park visitor from the wilderness parking lot in Yosemite Valley on August 2, 1995. M.M., who is being held in Wichita, Kansas for the murder of a woman and her 18-month-old child, was indicted on five federal counts - kidnapping, carjacking, assault with intent to commit a felony, assault with a dangerous weapon, and impersonation of a federal officer. [Jeff Sullivan, CI, YOSE] Wednesday, November 13, 1996 96-665 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescue On October 30th, rangers received a report of two stranded climbers who were 2,800 feet up the Dihedral Wall route on El Capitan. Investigation revealed that the pair had been on the wall for eleven days, that they had suffered through three separate snow and rain storms, and that they were stranded on a ledge without food or sufficient means to complete the remaining 800 feet of the climb. A nine-person rescue team led by ranger Keith Lober was flown to the top of El Capitan by a helicopter from Lemoore Naval Air Station. The rescuers were lowered 650 vertical feet down the wall to their location. Falling snow coated the ropes with ice, slowing the rescue and making the use of mechanical ascenders very dangerous. It also hampered use of aircraft and forced the victims and their rescuers to spend the night on El Capitan. The weather broke on the morning of the 31st and all parties were extracted by a Lemoore aircraft. [Brian Smith, YOSE] Friday, November 22, 1996 96-660 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescue Rangers received a report of an injured climber on the descent route on the West Face of Leaning Tower around 5 p.m. on November 10th. Preliminary investigation indicated that two inexperienced climbers were 400 feet up the wall when their rappel ropes became entangled. In their attempts to free the ropes, they pulled down numerous rocks and boulders, one of which struck a climber and caused an open fracture to her leg. A 16-person technical rescue team led by rangers Keith Lober and Evan Jones found the climber trapped on damaged ropes and unable to care for herself. Advanced life support measures were initiated and she was evacuated via a 450-foot vertical lowering operation. This was followed by a 2,000-foot scree evacuation to a waiting ambulance, which took the 16 rescuers about five hours. Darkness and significant rockfalls from the unstable chimney system hampered the operation. The climber was taken to the park clinic, then transferred to a hospital in Modesto. [Brian Smith, Valley District, YOSE] Monday, November 25, 1996 96-663 - Yosemite NP (California) - Slides, Road Closure Highway 140 was temporarily closed on the night of Thursday, November 21st, after a flash flood caused by heavy rains washed debris, large boulders and silt onto the roadway. Park and CalTrans road crews worked through Friday to clear the road from the park's west boundary in El Portal to a point about a quarter mile to the east. Their efforts were hampered by additional slides, as hard rains continued to fall through the day. The road was finally reopened late that night. [PIO, YOSE] Friday, January 3, 1997 96-707 - Western Areas - Follow-up on Storm Impacts Several additional reports have been received regarding the impacts of the series of storms that have been striking the West Coast. Forecasters are predicting more rain in coming days, and U.S. Geological Service's Tacoma office reports that "there is potential for serious and widespread flooding in the next several days over all of western Washington." This is at least partly because of the potential runoff from melting snow. USGS hydrographers estimate that the water equivalent in the snowpack between 3,000 and 6,000 feet in Washington ranges from about 15 to more than 40 inches. o Yosemite NP (California) - Heavy rains and melting snow have caused major run-off and flooding problems in the park and El Portal. The flooding may be worse than that experienced last winter. An incident management team has been established; the park has been split into two operational areas, based on the likelihood that El Portal will become separated from the rest of the park by flooding. Highway 140 and all roads into the valley are closed. Valley campgrounds along the Merced River are closed, but Yosemite Lodge and the Ahwahnee Hotel remain open. There are about 2,000 visitors still in the hotels, but neither they nor anyone else in the valley can get either in or out. The weather is so bad that helicopters can not fly in. The series of storms also caused a number of rescues and fatalities during the last weeks of December (see additional reports below). [USGS Headquarters, Washington; Colin Campbell, CR, GRTE; Bob Andrew, CR, YOSE; Superintendent, WHIS; CRO, WHIS; Paul Ducasse, SA, PGBSSO; John Dell'Osso, Acting CI, PORE; Jim Hammett, Superintendent, JODA; Randy Brooks, Acting CR, MORA] Friday, January 3, 1997 96-711 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescue Rangers received a report of overdue climbers on Washington's Column on December 21st. The climbers initially declined assistance, but cries of help were heard from the group the following day. Two climbers were stranded 1800 feet off the ground, had gotten wet, and were now suffering from hypothermia. An intense winter storm precluded use of aircraft and ultimately defeated a ground rescue team, which made two efforts to reach the climbers. On the morning of the 23rd, ranger-paramedic Keith Lober was lowered to the victims by a winch cable from a Lemoore NAS helicopter. The climbers were perched on an overhanging wall without leges, and each had to be attached to the cable, swung out from the wall, then winched into the hovering helicopter. They were taken to the park clinic, where they were treated for hypothermia, then released. [Brian Smith, Supervisor, YOSE] Friday, January 3, 1997 96-712 - Yosemite NP (California) - Search and Rescue; Double Fatality On December 26th, off-duty park employee Deron Mills saw and reported a car in the Merced River alongside Highway 140 west of the El Portal administrative area. The vehicle was upside down, with only the rear wheels and trunk protruding from the water. Yosemite rescue, fire, and EMS personnel responded to the scene. Rescue swimmers were unable to reach the passenger compartment due to the water depth and the currents around the vehicle. A mechanical extractor was used in an attempt to open the bottom edge of a rear door which was just above water line. Although the door could not be fully opened, it was opened far enough for rescue swimmers to see two occupants trapped in the front seat. Winches from two Yosemite rescue units and one county rescue unit were used to pull the car partially out of the water and turn it upright. Once extricated from the car, both victims were transported to a local hospital, then flown to a regional trauma center. Neither victim could be revived. Twenty-one park personnel participated in the rescue effort. [Mark Harvey, YOSE] Friday, January 3, 1997 96-713 - Yosemite NP (California) - Search and Rescue; Fatality Just before dark on December 27th, park rescue, fire, and EMS personnel were dispatched to the report of a car in the Merced River along Highway 140 west of the El Portal administrative area. The vehicle was upside down and submerged in the center of the river. Because of high instream flows from recent rains, the vehicle could not be reached by rescuers in the fast moving water. A search was started along both sides of the river bank for any victims who might have escaped or been thrown from the vehicle. The following day, Yosemite rescue personnel assisted the county SAR team with extrication of the car. This was a complex operation using rescue swimmers, dive teams, and a high line boat ferry. The driver and only occupant of the vehicle was still in the car when it was pulled from the river. Eleven park personnel participated in the initial search. [Mark Harvey, YOSE] Friday, January 3, 1997 96-714 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescues; Fatality Staff at the Arch Rock entrance station received a report on December 29th that an eastbound bus on Highway 140 was leaking oil onto the roadway, which was already slick from rain. A minute later, park employee Kevin Keheley found and reported a car upside down in the Merced River alongside the highway in the El Portal administrative area. The vehicle was 20 feet from shore and the passenger compartment was partially submerged. One victim was on top of the vehicle; another was trapped inside. A third victim, either ejected or washed out of the car, was floating downstream in a face down position and was not moving. That victim was carried the better part of a mile down the river until he became caught on an obstruction. A passerby who attempted a swimming rescue was himself carried downstream until he caught a rock ledge on the far side of the river. This meant that rescuers were faced with three simultaneous rescue situations over a three-quarter mile stretch of river. Initial efforts focused on the two victims on and in the car. The vehicle was reached by an extension ladder from the river bank, and the first victim was assisted over the ladder to shore. A door window was then broken, making it possible to extricate the trapped victim from the car. Due to hypothermia (his body temperature was later measured at 88 degrees Fahrenheit), a roped litter was needed to move him from the vehicle to the river bank. Both victims were transported to a local hospital; the first was treated and released, the second was flown by air ambulance to a regional trauma facility. At the same time, efforts were being made to reach the third victim, who was located six feet from shore at the base of a 75 foot river bank. Fixed lines were set for the descent of rescue swimmers, who reached the victim and brought him back to shore on a float board. He was in full cardiopulmonary arrest and also had a head injury. Immediate efforts were made by park paramedics to resuscitate him, but he could not be revived. The last victim to be rescued was the good Samaritan trapped across the river. He was reached by a rescue swimmer on a float board, then carried back across the river by a rescue kayak from the county SAR team. He was treated and released at the scene. While this operation was underway, rangers from the Valley District located and impounded the commercial bus reported earlier to the entrance station. Preliminary investigation revealed that the bus may have leaked 100 gallons of diesel fuel along the highway. The bus was impounded and held for investigation by state police as a possible cause of the motor vehicle accident. Thirty-two park rescue, fire, and EMS personnel participated in the rescue. [Mark Harvey, YOSE] Monday, January 6, 1997 96-707 - Western Areas - Follow-up on Storm Impacts The impacts of the severe storms which have been striking the West Coast since Christmas continue to be felt: o Yosemite NP (California) - The storms caused severe damage in Yosemite Valley and El Portal, which sustained major flooding last Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. Visitor use areas in Yosemite Valley became virtual islands as the roadways between them were inundated by high flood waters. Upwards of 1,200 visitors and employees were trapped during the peak of the flooding in the Curry Village area, the Yosemite Lodge area, the Yosemite Village area, and at the Ahwahnee Hotel. As soon as the weather broke on Friday morning, nine medical cases were flown out by helicopter; about 900 visitors were evacuated by caravan on Highway 41 once waters receded sufficiently on Friday afternoon. Rivers were still high yesterday, but had dropped enough to make travel inside the valley possible. Assessments are underway, but it is already clear that the park sustained major damage: * Roads - Highway 41 is the only road into the valley, and has been reduced to a single lane at one point. Highway 120 is in good shape, but can't be reached because the connecting road has been undermined and cut to a width of five feet along a significant stretch. A 200 foot section of Highway 140 in the valley has been completely eroded away, which also took out the park's sewer line. A significant section of 140 in El Portal was also largely carried away by the flood. The highway has accordingly been closed below El Portal. Only employees, residents and convoys are being allowed in and out. * Sewage - The valley's sewage system is down because of the loss of the pipeline along Highway 140. Maintenance workers are working on installation of a bypass, but it's estimated that it won't be completed for between three and five days. The park is attempting to bring in portable toilets, but they are hard to acquire because of the demand from other flooded areas in California and Nevada. * Water - The wells which serve the valley were knocked out by the flood. Efforts to bring them back on line have so far failed. The park has enough potable water in storage to last through Thursday, at best, and water can not be trucked in because of the damage to roads. Both park and concession staff in the valley (at least 500 of the latter) will be dramatically reduced until the water situation can be resolved. * Electricity - The valley still has power, but three of the four legs of one of the transmission line towers are unsupported due to erosion. The tower is on an island in the river, and can not yet be reached by repair crews. * Infrastructure - Assessments are still underway, but it is clear that serious damage was inflicted on concessioner buildings and most valley campgrounds, trails and road bridges. Because of the extent of the damage, the park requested the assistance of a national Type I incident management team. The closest such team, headed by the Forest Service's Dave Kohut, arrived on scene this weekend and has received the following delegation of authority: * Provide for the safety and living needs of employees. * Coordinate a damage assessment and evaluation. * Assume public information responsibilities. * Coordinate repair and rehabilitation of facilities. Hunter Sharp is the park's representative on the incident management team; Glen Rothell is deputy operations chief. Additional details will appear in future Morning Reports. [Hal Grovert, Assistant Superintendent, YOSE; Russ Lesko, PIO, LAVO; Dana Sullivan, REDW; Roger Rudolph, Assistant Superintendent, OLYM; Bill Gleason, CR, SAJH] Tuesday, January 7, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Storm Impacts About 500 concession employees were evacuated from Yosemite Valley yesterday due to the lack of both potable water and a functioning sewage system. The only employees remaining are a few managers and those deemed essential to keep the village store running and the Yosemite Lodge open (the only guests are incident command team members and NPS employees from other areas). The Red Cross has set up a temporary shelter in Mariposa to house displaced concessions employees. Highway 41, the only road in and out of the park, was closed early yesterday due to high winds and downed trees across the road. The road remained closed throughout the day, thereby delaying the planned evacuation. Several trucks with vital supplies (such as sewer line parts) were stalled at Wawona due to the road closure. It's hoped that the roads can be opened early today. If not, the supplies will be flown in by helicopter. The high winds also limited work in the valley. Primary efforts are focusing on getting basic services (water, sewers, power, etc.) back on line and on protecting park resources. Engineers, resource managers and other specialists should begin arriving today. If the highway is reopened, media representatives will also be allowed in to look at the damage to the valley and the Highway 140 corridor to El Portal. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE] Wednesday, January 8, 1997 96-718 - Yosemite NP (California) - Car Clout Arrest On December 20th, a juvenile who resides in Yosemite was taken into custody and charged with burglary. The arrest followed a four-month-long investigation into ten vehicle burglaries and attempted burglaries in Yosemite Valley. In each case, a large rock was used to break one or more windows of a vehicle to gain entry. The break in the case came when information was received after one of the victims posted a $500 cash reward for return of his lap top computer and two diskettes containing over a year's worth of irreplaceable work. A search warrant was obtained and some of the property was recovered, including the computer and diskettes. Additional stolen property was recovered from residences within Mariposa County. More arrest are anticipated as investigators continue to identify accomplices. [Doug Roe, CI, YOSE] Wednesday, January 8, 1997 96-719 - Yosemite NP (California) - Search; Missing Person On the night of December 28th, rangers were dispatched to investigate a report of a stabbing at an inholder residence within the employee housing area in El Portal. The female occupant of the house told them that a male friend had stabbed himself in the chest with a pair of scissors, then fled, wearing only a pair of underwear even though the weather was cold and rainy. Scissors and blood were found in the house. There was also evidence indicating that he might be intoxicated. A hasty search of the area was begun by rangers and county deputies, but no sign of the man was found. Since the area is one of proprietary jurisdiction, the sheriff's office assumed responsibility for the search, which continued without success for two more days. The man is now listed in NCIC as a missing and endangered person. The investigation continues. Seven park law enforcement and EMS personnel responded to the initial call. [Mark Harvey, YOSE] Thursday, January 9, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Storm Impacts The high winds which blew through the park early this week have diminished, thereby permitting clearance of trees from Highway 41 and the evacuation of about 500 concession employees. Supplies have arrived, and several media crews have visited the park to survey the flood damage. Park staff and members of the USFS Type I incident management team were able to continue work yesterday on restoring elements of the infrastructure within Yosemite Valley. Some progress has been made on water and sewer systems, but both remain inoperable. The Forest Service team will be leaving the park tomorrow and will be replaced by the Service's Type I all-risk incident management team (Jim Northup, IC). The park will remain closed indefinitely. No estimates have yet been made on the cost of needed repairs. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE] Tuesday, January 14, 1997 96-707 - Western Areas - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Two additional reports on the impact of the winter storms of early January have been received: o Yosemite NP (California) - The Service's Type I all risk incident management team (Steve Holder, IC) assumed overall management of the post-flood incident from the Forest Service on Saturday. Water and sewer systems remain inoperable, and only a few people are being allowed to stay within the valley. Members of an inter-disciplinary team from the Denver Service Center and Federal Highway Administration are working to develop comprehensive damage and cost assessments for the park's roads, utilities and structures. Attention is being focused on caring for park personnel impacted by this disaster, and on returning some semblance of normalcy to both displaced and otherwise impacted part staff, to park operations, and to the park's infrastructure. Considerable effort is being made to communicate updates to evacuated employees, area residents, business owners, and local, state and federal officials. Meetings have been held in El Portal, Mariposa, Oakhurst and Yosemite Valley. Representative George Radanovich toured the area by helicopter on Thursday and met with residents from his home district (Mariposa) at a town meeting that evening. On Friday, park managers met with nearly 200 community residents and business leaders at a town meeting sponsored by the Oakhurst Chamber of Commerce. Mild weather facilitated some progress toward resuming limited sewer and water service within Yosemite Valley before new snowfall hampered operations on Sunday. At this time, there's no projected date for the resumption of water and sewer system operations, and not projected date for reopening the park. [Amy Vanderbilt, IO, "Highwater 97" Incident, YOSE; Chief of Administration, JOMU] Wednesday, January 15, 1997 96-719 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Search for Missing Person On the night of December 28th, rangers were dispatched to investigate a report of a stabbing at an inholder residence within the trailer village housing area in El Portal. B.B., the female occupant of the house, told them that a male friend, D.A., had stabbed himself in the chest with a pair of scissors, then fled, wearing only a pair of undershorts even though the weather was cold and rainy. Scissors and blood were found in the house. There was also evidence indicating that he might be intoxicated. A hasty search of the area was begun by rangers and county deputies, but no sign of the man was found. After two more days of fruitless searching, D.A. was listed in NCIC as a missing and endangered person. On January 5th, following several days of flooding on the Merced River, his body was found entangled in driftwood about four miles down river from the trailer village. Preliminary information indicates that D.A. died of drowning and not from the apparently superficial chest wound. [Mark Harvey, YOSE] Thursday, January 16, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The elementary school and day care facilities in Yosemite Valley both resumed operation on Monday, but the children are being closely supervised because of the countless hazards remaining in the valley. Superintendent B.J. Griffin and other key staff members have been interviewed by countless print and television reporters regarding the impacts of this event and the resultant changes to the park from the January 1st flood. Initial assessments of storm damage to infrastructure, utilities, roads and resources are nearing completion, but progress on cleaning up the park was hampered by snow, rain and icy roads on Tuesday and Wednesday. Barring appreciable snowfall and hazardous road conditions, park maintenance crews will continue clearing and fixing repairable culverts and less severe road damage necessary to keep emergency traffic moving on Highway 41, the Hetch-Hetchy Road, and along South Side Drive from Sentinel Creek to Bridalveil Falls. Crews will also continue removing downed trees from Wawona Campground and repairing and testing utilities and lift stations. A total of 255 people are currently dedicated to the "Highwater '97" incident. [Amy Vanderbilt, IO, IMT, YOSE, 1/15] Tuesday, January 21, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Progress and setbacks continue as the park and ICS team work to restore sections of the park damaged in the flood. As of yesterday, operations were largely on hold due to heavy snows falling in the park and the diversion of resources for snow removal, fallen tree removal and restoration of power. The following report was submitted over the weekend: o Sewage and other utilities - Spirited cheers and applause echoed throughout Yosemite Valley last Thursday morning when the park's utilities branch succeeded in bringing the temporary sewage system bypass on line - 15 days after record flooding obliterated much of the 20-inch diameter sewer pipe paralleling the Merced River between Yosemite Valley and El Portal. On Sunday, however, a leak was detected about a thousand feet upstream from the bypass at the "Cookie" rock slide, requiring that the system in the valley be shut down again until further notice. Utilities branch personnel have worked around the clock to bring the emergency sewer system and other utilities at El Portal and in Yosemite Valley back on line. The overall structural integrity of the sewer system bypass remains unknown and will require on-going monitoring. o Road reopening - Federal Highway Administration engineers have been supervising blasting at the "Cookie" rock slide over recent days as part of the overall effort to clear rock debris on Highway 140. Once this project is finished, blasting will begin on Foresta Road. o Community support - Park community meetings and get-togethers continue for park employees and their families in both El Portal and Yosemite Valley. o Reopening of park - As the preliminary assessment of damage to the park's infrastructure nears completion, criteria are being developed to govern reopening of portions of the park to the public. These criteria will address visitor safety, health, and management issues, the availability of visitor services, and resource protection. Yosemite Valley will remain closed through the month of February. o Damage and cost assessment - A preliminary report on infrastructure damages and associated repair costs should be completed by tomorrow. This preliminary assessment will include both costs to date for support from the NPS Type I all risk incident management team and projected costs for long-term needs and rehabilitation work. An executive summary of this preliminary recovery assessment will be released to the public concurrent with the report's completion. A total of 568 people are currently assigned to the incident, including 528 from the NPS, two from BLM, and eleven from the California Division of Forestry. Other cooperating agencies include the Mariposa County Sheriff's Department, Mariposa County Fire Department, Mariposa County Road Department, California Highway Patrol, California Department of Transportation, American Red Cross, California Office of Emergency Services, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Yosemite Concessions Service Company, and all other park concessioners. [Amy Vanderbilt, IO, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE] Wednesday, January 22, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Heavy, wet snow and rain caused a rock slide outside the park Monday evening which closed Highway 140 west of El Portal. Only emergency vehicles are allowed through the slide zone until further notice. Snow accumulation has caused delays in blasting the "Cookie" rock slide on Highway 140 between Yosemite Valley and El Portal, but road repairs and other cleanup operations continue where possible. Winter storm warnings have been posted for from one to three feet of snow in the central Sierras, and precipitation is forecast to continue periodically for the next six to ten days. Winter weather (heavy snow, downed trees and broken limbs) have caused recurring electrical power failures at El Portal and Wawona, and it's expected that both areas will be isolated for a time today because of falling trees and landslides. Contractors continue efforts to repair the damaged and leaking sewer line paralleling the Merced River, but the sewer system remains inoperable. As of yesterday, the incident management team estimated that about 60 percent of emergency stabilization tasks, 80 percent of damage assessments, and two percent of needed rehabilitation work had been completed. Everglades superintendent Dick Ring, who went through Hurricane Andrew in his park, is in Yosemite as an advisor to share his insights on the long-term effects of a major natural event. Four community gatherings were held in Yosemite Valley and El Portal over Monday and Tuesday for employees and their spouses and families. Ring shared personal perspectives about the extent and duration of disruptions to employees and families at Everglades after Hurricane Andrew and offered some suggestions about coping strategies. Weather permitting, Congressman George Miller of California will tour the flood impacts today. The southern portion of the park at Wawona is slated to reopen to the public at noon today, but the event will likely be postponed due to the weather. A total of 569 people are currently assigned to the incident - 522 NPS (197 at El Portal and 352 in the valley), 33 USFS, two BLM, eleven CDF, and one USGS. [Amy Vanderbilt, IO, and Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/21] Thursday, January 23, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The snow which has been falling on the park changed over to rain yesterday morning, and a small stream flood advisory was issued for the remainder of the day. Rain was also reported at Tuolumne Meadows, elevation 8,592 feet. Although the weather was uncooperative, progress was made on the disabled sewer system. Concrete was poured for the manhole. It will take 18 hours for the concrete to cure and for pump tests to be completed; toilets should again be available in the valley some time today. Progress has also been made on the lift station at the El Portal trailer park, and toilets there are again in operation. The Wawona entrance station opened as planned at noon yesterday, and representatives from the media were on hand to record the event. Commercial power was restored to Wawona at 2:20 p.m. Yosemite Valley remains closed to all but emergency personnel and their families. A major storm is forecast for the weekend, and appropriate contingency plans are being prepared. A total of 560 people are currently committed to the incident. [Amy Vanderbilt, IO, and Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/22] Friday, January 24, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts A break in the weather yesterday permitted the resumption of work on several emergency stabilization and rehabilitation projects. Progress was made in blasting large boulders from the "Cookie" slide and in building up the road base on Highway 140. Work in the Valley focused on utilities and buildings. The 13 inches of snow on the ground has made road shoulders and trails very muddy and has hidden several hazards, so road work was limited to moving snow and clearing drainage culverts. Additional slippage of Highway 120 was also discovered. Although the sewer system was scheduled to go back on line yesterday, it remains down and will require further repairs. Warm weather and significant precipitation are forecast for the weekend; contingency plans have been completed and supplies, equipment and personnel are being pre- positioned for timely response to problems that may arise. A total of 556 people are currently committed to the incident. [Sonya Capek, IO, and Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/23] Monday, January 27, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Rain and snow throughout the weekend - though less severe than anticipated - hampered efforts to complete work on the sewer system and roads and prompted a limited evacuation of El Portal residents on Sunday. In mid-afternoon, complications from a mud slide threatened to knock out phone, cable television and electrical service. The weather also raised concerns about another possible evacuation from Yosemite Valley. The New Year's Day flood continues to have serious impacts on the everyday lives of NPS and concession employees, their families, and residents of surrounding communities: o Employees who live in El Portal but work in Yosemite Valley have been separated from their families for almost a month now, living in temporary housing in the Valley and Wawona. o Employees who wish to visit their families in El Portal must plan their trips around scarce days off and scheduled California Highway Patrol convoys over damaged roads. This has become increasingly difficult due to recent rock slides and road closures. o The sewer system in Yosemite Valley is still inoperable. The inconvenience of infrequent showers and continued use of portable toilets remain a reality of daily life in Yosemite Valley. o Employees with school age children find it difficult to get their children to school each day. Many high school students spend the week separated from their families in temporary housing in Mariposa in order to attend school. o About 1,000 concession employees lost their jobs; many also lost their personal possessions. The incident management team and county have hired as many of them as emergency workers as possible, but a number have moved on to other jobs and will not be returning to Yosemite. o Though not yet quantified, the economic impact on the surrounding communities is becoming more evident every day. Although the Wawona area opened to visitors on Wednesday, January 22nd, inclement weather and limited services have kept visitation down to a hardy handful. California congressman John T. Doolittle is planning to visit the park today. A contingent of NPS and DOI staff are scheduled to tour the park on Wednesday. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 1/27] Wednesday, January 29, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Congressman John Doolittle, members of his staff and several media representatives visited the park on Monday. Good weather has permitted crews to resume work on the temporary sewer line and the temporary road connection between El Portal and Yosemite Valley. Significant progress was made on both projects yesterday. The mud slide which occurred in the El Portal area on Sunday has been cleaned up. A Job Corps crew from Mariposa County, comprised of people left unemployed by the flooding, began working in the park on Tuesday. A recovery planning group, consisting of engineers, resource specialists, and other professionals, is completing work on the preliminary recovery needs analysis, which includes a damage assessment. A total of 649 people (563 NPS, 36 Forest Service, 11 CDF, 36 Mariposa County, two BLM and one USGS) are currently committed to the incident. [Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/28 and 1/29] Thursday, January 30, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Crews continued worked yesterday on installation of a temporary sewer line, construction of a temporary road connection between El Portal and Yosemite Valley, repair of eroded road shoulders, removal of damaged property, and opening of the road to Badger Pass (the latter will be open to cross-country skiing on Saturday). Demobilization of some engineers and resource specialists involved in long-term recovery planning is about to begin. Not much more assessment work can be completed until snow melts, particularly in the backcountry. The preliminary recovery needs assessment, which includes the damage assessment, is being edited and will be released to the public tomorrow. The release will be followed by a media tour of the damaged areas of the park. On Tuesday, California Representatives John Doolittle and George Radonovich announced that they will be proposing legislation in Congress next week (entitled "The Yosemite Restoration Act of 1997") to provide funds for infrastructure repair, road repair, relocation and replacement of employee and concessioner housing, and anything else needed for the expeditious and complete restoration and reopening of the park. Several representatives from the field area, WASO and the Department are in the park inspecting damage this week, and a tour and meeting will be held tomorrow for members of the surrounding communities and counties, including Merced, Mariposa, Madera, Mono and Tuolumne Counties. A total of 642 people (567 NPS, 36 Forest Service, 36 Mariposa County, two BLM and one USGS) are currently committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, and Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/30] Friday, January 31, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The sewer line between Yosemite Valley and El Portal was connected yesterday, ending water use restrictions in the Valley. The preliminary recovery needs assessment will be released later today and will appear in abbreviated form in the Morning Report on Monday. The Northeast Region's Type II incident management team (Skip Brooks, IC), augmented by personnel from the Alaska Fire Service, will assume management of the incident next week. [Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/31] Monday, February 3, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The park has released a preliminary report on damage sustained in the early January floods and on recovery and repair costs and upcoming needs. The overall price tag has been placed at $178 million. Here's an itemization, with estimates rounded off: o Roads - $36.3 million o Trails - $4.3 million o Utilities - $6.1 million o Buildings - $84.1 million o Grounds (including campgrounds) - $13.1 million o Natural resources - $4.3 million o Cultural resources - $.7 million o Lost or damaged property - $2.8 million o High country (estimate) - $12.9 million o Emergency, short-term incident response - $13.4 million The flood report, which was issued on Friday, had this to say about the upcoming recovery effort: "There are some benefits that will come from the effort to recover from this devastating storm. Many of the structures that were destroyed or severely damaged were in a flood plain. The park has a comprehensive, nationally debated and approved GMP that will guide the recovery effort and the relocation of [the damaged] facilities to a more protected and suitable location at a minimal additional cost. The added cost of relocation will be minimal when compared to the combined cost of rebuilding in place now, and in the near future relocating these facilities in accordance with the GMP...Many of the facilities that will be rehabilitated or reconstructed were substandard and part of a large backlog of work needed in Yosemite. The recovery effort will substantially reduce this backlog." The text of the report is available on the Internet (www.nps. gov/yose/whathapp.htm). Meanwhile, work continues to get the park up and running again. The new sewer connection between Yosemite Valley and El Portal was encased in concrete on Friday to stabilize it in the event of future flooding. The Badger Pass ski area opened to the public for cross- country skiing on Saturday. All other road closures and public use restrictions remain in effect. Management of the incident was transferred on Sunday from the NPS Type I incident management team (Steve Holder, IC) to the Northeast Region's Type II team (Skip Brooks, IC). A total of 589 people (504 NPS, 32 Forest Service, 50 Mariposa County, two BLM and one USGS) are currently committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, and Greg Stiles, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 1/31, 2/1] Tuesday, February 4, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts A section of Highway 140 collapsed yesterday morning, causing a power outage in Yosemite Valley that will continue until at least this afternoon. The incident command post, firehouse, administration building and cafeteria are being powered by generators. The site of the "Cookie" slide on 140 continues to be a main focus of recovery efforts. The temporary six-inch sewer bypass has been replaced with a permanent, gravity-fed twelve-inch main, and the washed out road section has been filled in and marginally stabilized. It is now passable with a Dihatsu two passenger utility vehicle. Despite advances in road repair and the opening of southern areas of the park, NPS employees continue to be displaced from their homes and offices, and between 800 and 1,000 concession employees remain unemployed. Staff members from the offices of California Senators Feinstein and Boxer were in the park yesterday to meet with park management. The incident is now being managed by Northeast Region's Type II incident management team (Skip Brooks, IC). A total of 602 people (509 NPS, 35 Forest Service, 52 Mariposa County, five BLM and one USGS) are currently committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, with Yosemite PIO staff, and Ann Marx, Plans Chief, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 2/3] Tuesday, February 4, 1997 97-38 - Yosemite NP (California) - Burglary Arrest A concession dormitory room in Yosemite Valley which had been evacuated because of the flood was forcibly entered on or about January 7th. Stolen was a $400 guitar. Shortly thereafter, concession employee D.H. attempted to sell the guitar to another employee and was subsequently arrested. D.H. had been evacuated from the area, but had returned to retrieve his car. D.H. was on federal probation at the time of his arrest and was also on bail for two other federal charges and for a state DUI charge. [Fred Elchlepp, CI, YOSE, 1/31] Wednesday, February 5, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The following are highlights from yesterday's reports on the continuing effort to restore and reopen the park: o Electric power was restored to Yosemite Valley yesterday morning. o Members of the Yosemite Fund, a private, non-profit organization created to provide funding for projects and programs of lasting benefit to the park, toured damage sites in the valley yesterday. The fund has created a humanitarian account, which will be used to aid park concession and NPS residents impacted by the flood. Former ambassador Bill Lane made an initial donation of $100,000. o Congressmen Radanovich and Doolittle planned to introduce their bill, entitled "The Yosemite Restoration Act of 1997," in Congress yesterday. Radanovich has added a Yosemite link to his Internet web site (www.house.gov/radanovich/yosemite.htm). A total of 581 people - down from 602 on Monday - are currently committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, with Yosemite PIO staff, and D. D'Andrea, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 2/4] Thursday, February 6, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The following are highlights from yesterday's reports on the continuing effort to restore and reopen the park: o Progress continued yesterday on repairs to the three major roads leading into Yosemite Valley. Rock blasting was conducted on Highway 140. Emergency repairs to that highway are nearing an estimated 55% completion level, but new slumps and damage areas show up on both Highway 140 and Highway 120 on a daily basis. Coordination of state, FHWA and park road crews continues to present a challenge to incident managers. o A dump truck working on road projects rolled over, but there were no injuries. o Incident costs have now reached $10 million. Efforts are underway to return incident management to the park. A total of 556 people - down from 581 on Tuesday - are currently committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, with Yosemite PIO staff, and D. D'Andrea, "Highwater '97A Incident", YOSE, 2/5] Tuesday, February 11, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Repairs to Highways 120 and 140 continue to be the focus of recovery efforts, but work is also continuing on the sewer system, campgrounds, and other parts of the park's infrastructure. The incident is now in its 42nd day and has so far cost just under $11 million. Goods and services are being purchased whenever possible from local communities that typically derive much of their livelihood from park visitors. The park to date has purchased about $560,000 in tools, equipment and other items from these communities, and continues to rent vehicles, lodging and construction equipment from businesses in the surrounding area. At present, there are 513 people (419 NPS, 30 USFS, 10 BLM, and 58 Mariposa County) committed to the incident. [Scott Gediman, IO, YOSE, and YOSE PIO Staff, 2/10] Tuesday, February 18, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts A portion of the park accessible by Highway 120 through the Big Oak Flat entrance reopened on Saturday. Visitors can now travel as far as Crane Flat, thereby permitting access to hiking, cross-country skiing, and snow play areas. The newly reopened section includes the Hodgdon Meadows campground and the Tuolumne and Merced Groves of big trees. This is the third segment of Yosemite to reopen to visitors since the entire park was closed by heavy flooding in early January. Reservations are now being accepted for the Upper Pines campground in Yosemite Valley for the period beginning on May 15th. The Upper River and Lower River campgrounds in Yosemite Valley will not open this summer. The NPS Type II team from Northeast Region (Skip Brooks, IC) is planning to return complete management of the incident to park recovery manager Kevin Cann today. [Scott Gediman, IO, YOSE, and Al Nash, YOSE PIO Staff, 2/15] Thursday, February 20, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Current projections are that Yosemite Valley will again be open to visitors on March 15th. This reopening is dependent upon continued progress on repairs to Highways 41, 120 and 140 and upon good weather conditions. Highways 41 and 120 will be open to private vehicles and buses; Highway 140 will be open for limited bus travel and may reopen to private vehicles in time for the Memorial Day holiday weekend. Portions of Yosemite Valley, including popular hiking trails, will remain closed past March 15th. [Scott Gediman, YOSE PIO, 2/19] Wednesday, February 26, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The park still anticipates that Yosemite Valley will be reopened to visitors on March 15th. This planned reopening, however, is still dependent upon good weather and continued progress on road repairs. No reservations will be necessary for entering Yosemite Valley once it reopens. Current plans are to implement the emergency vehicle reservation system for day use visitation some time in late spring or early summer. Details are pending. Yosemite Concession Services plans on simultaneously reopening facilities unaffected by the flooding, including overnight accommodations at the Ahwahnee, Yosemite Lodge and Curry Village. Services will resume gradually and increase to meet anticipated business levels. Reservations can be made by calling 209-252- 4848. Limited camping will be available in the valley. Reservations for camp sites in Upper Pines campground can be made via DESTINET (1-800-436- PARK) beginning on March 1st. Sunnyside walk-in campground and some sites in Lower Pines campground will also be available on a first-come, first-served basis. Upper River campground, Lower River campground and the group camp in Yosemite Valley will not be open this summer. Entrance fees to the park, which increased in January, are now $20 per private vehicle and $40 for an annual park pass. Temporary fee reductions that have been in effect over the past few weeks in recognition of limited services available throughout the park will return to normal once visitation and services resume. [Scott Gediman, IO, YOSE, 2/24] Tuesday, March 11, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Storm Impacts Yosemite Valley will reopen to visitors at noon on Friday, March 14th. Here are the particulars on what will be opened and who will have access: o Private vehicles and buses will be allowed to travel on Highways 41 and 120 into the valley, and a limited number of buses may be allowed on Highway 140 into Yosemite Valley. If so, they will be required to accompany the morning and evening employee bus convoy. Bus entrance to the valley would be limited to the morning convoy; exit would be restricted to the evening convoy. o No reservations will be necessary to enter the park when visitation resumes. The emergency vehicle reservation system for day use visitation is planned for implementation sometime in May. The reservation system is being designed to allow every visitor entry into Yosemite. Visitors without reservations for their vehicles may still enter the park by utilizing public transportation. Visitors with campground or lodging reservations inside the park will not need vehicle reservations. This system is in contrast to the one employed in previous years, when many visitors were turned away on busy summer weekends because overcrowding caused the park to restrict access. o Reservations for campsites in North Pines Campground in Yosemite Valley are available beginning March 15th for the period from May 15th through August 14th by calling DESTINET at 800-436-PARK. Campsites in Upper Pines campground for the period from July 15th to August 14th will also go on the reservation system on March 15th. A handful of campsites in Upper Pines campground may become available for reservation for the period of March 14th through July 14th. Sunnyside walk-in campground and some sites in Lower Pines campground will be available on a first- come, first-served basis, beginning on March 14th. Due to damages sustained during January's floods, the Upper River and Lower River campgrounds in Yosemite Valley will not be opened. These campsites will be relocated to less environmentally sensitive locations within Yosemite Valley in accordance with the park's general management plan. Representatives from at least 30 national print and electronic media will be covering Friday's opening event. [PIO Office, YOSE, 3/10] Tuesday, March 18, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Yosemite Valley reopened to visitors at noon on Friday, March 14th. About a thousand visitors entered the park that day; an estimated 4,000 people visited on Saturday, and almost the same number came on Sunday. The latter figure is about two-thirds of average daily visitation during March, 1996. The opening ceremony was covered by reporters from about 50 media organizations, including ABC TV, CNN, Fox, the New York Times, the Christian Science Monitor, and the San Francisco Chronicle. Meanwhile, work continues on interior park roads. Highway 140 remains closed to private vehicles from Yosemite Valley to El Portal. Plans still call for a Memorial Day reopening. Concessions operations are up and running, with some limitations due to flood damage. Visitor interest in the flood and its impacts remains high. Interpreters are regularly leading walks through flood-damaged portions of the valley. Wayside exhibits chronicling flood events have been erected throughout Yosemite Valley through donations from the Yosemite Fund. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/17] Monday, March 24, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts Superintendent B.J. Griffin testified at a hearing of the House Subcommittee on National Parks and Public Lands held on Saturday in El Portal. The hearing was chaired by Representative George Radonavich (R-Mariposa). Also testifying at the hearing were Senator Barbara Boxer (D-California) and representatives from Yosemite Concession Services, local communities, and environmental groups. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt joined volunteers from AmeriCorps, the Sierra Club, Chevron Corporation and surrounding communities in flood debris cleanup in Yosemite Valley yesterday. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/23] Wednesday, March 26, 1997 97-116 - Yosemite NP (California) - Falling Fatality H.T., 21, a student at Stanford University, sustained serious head injuries when he fell an unknown distance while hiking on the Upper Yosemite Falls trail on the afternoon of March 24th. H.T. had been hiking just below Columbia Point with his girlfriend. She had gone ahead on the trail, and did not witness the accident. About 30 park personnel were involved in the rescue effort. H.T. was flown by helicopter to a hospital in Modesto, where he later died. [Kendall Thompson, PIO, YOSE, 3/25] Friday, March 28, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The road linking Yosemite Valley with El Portal and Mariposa will reopen to limited visitor travel tomorrow. Damage caused by January's flooding closed the road for nearly three months. Visitors will be able to drive between Yosemite Valley and El Portal in ranger-led convoys on evenings and Saturdays. Convoys will run from 7:00 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Sunday through Friday evenings and from 6:30 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Saturdays. Visitors will be able to join the convoy at the park's western boundary in El Portal to enter the park, or at the junction of Highways 120 and 140 to exit Yosemite Valley. The emergency vehicle reservation system proposed for the park for this summer will not be implemented, as it proved impossible to develop such a system in the time available. This became evident as the park worked with interested parties, particularly those in gateway communities. Due to increasing congestion and construction activity related to flood recovery efforts in and around Yosemite Valley, a restricted access plan will be implemented this summer. It's anticipated that this plan will have to be utilized more often this summer than in previous years. Visitation to the park continues to increase. [PIO, YOSE, 3/27] Tuesday, April 8, 1997 97-139 - Yosemite NP (California) - Fatal Accident N.H., 74, of Escondido, California, was killed in an accident in Upper Pines campground on April 7th. N.H. was working on a friend's motor home when the jacks supporting the vehicle slipped, pinning him underneath. Bystanders had removed him from under the vehicle by the time rangers arrived. N.H. was unconscious and had massive injuries to his chest and abdomen. He was flown by helicopter to a hospital in Modesto, where he was declared dead. [PIO, YOSE, 4/7] Wednesday, April 30, 1997 97-175 - Yosemite (California) - Falling Fatality S.S. and partner E.H. were descending a trail after a climb on Arrowhead Arete in Yosemite Valley on the evening of April 27th when a boulder came loose and caused S.S. to fall approximately 200 feet. Park rescuers arrived at the scene of the accident after being notified by E.H.. S.S. was pronounced dead at the scene. His body was removed Monday morning. S.S. was considered to be an experienced mountaineer and talented climber. [PIO, YOSE, 4/28] Friday, May 2, 1997 97-178 - Yosemite NP (California) - MVA with Fatality J.F., 57, of Fresno, California, was riding his motorcycle on Chapel Straight on Southside Drive on the afternoon of April 27th when a vehicle cut in front of him. J.F. was thrown from his bike and sustained severe head injuries. Rangers and medical personnel responded to the accident. J.F. was taken to Yosemite Medical Clinic, then flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto, where he was declared dead about three hours later. The driver of the other vehicle involved in the accident reportedly saw that J.F. was injured but left the scene. Rangers found him later that day at Chinquapin on Highway 41 between Yosemite Valley and the park's south entrance. The 54- year-old German national was taken into custody by rangers and charged with involuntary manslaughter. J.F. was wearing a helmet at the time of the accident; the helmet, however, was not Department of Transportation approved. [PIO, YOSE, 4/28] Monday, May 5, 1997 97-179 - Yosemite NP (California) - Rescue On April 24th, rangers responded to a report of an unconscious and unresponsive 12-year-old male about a mile up the Mist Trail near Vernal Falls. Ranger/medics Cameron Jacobi and Keith Lober found that the boy had fallen about 30 feet and sustained a significant head injury. Advanced life support was begun and a Lemoore Naval Air Station helicopter was summoned. The boy was evacuated through a difficult hoisting operation among 150-foot- tall trees. He was flown to Memorial Hospital in Modesto and has recovered following hospitalization in the intensive care unit. [Brian Smith, SPR, YOSE, 5/2] Tuesday, May 27, 1997 96-707 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Winter Storm Impacts The El Portal Road (that portion of Highway 140 inside the park) reopened to unrestricted travel at noon on Friday, May 23th, following a short reopening ceremony which was covered by numerous members of the media. The road was severely damaged by January's flood and was closed to all travel until mid- March. It was then opened to restricted travel on evenings and Saturdays to permit completion of emergency repairs. This opening marked a milestone in Yosemite's flood recovery efforts. The road will again be subject to restricted travel in the fall when permanent repairs are begun. [Kendell Thompson, PIO, YOSE, 5/23] Wednesday, June 4, 1997 97-244 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the evening of June 2nd, park dispatch received a report of a girl trapped under a boulder at the base of the cliff near the Le Conte Memorial. Investigator Scott Hinson and ranger Tom Wilson were first to reach the injured 13-year-old, who was lying on her back with a boulder weighing about five tons lying on top of her. The girl and other students were climbing in cliff talus when the rock rolled on top of her. A two-and-a-half hour extrication effort followed. Employees from the two park engine companies and rescue staff employed the "Jaws of Life", air bags and other heavy rescue equipment to free the girl. Advanced life support was initiated after she was extracted. She was then taken to a hospital in Modesto, where she is being treated for significant pelvic, internal, and leg injuries. [Brian Smith, SPR, YOSE, 6/3] Tuesday, July 1, 1997 97-298 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Probable Drowning On June 24th, Richard Eldredge went swimming in the Merced River near the Arch Rock entrance station on Highway 140. Although the river has crested from the spring melt, water levels remain high and currents swift from the snow pack runoff. Eldredge was quickly caught by the current and swept downstream, where he disappeared beneath the water in an area of turbulent rapids. A companion reported the incident and a search was initiated with shore-based search teams, a search dog, and the park's helicopter. No trace of Eldredge was found before the search was discontinued at night fall. A scaled down shore and aerial search continued the following day without locating the body. The search will resume later, as water levels continue to fall in the river. The circumstances of the incident are under investigation. Consumption of alcohol appears to be a contributing factor. [Dan Horner, CIR, YOSE, 6/27] Wednesday, July 23, 1997 97-298 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Drowning The body of R.E. was found in the Merced River on July 1st. R.E. had been missing since he was last seen while swimming on June 24th. His body was found submerged about one foot beneath the surface, where it was caught between rocks in a whitewater chute in the middle of the river. The body was reached and recovered in a complex technical operation over a period of two days. [Mark Harvey, PR, YOSE, 7/7] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-365 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue A vehicle drove into the Merced River just below Pohono Bridge in Yosemite Valley around 10:30 p.m. on July 5th. Responding rangers and park fire, rescue and EMS personnel found the car in a class III whitewater. The driver had been able to extricate himself as the car floated in the river. He suffered only minor injuries and was washed up on shore. Investigation revealed that the vehicle had been traveling east on Northside Drive at a speed of about 65 mph (the speed limit is 35 mph) when the driver failed to negotiate a corner. The vehicle skidded for 120 feet, then sailed off a 35- foot embankment into whitewater. It then floated under the bridge and traveled another 150 feet until it was pinned against a boulder. Incident commander Keith Lober reported that the accident should have been unsurvivable. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-366 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the afternoon of July 5th, a 29-year-old climber took a 100-foot pendulum fall and broke a leg on the "Thank God Ledge" traverse of the "Regular Route" on the northwest face of Half Dome. Other climbers on the face were able to raise the climber to the top of the cliff, where he was picked up and flown by park helicopter to the Yosemite Clinic, then taken by Air Med helicopter to a hospital in Modesto. Failure of the lead climber to place adequate protection on the traverse transformed what should have been a minor fall into a near fatal accident. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-367 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Early on the morning of June 16th, an 18-year-old climber fell 30 feet to the ground from the first pitch of the "Paradise Lost" route on Middle Cathedral Rock and suffered a severe head injury. Investigation showed that he had ripped out all of his protection points during the fall. An NPS rescue team led by ranger/paramedic Keith Lober began advanced life support and evacuated the victim down a 300-foot scree slope. He was taken to Doctors Hospital in Modesto, where he was diagnosed as suffering from a basalar skull fracture. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-368 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue A solo climber descending the nose route of El Capitan around noon on July 3rd became immobilized on the wall when his ropes became entangled. A park rescue team climbed the first five pitches and freed the ropes. The climber was then able to descend on his own without incident. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-369 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue A lead climber on the "Shield Route" on El Capitan fell around 9 p.m. on May 29th and suffered internal injuries. A park rescue team was flown to the top of El Capitan the next morning and brought the injured climber to the top in a five-hour, thousand-foot raising. He was taken to Doctors Hospital in Modesto, where he was diagnosed as suffering from displaced rib fractures. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-370 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Japanese climbers reported finding a bloody, broken climbing helmet at the base of El Capitan on the morning of July 12th. Investigation quickly revealed that there was an injured and immobile climber 2,200 feet up the "Cosmos Route." The man, who was a friend of the Japanese climbers, had fallen an unknown distance, was severely dehydrated, and had been rationing his food for several days. The park helicopter and Navy helicopters from Lemoore NAS were not available, so an ANG Pavehawk helicopter and C-130 aerial tanker were sent from Moffett Field near San Francisco. A rescue team was flown to the summit of El Capitan. Ranger/ paramedic Keith Lober was lowered to the victim; Lober stabilized him, then was raised 700 feet to the summit with the patient in a litter. Darkness forced the team and the injured climber to spend the night on top of El Capitan. The patient was flown to the park clinic the next day, where he was treated for severe dehydration and a minor head injury. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/21] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-371 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On July 14th, a 33-year-old Croatian climber fell about 50 feet to the ground while leading at the Cookie Cliff in the Merced River canyon. He was not wearing a helmet and was resting by hanging from a camming device when it failed. The only other piece of equipment he had placed also failed, and he fell to the ground, sustaining injuries to his neck and head. He was taken by ambulance to the El Portal school grounds, where he was transferred to a medical helicopter and flown to a hospital in Modesto. He was still in a coma and on life support as of July 19th. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/21] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-372 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue An eight-year-old boy was bitten on the finger by a rattlesnake near Clark's Point on the John Muir trail near Nevada Falls on July 20th. The incident was reported by cell phone. Ranger/paramedic Keith Lober heli-rapelled from the park's helicopter and reached the boy within an hour of the bite. Initial exam showed that he had been seriously envenomated. The boy was quickly packaged in a litter, then short-hauled several miles under the helicopter to the Ahwahnee Meadow. He was flown by air ambulance about 200 miles to Oakland Children's Hospital, where he remains in pediatric intensive care. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/21] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-374 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue; Assault on Rescuers Rangers and rescue personnel responded to a report of a male who had collapsed a mile and a half up the Yosemite Falls trail on the evening of May 30th. The 35-year-old man was found conscious but unable to stand, walk or care for himself. He displayed signs of dehydration and profound drug and alcohol withdrawal. During the evacuation, he repeatedly became agitated and struck two SAR team members in the face with his fist. He was restrained, additional rangers were called to the scene, and the evacuation continued. He was eventually taken to a hospital in Modesto. After he was released, he was arrested by rangers and charged with assault, being under the influence of an illegal stimulant drug, and disorderly conduct. The magistrate sentenced him to 60 days in custody. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-375 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Falling Fatality A Chinese national who had been swimming in the pool above Nevada Falls was swept over the falls and fell 592 feet to his death on the evening of July 5th. Signs are posted throughout the area warning of the danger of being swept over the falls. Efforts to find the body have so far been fruitless; they will continue on a limited basis as the river level drops. The victim was at least the fifth person to go over Nevada Falls over the past 15 years. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 7/14] Friday, July 25, 1997 97-385 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Suicide On the evening of July 9th, climbers reported finding a body at the base of the northwest face of Half Dome which apparently had been there for several days. Park rescue team members went up the Half Dome slabs in the dark to confirm the report and protect the scene. A recovery team lead by ranger/coroner Evan Jones flew to the scene the next morning and recovered the body. Evidence found at the top of the cliff, with the body, and in a rented car tentatively identified the victim as a German citizen and indicated that he'd jumped to his death around July 5th. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/14] Thursday, July 31, 1997 97-424 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search for Missing Aircraft On the morning of July 23rd, a single-engine 1962 Navion with two men on board was tracked on radar to a position over the park, but was lost from passive radar tracking as it crossed the Sierra Nevadas around 8 a.m. Notification that the plane had not reached its destination was made to the Civil Air Patrol (CAP) on the morning of the 25th. CAP aircraft began searching the park that day, but found no clues. The park was notified of the search around 4 p.m. On July 26th, CAP aircraft continued to search over the location where the plane was last tracked and an investigation into its disappearance was begun. Backcountry employees and hikers who may have seen or heard the Navion were contacted. A search of wilderness permits was begun to identify other possible witnesses. On the afternoon of the 29th, an Air Force high-altitude C-130 was used to coordinate the search planes and park contract helicopter, which was being used to follow up on leads and to detect any emergency locator transmitter (ELT) signals. Two brief ELT transmissions were detected by the C-130, but could not be plotted. The air search and investigation are both continuing. [Steve Stockdale, IC, YOSE, 7/31] Wednesday, August 6, 1997 97-437 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue A 19-year-old employee of a private church camp in Wawona was scrambling on boulders in the Chilnualna Creek drainage around 6:30 p.m. on July 26th when he lost his balance and fell about 30 feet, landing on his feet. Both heel bones were crushed and he fractured his wrist. When he failed to return for work that evening, friends who had been with him earlier in the day returned to the area and heard him calling for help. Rangers were called for assistance at 9:30 p.m. Hazardous terrain and darkness prevented an immediate evacuation. Rangers stabilized the victim with the aid of church camp personnel and prepared him for a technical rescue. He was evacuated by high line traverse 150 feet across the drainage at daylight. A litter team then carried him to a waiting ambulance. [Todd Brindle, DR, Wawona District, YOSE, 8/5] Friday, August 8, 1997 97-446 - Yosemite NP (CA) - EMS Rescue On July 30th, a 37-year-old visitor at Glacier Point suffered an anaphylactic reaction from a wasp sting. Interpretive ranger/EMT Doug Nowlin found the victim lying down and disoriented and having difficulty breathing. Ambulance response time was about 45 minutes. Nowlin immediately injected the patient with epinephrine, and his condition improved dramatically. He was eventually transported to the park clinic. Nowlin's action, which probably saved the man's life, stemmed from the park's voluntary training program, which teaches EMT basics, including the use of epinephrine to treat anaphylaxis. [Todd Brindle, DR, Wawona District, YOSE, 8/5] Wednesday, August 20, 1997 97-471 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Falling Fatality C.R., 67, and his wife were scrambling on the west face of Mount Conness at 10,600 feet on August 10th. While walking on a small ledge across a steep slab, C.R. fell between 30 and 50 feet, sustaining severe trauma to his head and extremities. His wife determined that he was dead, then hiked out to report the incident the following afternoon. Rangers flew to the scene in the park helicopter and recovered the body. [John Roth, DR, Tuolumne District, YOSE, 8/14] Wednesday, August 20, 1997 97-474 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On August 5th, rangers received a report of a teenager suffering from high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) in a remote backcountry area. The park helicopter was dispatched with a park medic aboard. The patient was treated at the scene and evacuated to Tuolumne Meadows by helicopter, then taken to a hospital in Mammoth Lakes by ambulance. He was diagnosed with moderate HAPE, dehydration and altitude sickness. [Martin Zebell, PR, Tuolumne District, YOSE, 8/14] Thursday, August 21, 1997 97-483 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist; MVA with Multiple Fatalities A tractor-trailer pulling two trailers crashed on the Lee Vining grade about five miles outside of the park on the afternoon of August 5th while hauling granite boulders to a construction project. Tuolumne Meadows rangers were the first emergency personnel on scene. A park medic was able to enter the severely damaged cab and determine that the two occupants were dead. County and state officers arrived shortly thereafter, and the incident was turned over to them. [Martin Zebell, PR, Tuolumne District, YOSE, 8/14] Friday, August 22, 1997 97-491 - Yosemite NP (CA) - BASE Jumping Conviction On August 13th, a U.S. magistrate convicted J.E. of parachuting in the park. Under the terms of a plea agreement, J.E. admitted to BASE jumping from El Capitan on June 18th. He will make a $1,500 contribution to the Yosemite Mountain Safety Fund in lieu of a fine, and will permanently forfeit his BASE jumping parachute rig, worth about $800. The fund is managed by the Yosemite Association and is used to buy rescue and EMS equipment and supplies and to fund associated training. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 8/14] Wednesday, September 3, 1997 97-424 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Search for Missing Aircraft On the morning of July 23rd, a single-engine 1962 Navion with two men on board disappeared from radar while crossing the Sierra Nevadas. The search for the aircraft involved park, Air Force and Civil Air Patrol personnel. The search is still underway, but no clues have yet been found regarding the plane's location. There are a number of airplane crash sites on the crest of the Sierras, so searchers are continuing to receive reports of airplane parts, crash sites, and/or reflections. The search is complicated by the fact that the Navion was painted dull black, lacked a transponder, and had a questionable emergency locator transmitter. [Steve Stockdale, YOSE, 8/30] Friday, September 12, 1997 97-557 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Serious Injury On August 18th, 66-year-old S.S. of Valencia, Spain, was seriously injured when the tour bus in which he was riding sideswiped a rock outcropping along the El Portal Road. The accident occurred when an unidentified motor home traveling in the opposite direction crossed over the center line and forced the bus off the road. A large rock from the outcropping broke through a side window and struck S.S. in the face. He was extricated from the bus by El Portal EMS and rescue crews and flown to a hospital in Modesto. [Ruth Middlecamp, PR, YOSE, 9/11] Friday, September 12, 1997 97-558 - Yosemite NP (CA) - EMS Rescue J.S. was bitten by a rattlesnake while walking on a trail near Vernon lake on the afternoon of August 24th. His brother hiked out 11 miles and reported the incident. Ranger/paramedic Heather Lee flew to the scene in the park's helicopter and provided advanced life support. J.S was flown to a hospital in Modesto, where he received 14 vials of anti-venom and made a complete recovery. This was the third rattlesnake bite recorded in the park this year. [Mike Kerns, PR, YOSE, 9/11] Wednesday, September 17, 1997 97-566 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assault on Rangers On September 6th, rangers were called to the Ahwahnee Hotel regarding a room burglary. An intoxicated man had reportedly entered a room and stolen wallets and alcohol. When confronted by the occupants of the room, the man fled, falling on a flight of stairs in his attempt to get away. When the rangers found him, he was bleeding from his face and mouth. The man resisted arrest and attempted to strike the rangers; during the struggle, he spit blood directly into the eyes and mouth of one of them. He was booked into the park jail on felony counts of assault on a federal officer, burglary, and being under the influence of alcohol. [Brian Smith, SPR, YOSE, 9/16] Wednesday, September 17, 1997 97-567 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rockslide; Rescue A rockslide on the Mist trail near the top of Nevada Falls on September 14th resulted in a serious head injury to a visitor. Although the trail was crowded with hikers at the time, the only person injured was a 63-year-old man who was trapped for about 15 minutes under a tree which came down in the slide. Bystanders were able to lift the tree off him prior to the arrival of rescuers. Because of high winds blowing at the time, a helicopter short haul evacuation was not possible. Rangers and SAR team members had to carry him by litter about a mile to a landing zone, where he was picked up by helicopter, flown to Yosemite Valley, and transferred to a medical helicopter that took him to a hospital in Modesto. Over 40 people were involved in the rescue. [Brian Smith, SPR, YOSE, 9/16] Friday, October 3, 1997 97-594 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the evening of September 15th, rangers responded to a report of an injured climber at the base of El Capitan. They found that a solo climber had fallen on the first pitch of the West Buttress route and had suffered a compound fracture of an ankle with extreme angulation. He was able to descend to the ground on his own, then crawl several hundred feet down the scree slope before help arrived. A 20-person NPS rescue team, joined by five members of the Los Angeles police department who were int he park on training, carried the victim down the talus in a five-hour operation. Because the eventual recovery of his ankle was threatened by the deformity, he was flown by medical helicopter in the early morning hours to a hospital in Modesto. [Brian Smith, YOSE, 9/22] Wednesday, October 29, 1997 97-375 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Falling Fatality The body of Z.L. was found approximately 600 feet downstream from the base of Nevada Falls on October 12th. Z.L. had been swimming in a pool about 100 feet above Nevada Falls on the evening of July 5th when he was swept over the falls while his friends watched and fell 600 feet to his death. Efforts to find the body immediately after the incident were fruitless and were not resumed until the river level dropped. An extended search by dogs, divers, and ground searchers was required to locate his body. A scuba diver was employed to recover the body where it had been trapped under a boulder in about six feet of water. Signs are posted throughout the area above Nevada Falls warning of the danger of being swept over the falls. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 10/28] Wednesday, October 29, 1997 97-668 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Drowning Dispatch received a cellular phone report of a drowning at the top of Vernal Falls on October 18th. A.B., 29, of Santa Clara, had entered the water in an attempt to save his wife, who had slipped into the Emerald Pool. Neither A.B. nor his wife were swimmers. Although A.B.'s wife made it to safety, he went under and was submerged for about 15 minutes before visitors pulled him from the cold water. CPR was begun by off-duty firefighters and a physician. Rangers were flown to the scene in the park helicopter and began advanced cardiac life support. A.B.'s pulse returned during the rescue effort, but he then went back into full arrest. He was carried by litter to the helicopter and flown to the park clinic. During extended resuscitation efforts there, he again regained a pulse and blood pressure, but subsequently succumbed. [Brian Smith, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 10/28] Thursday, October 30, 1997 97-671 - Yosemite NP (CA) - BASE Jumping Arrests Rangers and criminal investigators arrested three BASE jumpers as they landed in El Capitan Meadow at first light on October 14th. Investigators had determined that the trio would be jumping from El Cap that morning and had staked out the area. All three were charged with illegal jumping; one was also charged with interfering with an agency function, and a second with possession of marijuana. All three pled guilty. The magistrate fined each of them $500 and ordered them to perform 200 hours of community service on the illegal jumping charge; their parachutes, worth $2,000 each, were permanently forfeited to the government. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 10/28] Friday, October 31, 1997 97-677 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Commercial Bus Violations In 1994, J.H.L., owner of Save and Save Travel and doing business as Charter One Service, was convicted of commercial bus violations in the park. These violations were discovered during a multi-agency bus inspection. J.H.L. was placed on probation and ordered to pay a fine. In 1996, J.H.L. was convicted of new violations and was fined $5,000 and given three more years' probation. In June of this year, one of J.H.L.'s buses was caught operating with revoked California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) authority at a bus inspection in the park; in August, J.H.L. was cited for yet another PUC violation and patrol rangers impounded the bus. On October 22nd, J.H.L. pleaded guilty to the two 1997 PUC violations and was fined a total of $10,000. He also admitted to being in violation of his probation by paying part of his 1996 fine with a check that bounced. He was fined $2,500 for the probation violation. The magistrate extended J.H.L.'s probation 36 more months and ordered him not to operate any commercial vehicles in Yosemite for one year. [Bonnie Schwartz, Special Park Uses Office, YOSE, 10/29] Friday, October 31, 1997 97-678 - Yosemite NP (CA) - BASE Jumping Arrests A.W. and E.H. were arrested by rangers for illegal BASE jumping as they landed in El Capitan Meadow at 3:45 a.m. on the morning of October 25th. Investigation revealed that A.W. has made close to 100 BASE jumps in the park and has been acting as a guide for jumpers new to Yosemite, but that this was E.H.'s first such jump. Both pleaded guilty in magistrate's court. A.W. was sentenced to two days' custody, a $2,000 fine, permanent forfeiture of his parachute rig, and placed on two years' court probation. E.H. received three days in jail, a $500 fine, forfeited his parachute rig (which he testified was worth nearly $4,000) and was placed on a year's probation. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 10/29] Friday, October 31, 1997 97-679 - Yosemite NP (CA) - EMS Assist; Accidental Shooting Two teenage boys drove up to the south entrance station early on the morning of October 26th to get help. The driver reported that he had accidentally shot his companion with a 12 gauge shotgun. Wawona District EMS employees responded and treated the 16-year-old victim for multiple wounds to his chest and hand. He was flown by helicopter ambulance to University Medical Center, in Fresno, where he was treated for a collapsed lung and hand injuries. The Mariposa County sheriff's office, with the assistance of rangers, investigated the shooting, which happened outside the park. The boys had been hunting squirrels when one tripped and fell, accidentally discharging his shotgun at his friend, who had been walking beside him. [Todd Brindle, DR, Wawona District, YOSE, 10/29] Wednesday, December 3, 1997 97-728 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assault On the evening of November 17th, rangers and criminal investigators responded to a knife and fist fight between two intoxicated men in the Boystown concession housing area. One suspect was armed with an illegal butterfly knife and the other with a large kitchen knife. One of the men suffered lacerations and punctures to his neck, shoulder and foot; the other received a broken nose and blunt head trauma. One attempted to flee the scene and was arrested after a brief search; the other was arrested in his residence. The knives used in the assault were recovered. The two men were treated at the Yosemite clinic, then booked into the Yosemite Jail. A third intoxicated employee who attempted to interfere during efforts to preserve the crime scene was also arrested. [Brian Smith, Valley Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 12/2) Wednesday, December 3, 1997 97-729 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Multiple Serious Injuries Wawona District rangers were dispatched to a two vehicle accident with injuries on the Wawona Highway at 10:45 a.m. on November 16th. A BMW with four occupants had spun out of control and crossed into the opposite lane where it was struck by an oncoming Pontiac with two occupants. The impact knocked the BMW off the road, ejecting two of the passengers, neither of whom as wearing a seatbelt. Extrication was required to remove the passenger in the Pontiac. Two victims were flown from the scene by a medical helicopter. Four were transported by ground ambulance to the Yosemite Medical Clinic, where one was found to have a broken back. She was subsequently flown out of the park by helicopter. Four ambulances, two fire trucks, a helicopter, and personnel from three districts responded to the accident. The accident was cleared and the road re-opened two and a half hours later. [Todd Brindle, DR, Wawona District, YOSE, 12/2] Monday, March 2, 1998 98-82 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA and Rescue Just before midnight on February 20th, snow plow operators discovered tire tracks leading to a break in the snow berm on the Wawona Road. They stopped to check, and saw vehicle lights about 100 feet below on the very steep, snow-covered hillside. Emergency crews were dispatched and found a critically injured 71-year-old man inside. He was suffering from major chest trauma, including a tension pneumothorax. The man was stabilized, extricated from the vehicle, and raised in a litter to the road. More than 20 people, an engine company, two rescue trucks and a paramedic ambulance were involved in the rescue. The victim was taken by ambulance to the park clinic, then flown to Modesto, where he is currently recovering from his injuries. The accident evidently occurred because the man fell asleep at the wheel. [John Stobinski, IC, YOSE, 2/27] Thursday, May 7, 1998 98-189 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Disturbed Person On April 16th, park dispatch received a call from the Madera County Sheriff's Office reporting that a doctor in the town of Oakhurst had advised them that a patient of his in Wawona was threatening to kill himself. The patient, J.M., was demanding stronger drugs for his chronic pain or he would shoot himself. J.M. told his doctor that he was barricaded inside his Wawona residence and that he had a handgun pointed at his head. The doctor heard a gunshot, then the line went silent. The doctor hung up and reported the incident to the sheriff's office. Park dispatch contacted criminal investigator Fred Elchlepp, who is a trained crisis negotiator. With assistance from the phone company, Elchlepp was able to re-establish contact with J.M.. J.M. told Elchlepp that he was so tired of living with the severe chronic pain that he wanted to kill himself. He said that he had been holding the gun to his head for about two hours, and admitted to firing the weapon into his front lawn when he was talking with his doctor. Elchlepp was able to convince J.M. that he would get him help if he would unload his gun, lay it on the floor, and come out of the house with his hands up when the rangers arrived. J.M. did so and was taken into custody without incident by Wawona rangers. He was then transported to a medical facility. Charges of negligent discharge of a firearm are pending. [Dan Horner, YOSE, 5/6] Thursday, May 7, 1998 98-190 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Structural Fire Yosemite and Mariposa County fire crews were dispatched to a structural fire at the park's El Portal administrative site at 2:24 a.m. on April 14th. The fire was in a privately-owned, single-family residence. The fire had burned about 80% of the structure by the time the park crew arrived a few minutes later and was controlled within an hour. Although the building was a total loss, firefighters were able to salvage some significant property from the residence. The owner reported that the fire had already burned through the house's roof at the time of discovery. A total of 26 people and three engines were committed to the suppression of the fire. The cause was determined to have been a laundry dryer vent. The owner had turned the dryer on after returning home from work around 1:30 a.m. This was the second structural fire in a three-week period for park fire crews. On March 25th, firefighters responded to another residential fire, which was contained to a single bedroom. The fire was caused by a mattress that had been pushed up against an electric wall heater. Damage to the NPS residence was estimated at $5,000. [Darin Mills, FMO, South District, YOSE, 5/5] Wednesday, May 13, 1998 98-200 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On May 11th, rangers received a report of an injured climber who was 1,200 feet up the Royal Arches route in Yosemite Valley. Nine members of the Valley SAR team ascended the route to the climber, who had taken a sliding, 70-foot leader fall, struck a ledge, and severely shattered his left ankle. He was stabilized by a team paramedic, placed in a litter and lowered to the ground during a six-hour operation that took place in wind, rain and very cold temperatures. The victim was taken by ambulance to the park clinic, then transferred to a hospital in Modesto for surgery. [Evan Jones, IC, YOSE, 5/12] Wednesday, May 20, 1998 98-214 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Bus Fire On May 15th, a tour bus carrying 31 students and teachers from Newport Beach caught fire and burned on the Wawona highway. The bus was fully engulfed in flame when park units arrived and was a total loss. None of the passengers was injured, but the driver was treated for smoke inhalation at the scene and released. The cause of the fire is still under investigation. The park response included two engines, a water tender, a paramedic ambulance, and five ranger units. [Kevin McMillan, IC, YOSE, 5/19] Thursday, May 28, 1998 98-226 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search in Progress Search and rescue teams are attempting to locate 28-year-old D.M. of San Francisco, who has been missing since Monday, May 25th. D.M. began a solo, 17-mile round-trip hike to Half Dome at 5:30 a.m. that morning and intended to return by 2 p.m. He was dressed only in cotton pants, a sweatshirt and running shoes and was carrying a fanny pack. Two helicopters, six dog teams and 22 ground teams are involved in the search, which is centered on Little Yosemite Valley. A California Highway Patrol helicopter with infra-red equipment conducted an extensive aerial search yesterday morning, but failed to turn up any new leads. Search efforts are to be stepped up this morning. The park is experiencing unusually cool weather. Light snow fell as low as 4,000 feet on Monday, and lows in the 20s are forecast above 5,000 feet. Several agencies are assisting in the search. [Kendell Thompson, PIO, YOSE, 5/27] Friday, May 29, 1998 98-226 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Search in Progress Searchers have found tracks which could be those of D.M., who has been missing since Monday. A half dozen tracks were discovered yesterday afternoon which match the tread of the shoes he was wearing when he began a solo hike to Half Dome. Investigators are now working to determine if the tracks were made during the time D.M. is believed to have been hiking in the area. This is the strongest lead that has developed since an earlier report that D.M. was seen on the trail on Monday morning. Searchers have already covered at least three-quarters of three search areas and smaller percentages of the remaining search areas. Search managers are planning to continue full-scale efforts today despite rain, lightning, and the threat of snow. Two dozen members of the search team spent last night in Little Yosemite Valley. Nearly 250 people are currently assigned to the operation, including 100 ground searchers and 15 dog teams. Four helicopters are being used. [Christine Cowles, IO, YOSE, 5/28] Monday, June 1, 1998 98-226 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Search in Progress The search for D.M., 28, which has been underway since May 25th, was scaled back over the weekend due to lack of clues. As of Friday, plans were to shift from the large-scale search to a smaller, more technical and focused effort. The park planned on employing investigators, two dog teams, and a dozen searchers with technical climbing and rappelling experience to look for D.M. on Saturday and to augment them with periodic aerial surveys, ranger foot patrols, and an on-going visitor awareness program. At its peak, the search involved 250 people, 15 dog teams, and four helicopters. The park extends its thanks for the concerted efforts made by more than a dozen other federal, state and local agencies and numerous volunteers. D.M.'s family and friends would also like to thank all involved for their time, energy, and selfless attempts to find him. [Christine Cowles, IO, YOSE, 5/29] Wednesday, June 17, 1998 98-290 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Road Closures, Partial Campground Evacuation Heavy spring runoff forced the closure of two of the three roads leading in and out of Yosemite Valley on the evening of Monday, June 15th. High water from melting snow undercut a section of road a quarter mile east of the junction of Highways 140 and 120, an area which had been temporarily repaired after being severely damaged during the severe flooding of January, 1997. Until temporary repairs are completed, access to the valley is limited to Highway 41 through the park's south entrance. The park remains open and visitation is expected to continue at normal summer levels despite the inconvenience to visitors and a three hour commute for many park employees. A few visitors have been moved from 42 low-lying campsites in valley campgrounds. [Kendell Thompson, Scott Gediman, PIOs, YOSE, 6/16] Wednesday, June 24, 1998 98-313 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist; Search, MVA with Fatality On the morning of June 18th, El Portal District personnel responded to a report of a vehicle in the Merced River west of the park. The location where the vehicle had left the road and gone into the river was found. Rangers located and interviewed the driver; they determined that the accident had occurred almost five hours earlier, and that passenger W.A. had last been seen crawling out of the passenger side window. He then disappeared into the river, which is currently at flood stage. The county sheriff's office requested assistance from the park; the park responded with two dozen search and support personnel and the park's helicopter. W.A.'s body was found and recovered late that afternoon seven miles downstream from the scene of the accident. The vehicle is submerged somewhere in the Merced River and has not yet been found. The California Highway Patrol is investigating. [Mark Harvey, El Portal Ranger, YOSE, 6/22] Friday, June 26, 1998 98-290 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Closures Emergency repairs to the section of road undermined by high river runoff were completed on Thursday, June 18th. Highways 120 and 140 were accordingly reopened to travel that evening. A section of the El Portal road at the west end of Yosemite Valley and just east of the intersection with Big Oak Flat road was closed on Monday, though, when a 100-foot section was undermined by the Merced River. This same section of roadway was temporarily repaired after being damaged during the January, 1997, flood. FHWA engineers examined the site on Tuesday, and a contractor began stabilizing the river bank, replacing the roadbed and repaving the damaged area that night. Permanent repairs will be made this fall. [Scott Gediman, Al Nash, PIOs, YOSE, 6/22] Thursday, July 2, 1998 97-424 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search for Missing Aircraft On the morning of July 23, 1997, a single-engine 1962 Navion with two men on board disappeared from radar as it crossed the Sierra Nevada range. An extensive search was launched which involved over two dozen Civil Air Patrol aircraft, a park helicopter and an Air Force C-130; although two brief ELT transmissions were detected by the C-130, they could not be plotted. No sign of the aircraft was found. On May 18th, a rancher riding horseback in a remote area southeast of Gabbs, Nevada, found the remains of the Navion. The preliminary report from the NTSB indicates in-flight structural failure. The wreckage was spread over a mile-long path on rolling hills between 5,400 and 5,700 feet. The remains of both the pilot and passenger were found with the wreckage. Firearms and cash were recovered from the plane. [Steve Stockdale, Mather District, YOSE, 7/1] Thursday, July 2, 1998 98-335 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the evening of June 14th, valley rangers received a report of an injured climber on the Selaginella route below the Upper Yosemite Falls trail. A ground team hiked up the trail to the top of the climb; two rangers, one a paramedic, rappelled from the park helicopter to the trail. The medic was lowered to the victim, who has found to have shattered his leg in a 60-foot leader fall. A splint was applied and he was short-hauled in his climbing harness about a half mile to a waiting ambulance, then flown to a hospital in Modesto for surgery. [Brian Smith, IC, YOSE, 6/30] Wednesday, July 8, 1998 98-352 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist; Rescue On June 27th, rangers received a report from an injured skier who said that he and two of his friends had been skiing the Dana couloir when they'd been hit by an avalanche. The couloir is located just outside the park's boundary. Mono County SAR asked for assistance from the park. Ranger Keith Lober was flown to the scene along with several members of the Mono SAR team. They treated and stabilized the two injured skiers, one of whom was critically injured. A helicopter from Fallon Naval Air Station was used to transport him to Mammoth Lakes Hospital; he was listed in stable condition in intensive care at the time of the report. The other victim was flown to a waiting ambulance aboard the park helicopter. Helicopter operations were hampered by altitude, warm temperatures and high winds. The accident was probably caused by a cornice release above the skiers. This year's deep snow pack has allowed backcountry skiing through June. [Martin Ziebell, IC, YOSE, 6/30] Tuesday, July 14, 1998 98-379 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Attempted Suicide; Crisis Negotiation On the morning of June 24th, a man called 911 to report that he was going to commit suicide. The call came from the trailer court in El Portal, which is on the NPS administrative site just outside the park's boundary. Criminal investigator Fred Elchlepp called the residence and was able to contact the man after several attempts. The man said he was very depressed about being unemployed, that he'd attempted to hang himself minutes earlier, and that he was ready to die. Responding El Portal rangers took cover outside the residence, as the man told Elchlepp that he had a shotgun in his house. After several more minutes of negotiations with Elchlepp, the man agreed to surrender to the rangers. He was instructed to walk out onto his front porch and follow the commands of the rangers on scene. He was taken into protective custody without incident. [Dan Horner, YOSE, 7/10] Wednesday, July 15, 1998 98-390 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Fatality A group from the British Royal Air Force was travelling on the Tioga road on July 6th when the driver ran off the road and struck two large trees. The driver and four occupants were seriously injured and were flown to trauma centers in Modesto. The remaining passenger, K.T., a British citizen, was declared dead at the scene. The accident is under investigation by the park's criminal investigations unit. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory CI, YOSE, 7/14] Thursday, July 16, 1998 98-392 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Injuries to YCC Staff On the evening of July 2nd, an NPS Youth Conservation Corps crew was returning to its camp at Crane Flat from a recreational trip to Yosemite Valley when the driver lost control of the eleven-passenger van on a sharp curve on the Big Oak Flat Road. The van spun around, left the road, and rolled over. All eleven occupants were transported by ambulance to the park clinic. Ten suffered minor injuries and were released that evening. One girl was transferred to a hospital in Modesto for observation, then released the next day. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/15] Friday, July 24, 1998 96-613 - Yosemite NP (California) - Follow-up on BASE Jumping Fatality On October 21, 1996, J.C., 42, of Phoenix was killed when he slammed into a cliff while BASE jumping off El Capitan. He was one of several jumpers on El Capitan that day; five others were arrested. Two of the five jumped with him, the other three aided and abetted the jump. Following lengthy pre-trial motions, the five all pleaded guilty to illegal air delivery charges under the terms of a plea agreement. They were sentenced in federal court on July 14th. Each was sentenced to limited supervised probation, fined $2,000, and ordered to contribute to a combined sum of $5,680 to the Yosemite Mountain Safety Fund, which was established to provide support to parkwide SAR activities. [Dan Horner, CI, YOSE, 7/21] Friday, July 24, 1998 98-425 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Special Event The city of San Francisco held a celebration of the 75th anniversary of the O'Shaughnessy Dam at Hetch Hetchy Reservoir on July 11th. Due to protests and unlawful demonstrations that have occurred at past events at the dam and to some intelligence indicating potential civil disobedience, the Pacific West all-risk management team (Fowler) and a special events team (Sullivan) were employed to manage the incident. No incidents were reported. [Dave Lattimore, DR, Mather District, YOSE, 7/16] Friday, July 24, 1998 98-428 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Multiple MVAs There has been a string of motor vehicle accidents in the Mather District since the opening of the Tioga Road for the season. The following were recorded over the 13-day period beginning on July 2nd: o Crane Flat - YCC van, 11 injured and transported (previously reported). o Siesta Lake, Tioga Road - Two vehicles, one serious injury. The operator fell asleep. The passenger is paralyzed from the neck down. o May Lake, Tioga Road - Two injured when the operator fell asleep. Ambulance transport. o Crane Flat - A motor home ran into a government vehicle. No injuries. o Gin Flat, Tioga Road - A vehicle struck a tree - one fatality, five critically injured, three air ambulance helicopters and the park helicopter employed (previously reported). o Yosemite Creek, Tioga Road - Rollover accident, two occupants, both Swiss nationals. Ambulance transport to park clinic. o Crane Flat - Three vehicle MVA, rear-end collision. Speed a factor. No injuries. o Siesta Lake, Tioga Road - Vehicle ran into a rock, total loss. o Yosemite Creek, Tioga Road - Motorcycle struck a deer, two ambulance transports to the park clinic. The driver had a .32 caliber semi- automatic pistol in his pocket. o Crane Flat, Tioga Road - Two vehicle MVA, rear-end collision, one minor injury. o White Wolf, Tioga Road - Solo vehicle accident, two injured and two transported, one with major facial injuries. Operator fell asleep. [Dave Lattimore, DR, Mather District, YOSE, 7/16] Friday, July 24, 1998 98-429 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist; Serious MVA Tuolumne Rangers responded to a single vehicle accident just outside the park's boundary on the afternoon of July 20th. A VW camper with a family of five aboard had left the road and struck a rock face head on, injuring all five. Rangers and Mono County paramedics treated them for injuries ranging from fractures to acute abdominal distress and loss of consciousness. The park helicopter was used to transport a seriously injured juvenile to Mammoth Lakes Hospital. Several agencies were involved in the rescue. [Martin Ziebell, IC, YOSE, 7/21] Friday, August 14, 1998 98-497 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Employee Arrested An off-duty park employee was arrested by local police at his home in Fresno, California, on Friday, July 31st. Park paralegal specialist S.C. was charged with kidnapping and several counts of child molestation by Fresno police. S.C. remains in custody and has been suspended from duty indefinitely. [Robert Andrew, CR, YOSE, 8/13] Tuesday, August 18, 1998 98-510 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search; Drowning On Sunday, August 9th, rangers and SAR team members launched an effort to find a man who had fallen into Yosemite Creek in the inner gorge between upper and lower Yosemite Falls. R.B. was hiking off trail when he slipped and slid about 50 feet on a wet granite slab into the cascading water. Rescuers were flown to the scene in the park's contract helicopter. A major swiftwater rescue effort was begun, which culminated when his body was found underwater about four hours later. [Billie Patrick, IC, YOSE, 8/17] Thursday, September 10, 1998 98-578 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Four young adults camping in the Bridalveil campground became chilled by unseasonable weather on September 6th and decided to move their small charcoal grill inside their tent. Carbon monoxide levels increased inside the tent until one of the occupants recognized the problem and called 911. When ranger Kelly Roche arrived, C.G., 20, had been unconscious for about ten minutes; he began convulsing, vomiting and exhibited an altered level of consciousness. C.G. was given oxygen and taken to the park clinic by paramedic ambulance. He was kept on oxygen for five hours, then released. The remaining three campers also suffered some effects from the monoxide poisoning. [Kevin McMillan, Acting DR, Wawona District, YOSE, 9/9] Wednesday, September 30, 1998 98-624 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Bus Accident with 29 Injuries On September 23rd, two Frontier tour buses traveling together collided at the junction of Big Oak Flat Road and Highway 140 when the first stopped at a stop sign and the second ran into it. The buses carried a total of 86 people, and 29 of them were injured. Twelve were taken by park ambulance to the park's medical clinic and a local hospital; another eleven with lesser injuries were taken to the clinic on a park concessioner tour bus. The remaining six visitors were treated at the scene and released. A total of 30 people, three ambulances, two rescue trucks, two fire engines, and two concessioner tour buses were dispatched to this accident. [Mark Harvey, IC, YOSE, 9/28] Thursday, October 1, 1998 98-497 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Employee Arrest Former park legal officer S.C. was charged with kidnapping and several counts of child molestation by Fresno police on July 31st. He has since pled guilty in state court to four felony counts involving unlawful sex with minors. S.C. filed for retirement in August. There is no information suggesting any criminal activity by S.C. in the park. [Bob Andrew, CR, YOSE, 9/30] Tuesday, October 6, 1998 98-634 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Commercial Vehicle Inspections Staff from the special park uses office and rangers conducted commercial bus inspections in May, July and September this year. They were assisted by California Highway Patrol officers and California Public Utility Commission inspectors. Buses were inspected for mechanical defects and current operating authorities, and drivers were checked for proper endorsements and logbook requirements. The 173 inspections that were conducted led to the issuance of 104 citations to 67 defendants (either corporations or individuals); these included 53 citations for mechanical problems, 13 for logbook violations, 13 for driver or registration violations, and 24 for PUC or ICC violations. One driver was also arrested on a felony warrant. Nineteen buses were taken out of service until mechanical problems were fixed. [Ruth Middlecamp, Office of Special Park Uses, YOSE, 9/30] Friday, November 13, 1998 98-705 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Serious Employee Illness On the afternoon of November 3rd, park employee Don Ramsey was transported by park ambulance to a local hospital for treatment of respiratory difficulties and a high fever due to a pulmonary infection. Later that night, he was transferred by air ambulance to a regional medical center and admitted to the intensive care unit, where he was placed on a ventilator. Although there has been some improvement in his condition, he remains on the ventilator and his condition is still critical. Don has long served in the park as a campground ranger and as a dispatcher at the park's communications center. His family is sure that he would appreciate receiving cards and caring thoughts. They can be sent to him at Modesto Memorial North Hospital, Don Ramsey, c/o ICU #16, 1700 Coffee Road, Modesto, CA 95355-2803. [Mark Harvey, DR, YOSE, 11/12] Thursday, November 19, 1998 98-707 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rockslide; Evacuation A rockslide occurred in Yosemite Valley just after 5 p.m. on the afternoon of Monday, November 16th. The slide originated in the Glacier Point apron directly above Curry Village. About 500 visitors, park employees, and Yosemite Institute students were evacuated from the area, which was immediately closed. No injuries or fatalities were reported, and rangers were able to account for all people who were in the area. A damage assessment was conducted on Tuesday morning. Damage to guest accommodations and concession employee housing was minimal. Most of Curry Village was reopened to visitors and employees later that day, but a section of the village will remain closed until technical experts determine that the area is safe. Media interest in the event was high. [Scott Gediman, Christine Cowles, PIOs, YOSE, 11/18] Thursday, November 19, 1998 98-708 - Grand Canyon (AZ) - Illegal Commercial River Trips Over the past four months, rangers either stopped and/or began prosecution of three illegal commercial river operations: o In July, R.S., N.B. and S.C., all of South Carolina, were prosecuted for permit violations and false statements to federal officers at the time they launched their trip. All three pled guilty, paid $1,000 fines, and have been administratively prohibited from participating in Grand Canyon river trips for three years. o In August, Dr. T.K.W. of New Mexico was charged with permit violations after a licensed outfitter provided information indicating that Wuersching was using a private permit for commercial gain. Prosecution is pending. o In October, the park canceled a trip being led by P.M. when an extended investigation revealed that P.M. and B.O., both of British Columbia, conspired to use P.M.'s private permit for commercial gain. A key piece of evidence in this case was a fax received from Canadian wardens which advertised trip experiences, including "primal music, breath work, and firewalking." The wardens were aware of the problem of illegal river trips following an exchange program between Grand Canyon rangers and Canadian wardens last spring. P.M.'s permit was canceled and he and B.O. have been administratively prohibited from the river for three years. These actions are considered vital to maintaining the integrity of the park's river permit system. [Patrick Hattaway, DR, River District, GRCA, 10/27] Thursday, November 19, 1998 98-709 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search and Rescue R.S., a German national, was reported three days overdue from a three-day backpacking trip in Yosemite on the evening of November 8th. His rental car was found in Yosemite Valley with a note saying that he intended to hike to Sunrise Lakes. By that time, the first winter storm of the season had closed the Tioga Pass Road with over a foot of snow. A large ground search was started immediately. Helicopters were also used to search from the air. Rangers on snowmobiles found R.S. walking on the Tioga Road on the afternoon of November 9th. He was suffering from exhaustion and frostbite in his feet. R.S. was evacuated by helicopter to the hospital at Mammoth Lakes. The search involved 50 people and two helicopters and was about to expand again when R.S. was found. [John Stobinski, IC, YOSE, 11/17] Thursday, November 19, 1998 98-710 - Yosemite (CA) - EMS Incident, Life Saved On the evening of Saturday, October 24th, Wawona rangers and EMS team members responded to a report of a visitor experiencing a severe anaphylactic reaction at the Wawona Hotel. They found a 16-year-old girl collapsed in a stairway in severe respiratory distress. She was turning blue, convulsing, and had a very rapid, weak pulse. Park maintenance employee and registered nurse Brent Hansen administered a shot of epinephrine, and the girl's condition immediately improved. She was transported by park ambulance, then taken to a Fresno hospital. The girl was alert and laughing within 15 minutes of receiving the epinephrine. The cause of her allergic reaction has not been identified, but apparently was from something she'd eaten. [Kevin McMillan, EMS Coordinator, Wawona District, YOSE, 11/3] Tuesday, December 1, 1998 98-729 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Fall; Fatality D.O., a well-known rock climber, fell to his death on the evening of November 23rd while making a free-fall descent from the Leaning Tower in Yosemite Valley. D.O. and others had made about a dozen prior falls from the Leaning Tower over the previous two months. In each case, the 900-foot falls were caught and checked with climbing ropes. On this occasion, however, the rope that was to catch D.O. apparently broke at a knot and he fell 1100 feet to the ground. His body was evacuated via helicopter by rangers and SAR team members the next day. Photographs of D.O. making a 200-foot free-fall from the Rostrum in Yosemite appear in the September issue of "Rock and Ice" magazine. [Mary Hinson, IC, YOSE, 11/25] Tuesday, January 5, 1999 98-779 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Attempted Suicide; Life Saved On Christmas day, park dispatch received a request from an off-duty park employee for a "welfare check" of his potentially suicidal son. The father was returning to his residence from a trip out of town and had received information that his son was extremely upset, had a knife, and was threatening suicide. Rangers Keith Lober, Gordon Gilbert and David Hajdik responded, found the interior of the residence destroyed, and made an exigent circumstances entry to locate the potentially suicidal youth. Lober found the boy in a bathroom; the boy brandished a large butcher knife and attempted to incite Lober, pleading for the three rangers to shoot him. The rangers were able to disengage and called for additional backup. Attempts to use pepper spray to subdue the boy proved ineffective. A perimeter was established around the house and a crisis negotiator was requested. The boy advanced on the rangers three times while they were holding the perimeter, each time attempting to provoke them to shoot him. He continued to wander through the inside of the house, waving the knife and slashing at his wrists, then appeared at the backdoor. Ranger Jim Tucker and special agent Scott Hinson, who had dealt with the boy before in a similar situation and knew him personally, talked to him there and tried to get him to drop the knife. The boy instead went back into the house and resumed brandishing the knife and slashing at his wrists. He was eventually contained in one part of the house, where a CS tear gas grenade was employed in an effort to incapacitate him so that he could be taken into custody. The boy began climbing out of the bathroom window within a minute after the gas began dispersing. The boy's father and Tucker asked him to drop the knife, which he did. He was taken into custody and brought to a standby ambulance, where he received medical evaluation and treatment. He was then transported to the park's medical clinic, where he was detained on a mental health evaluation hold. Charges have also been presented to the county district attorney for brandishing a deadly weapon at peace officers in order to resist arrest or detention. The boy suffered only minor self-inflicted knife wounds and the transient effects of exposure to CS gas; he will likely be committed to the care of a long-term, in-patient psychiatric facility. Several park rangers and an ambulance medic also sustained varying degrees of transient exposure to CS tear gas. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 1/3] Friday, February 5, 1999 98-705 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Serious Employee Illness On the afternoon of November 3, 1998, park employee Don Ramsey was admitted to an intensive care unit and placed on a ventilator for treatment of a serious pulmonary infection. Although critically ill for a long period of time, Don made continued progress and was finally released from the hospital on January 8th. He continues to improve at home and hopes to return to work within the next several months. He deeply appreciates the outpouring of cards, letters and good wishes sent to him by friends and members of the NPS family. You can write to him at his parent's home, where he's currently staying: 4004 Vista Court, La Crescenta, CA 91214. [Mark Harvey, DR, YOSE, 2/3] Friday, February 5, 1999 99-31 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Bus MVA with Multiple Injuries An Ernie's Tours bus was eastbound on the Big Oak Flat Road on January 23rd when it rounded a curve on a downhill grade and came upon a stationary vehicle partially blocking the roadway. It was snowing heavily at the time, and the driver of the stopped vehicle was installing chains. The bus driver locked his brakes while attempting to avoid the vehicle; the bus went off the road, down a steep embankment, rolled, and came to rest on its side against a tree approximately 70 feet below the roadway. Rangers, firefighters and maintenance employees mounted a parkwide response. Seven of the 18 passengers were injured and required ambulance transport. Three other passengers, who initially denied being injured, were treated later that day. Most of the passengers were from Indonesia and had to delay their return home for several days because luggage and passports were inaccessible. Removal of the bus was impeded by continuing snowstorms. The road therefore had to be closed for two nights. [John Roth, ACR, YOSE, 2/4] Friday, February 5, 1999 99-32 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Multiple Injuries On Monday, January 18th, the driver of a van traveling westbound on the Big Oak Flat Road lost control of his vehicle in a snow and rain storm. The vehicle went over a steep embankment, rolled several times, and hit a tree nearly 100 feet below the road. All seven occupants of the van were injured in varying degrees. Rangers and firefighters responded, rescued and evacuated all the patients to hospitals in Sonora and Modesto. Weather conditions and language difficulties with the Korean patients complicated the incident. [John Roth, ACR, YOSE, 2/4] Friday, February 5, 1999 99-33 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Apparent Suicide Maintenance employees in the Hodgdon Meadow campground heard a gunshot shortly after noon on Saturday, January 30th, and discovered a man slumped over in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked in a campsite. Rangers responded and found the victim dead, with massive chest trauma from a gunshot wound. A .243 rifle was resting between his legs. The motive for the apparent suicide has not yet been determined. The name of the victim will be withheld pending further investigation and notification of his family. He is thought to be a fugitive from Florida; the car in which he was found was stolen. [John Roth, ACR, YOSE, 2/4] Monday, February 22, 1999 99-52 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the afternoon of February 6th, rangers received a report of yells for help coming from the top of Lower Yosemite Falls. Temperatures were in the lower 30s at the time, and a winter storm was just beginning. A rescue team rappelled from the Yosemite Falls trail to the victim's location. M.G., 18, of Crockett, California, was cold, soaked, and suffering from injuries to his head, legs and arms. M.G. and other students from a high school science club had wandered off the Upper Falls trail into the inner gorge, an area of ice and wet, slick granite and the scene of numerous accidents and rescues in the past. M.G. had become separated from the group, then fallen about 25 feet. He made his way to the top of the Lower Falls and began shouting for help. M.G. was lowered by litter about 300 feet to the base of the Lower Falls in the dark. He was then evacuated in an hour-long technical carryout through boulders to the road, arriving there at 10:30 p.m. The 25 rescuers included rangers, NPS firefighters, rescue team volunteers, and a registered nurse from the park's clinic. [Dave Hajdik, IC, YOSE, 2/19] Friday, February 26, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search in Progress Three women visiting the park have been missing since Tuesday, February 16th. C.S., 42, and her daughter, J.S., 15, both from Eureka, California, and 16-year-old S.P., a family friend from Argentina, stayed in a motel in El Portal on the park's boundary on the night of February 15th. It's believed that they were in the park or surrounding area over the next several days. Rangers began searching for them last week. The FBI has joined the effort, and is now serving as the lead agency in a unified command. Also participating are representatives from the Forest Service, Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, Tuolumne County Sheriff's Office, California Office of Emergency Services, and the California Highway Patrol. Searchers are currently focusing on roads inside and adjacent to the park. Media interest in the on-going search is extremely high. [Scott Gediman, PIO, and John Roth, ACR, YOSE, 2/25] Monday, March 1, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The search for C.S., 42, her daughter, J.S., 15, and family friend S.P., 16, who have now been missing for almost two weeks, is currently focusing on locations outside the park. A thorough search of the Route 120 corridor and other primary search areas concluded on Friday following ten days of effort. Eleven teams with 115 searchers and three helicopters were deployed, but no signs of the three women were found. The search operation was accordingly terminated. C.S.'s wallet was found in Modesto last week, so the FBI's efforts are now concentrated in that area. Media attention remains very high; there were over two dozen satellite transmission trucks in and around the park last week. The S.s are a wealthy California family and have offered a $250,000 reward for any tips or information. C.S. was driving a rented 1999 red Pontiac Grand Prix, California license. She is 5'3" and weighs about 170 pounds; the girls are about the same height, but weigh between 115 and 130 pounds. The FBI contact number is 1-800-435-7883. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 2/26; The Fresno Bee, 2/28] Wednesday, March 3, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The search for C.S. and J.S. and family friend S.P. continues. The incident command post for the search has been moved to Modesto, and the focus of the case has shifted from search to investigation. Yosemite NP investigators continue to work with the FBI and other agencies on the case. Rangers continue to search for the vehicle and the missing women during their regular patrols. Media interest remains high. During the search in the park, searchers checked out over 100 miles of road, logged 25 hours of helicopter flight time, and covered the entire area from the Tuolumne River south to the Highway 41 corridor. [Scott Gediman, PIO, and John Roth, ACR, YOSE, 3/1] Monday, March 15, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The search for C.S. and J.S. and family friend S.P., now in its fourth week, continues, and is now focusing on the Cedar Lodge area, which is about three miles west of El Portal on Highway 140 - outside of both the park and the El Portal administrative area. FBI agents and county deputies, however, have searched the Trailer Village area and around the El Portal Chevron station, which are on park lands. The night janitor at the lodge was arrested, but on charges of parole violations rather than for any actions associated with the missing women. Park staff are not involved in the search or the investigation. According to FBI agent James Maddock, cited in Saturday's Fresno Bee, the FBI has concluded that the three were victims of a violent crime at or near Cedar Lodge on the night of February 15th or early on the 16th and that there is a high probability that they are dead. Maddock said that the search and investigation will probably "go on for a long, long time." [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSe; Michael Baker and Pablo Lopez, The Fresno Bee, 3/13] Thursday, March 18, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The search for C.S. and J.S. and family friend S.P. continues. On Monday, the FBI asked park staff to conduct another search in Yosemite, since the weather has warmed up and a significant amount of snow has melted since the last major search (February 24th to the 26th). An initial effort on Tuesday was scratched due to heavy fog, but good weather yesterday permitted resumption of the search. A contract helicopter crew worked with about ten SAR team members to comb the Highway 120 and Highway 41 corridors and target specific areas where a car could have gone off the road. They found nothing. The ground search will be expanded to two teams today, one on each of the highway corridors. Although the FBI is focusing on the possibility of a violent crime, an accident on a park or nearby road has not been ruled out. Media interest in the search remains high. A park spokesman appeared with an FBI agent and family members on the Larry King show on Tuesday; a segment on the search is tentatively scheduled to air on Saturday night on "America's Most Wanted." [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/17] Friday, March 19, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The search for C.S. and J.S. and family friend Silvina Pelosso continues. The burned-out hulk of the red 1999 Pontiac Grand Prix rented by C.S. was found yesterday afternoon off Highway 108 near the community of Long Barn about 50 miles from El Portal. No bodies were found in or near the car. The community is north of the park's northern boundary. FBI special agent James Maddock is quoted on the status of the investigation in an article in today's San Francisco Chronicle: "Search efforts are under way in the area where the car was recovered. Most likely the car was placed there by someone who knew the area. It was well-hidden in a very rugged area. I believe this is conclusive evidence of a violent crime - they were either abducted or carjacked. This is not an area someone stumbles on." According to the Chronicle, the area where the car was found is near an old logging road, often blocked by a chain, that is frequently used by people who drive down it and toss out old appliances and garbage in "an informal dump." A report in today's Modesto Bee states that an attendant at a gas station a mile from the point where the car was found sold gas to S. on February 15th and talked briefly with Pelosso. [San Francisco Chronicle and Modesto Bee, both via Dennis Burnett, RAD/WASO, 3/19] Monday, March 22, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search in Progress The investigation into the disappearance of C.S. and J.S. and family friend S.P. continues. Two bodies were found last Friday in the trunk of their burned out rental car, which was discovered the previous day off Highway 108 near the community of Long Barn about 50 miles from El Portal. Neither victim has yet been identified. Park staff are not currently involved in either the investigation or search, both of which are continuing in areas near the park. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/21] Wednesday, March 24, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search, Investigation At a press conference on Monday afternoon, the FBI and Tuolumne County Sheriff's Office announced that one of the bodies found in the truck of the burned rental car is that of C.S. The FBI did not release the identity of the other victim, pending DNA testing. The focus of investigative efforts continues to be the area northwest of the park in the Stanislaus National Forest. Park staff are not currently involved in the investigative efforts. Some media reports are inaccurately indicating that the deaths occurred in the park. The location and circumstances of the murders are not yet known. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/23] Tuesday, March 30, 1999 99-57 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search, Investigation On Friday, March 26th, the FBI held a press conference and announced that the body found the day before near Lake Don Pedro (a reservoir northwest of the park) is that of J.S., daughter of C.S. It was also announced that there is an extremely high probability that the other body found in the burned-out rental car was that of Silvina Pelosso. The investigation continues, but park staff are not involved. Although there are still no indications that the murders or any other aspect of the incident occurred in the park, media interest in safety and crime rates in the parks in general and Yosemite in particular remains high. The parks' PIO has done over 20 interviews recently on whether or not it is safe to visit Yosemite. MSNBC will be in the park today to film a story on the same subject. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/29] Tuesday, April 20, 1999 99-128 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Employee Injuries There was a car accident in the park involving two park trail crew employees and an employee of the Pacific West Region on the evening of April 15th. C.R., a member of the trail crew, and M.L., the regional human resources officer, sustained serious injuries; A.C., the other trail crew member, received less serious injuries. Cards can be sent to M.L. She asks that people send donations to their favorite charity in lieu of flowers. Cards to C.R. should be sent in care of his parents. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 4/19] Friday, April 23, 1999 99-134 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist: Rescue Around 9:30 p.m. on the evening of April 19th, a car driven by K.H. skidded off Highway 140 about six miles west of the park and ended up in the Merced River. It quickly filled with water and settled onto a rock about 30 feet from shore. K.H. got out of the car through the T-roof and stood on a small area of the trunk which was still above water. Unfortunately, the vehicle was not visible from the highway. K.H. stood on the car for 45 minutes until a passing motorist who had stopped to heed nature's call heard K.H. yelling for help and reported the accident. The county sheriff's office requested assistance from the park. A rescue truck, fire engine, and ambulance responded from El Portal and were first on scene. Lighting was set up and rescue swimmers and rescuers with throw bags were posted downstream. An aerial ladder truck from the county fire department eventually arrived on scene. A rescue harness was lowered from the extended ladder and K.H. was lifted from the car and brought to shore. She was treated for hypothermia and released later that night. [Mark Harvey, Ops Chief, El Portal, YOSE, 4/21] Monday, April 26, 1999 99-136 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rock Slide with Visitor Injuries Three hikers on Upper Yosemite Falls trail suffered minor injuries when several refrigerator-sized rocks dislodged from the cliff about 400 feet above them on the afternoon of April 21st. Two received cuts to their arms; the third received a head laceration from flying debris. Three rangers were sent up the trail to assist the injured and look for other casualties. A trail block was set up below the slide while the injured were assisted down the trail to an ambulance. A park trail crew that had been working about two miles below the slide was sent to assess the damage and look for hikers stranded above the slide. A helicopter flight was also made to assess the stability of the release zone. The trail was significantly damaged, and the area was found to be unsafe for hikers to pass through. Twenty-two hikers were trapped above the slide. They were moved to a landing zone above Yosemite Falls and evacuated by two helicopters. The trail will remain closed indefinitely while it is further assessed. [John Stobinski, IC, YOSE, 4/23] Wednesday, June 9, 1999 99-250 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Structural Fire Park dispatch received a 911 call reporting a structure fire in the El Portal trailer village just after 10 p.m. on June 5th. Fire crews were on scene within five minutes and found a double-wide mobile home engulfed in flames. NPS crews from El Portal and Yosemite Valley and firefighters from Mariposa County worked the fire for several hours. The mobile home, which was owned by the park concessioner, was a total loss. Additional damage was limited to a single vehicle. The occupants got out safely and there were no injuries to firefighters. Preliminary investigation indicates that the fire was caused by a halogen lamp. [Deron Mills, FMO, South District, YOSE, 6/7] Wednesday, June 9, 1999 99-252 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search During the evening of May 29th, C.N., 23, became separated from his hiking party near the top of El Capitan. His companions reported him overdue around 10:30 the next morning. A search employing about 30 searchers, two helicopters and a dog team was begun. C.N. was spotted from a helicopter clinging to a ledge in a precarious location in the Ribbon Falls area late the following afternoon. Rangers Keith Lober and Mary Hinson heli-rappelled to C.N. just before nightfall and got him into a more stable situation. They found that C.N. had fallen approximately 15 feet while attempting to descend from the valley rim earlier in the day and was suffering from head, shoulder and wrist injuries in addition to being cold and wet. Lober and Hinson cared for him through the night and rigged him for a helicopter short-haul in the morning. C.N. was treated at the Yosemite Medical Clinic and released later that day. [Jana Pederson, IC, YOSE, 6/8] Monday, June 14, 1999 99-259 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Attempted Homicide Visitor C.R., 34, of Santa Monica, stabbed her male companion in the back while he slept in their cabin at Housekeeping Camp during the early morning hours of June 4th. C.R. and her companion were on vacation with family members at the time. She waited until he fell asleep, then went to her relatives' nearby cabin and asked for a large knife. They asked C.R. why she wanted the knife; she said she was going to kill her companion. Although the relatives did not take the threat seriously, they would not give her the knife. C.R. then went back to her cabin, got a kitchen knife with a five-inch blade, went into the bedroom, moved the blankets from his back, and stabbed him. C.R. left the knife in place, ran out of the cabin, and asked a man who was on his way to the restroom to help her because she had just killed someone. He accompanied C.R. to a nearby pay phone, where she called 911 and told the park dispatcher that she had just killed her friend. C.R. remained on the telephone until the first ranger arrived on scene and took her into custody. The victim was transported to the clinic, then taken to the park helibase and flown to the hospital in Modesto. The stab wound luckily missed his spine by about an inch, and he was released from hospital the next day. C.R. remains in custody pending a detention hearing and is charged with 18 USC 1113, attempt to commit murder. The U.S. attorney intends to seek a grand jury indictment. [Scott Hinson, CI, YOSE, 6/10] Monday, June 14, 1999 99-260 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Park dispatch received a report of possible overdue climbers in need of a rescue at 7 a.m. on June 3rd. L.A. and J.D. were attempting the Regular Route on the Northwest Face of Half Dome when they were caught in a winter storm, causing them to be one day overdue. The reporting party said that the two men had no sleeping bags, had never climbed a big wall, and had never climbed with each other before. While the park receives reports of overdue climbers every day, this one was of special concern due to the current weather conditions, their lack of experience and their lack of equipment. It appeared that L.A. and J.D. were near the top of the route and unable to complete the climb due to the winter storm conditions. A size- up team was unable to locate them from the ground due to low clouds in the area. Helicopter 551 was ordered for an air search of the face. The climbers were located one pitch from the top; both were signaling for a rescue. A technical team, headed by ranger Keith Lober, was flown to the top of Half Dome as soon as visibility permitted. Rescuer Jeff Follett was lowered to the climbers, who were literally frozen to the wall. Both were suffering from hypothermia and mild frost nip to their hands and feet. Once they were freed from the wall, they were able to ascend the ropes to the top of Half Dome with the assistance of the technical team. Due to the lack of visibility, the climbers had to hike down to the shoulder of Half Dome, where they were evacuated by helicopter to the Valley floor. They were both treated and released by on-scene physician Dr. Desmond Kidd. [Mary Hinson, IC, 6/11] Monday, June 14, 1999 99-261 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the morning of June 4th, dispatch received a report of a climber who had taken a fall on El Capitan. The climber, R.S., was reported to be in serious condition, with possible injuries to his head and spine. Rescuers Werner and Merry Braun ascended 600 feet up fixed lines to Sickle ledge, R.S. sitting. He had taken a 60-foot leader fall while attempting the pitch above Sickle Ledge. R.S., who was wearing a helmet, fell upside down, hitting his head as well as both sides of his body. He complained of pain to his neck and shoulders. Rangers Mary Hinson and John Dill heli- rapelled to Sickle Ledge and prepared R.S. for a short-haul evacuation. R.S. was flown to El Capitan meadow, where he was met by an ambulance and transported to the park clinic. He was treated for bi-lateral anterior dislocated shoulders and released. [Grady Bryant, IC, 6/11] Monday, June 14, 1999 9-265 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Sex Offender Arrested Criminal investigators learned in early June that P.H., 50, a newly hired concession employee, was a convicted sex offender who is required by California law to register with authorities wherever he resides. When he moved into the park, he failed to register with the county sheriff. P.H. was arrested and charged with failure to register. The case has been referred to the county district attorney; if that office prosecutes, the federal charges will be dismissed. [Scott Hinson, CI, YOSE, 6/10] Tuesday, June 15, 1999 99-266 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rockslide with Fatality, Injuries, Evacuation At 7:35 p.m. on Sunday, June 13th, a rockslide occurred above Curry Village in Yosemite Valley. The release point was on the Glacier Point Apron, approximately 2,000 feet above the valley. Three visitors from Gunnison, Colorado were climbing the Apron Jam route in the direct path of the rockslide. P.T., 22, was killed by falling rocks; his two climbing companions and a bystander received minor injuries. After the slide, 1,363 guests and Yosemite Concession Services employees were evacuated from their tent cabins. All but 155 concession employees were allowed to return to their cabins later in the evening. Park personnel spent the day assessing the area from the ground and by helicopter. A USGS geologist is coming to the park to further evaluate the rockslide. Media interest in the incident has been very high. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 6/14] Tuesday, June 15, 1999 99-267 - Yosemite NP (CA) - BASE Jump; Search At first light on June 9th, a man jumped from El Capitan and parachuted to the floor of Yosemite Valley, landing in El Capitan Meadow. Rangers John Stobinski and Tom Schwartz saw the jump. As the jumper was disconnecting his harness, they identified themselves and ordered him to stop. He looked at the rangers, smiled and fled. The rangers gave chase for approximately 500 yards until the jumper entered the Merced River, swollen by spring run-off. He was swept downstream and was not seen again by the rangers. A search of a two-mile stretch of the Class 3 Merced River was conducted utilizing the park's contract helicopter and ten swiftwater-trained rescuers. The jumper was not located, and it's not certain if he got out of the river. Evidence indicates that he was an experienced and professional BASE jumper named F.G. F.G. is reported by close friends as reliable and punctual; he was expected home in Lake Tahoe on the evening of June 9th and had a job appointment the following morning. He didn't make either of these appointments, and, as far as investigators have been able to determine, has not called any friends or relatives. The search continued on June 10th. F.G.'s vehicle was found parked near a trailhead that leads to the top of El Capitan. No further sign of him has yet been found. [Scott Hinson, YOSE, 6/12] Thursday, June 17, 1999 99-266 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Rockslide A small slide occurred late Tuesday night in the same area as Sunday's rock slide. There were no evacuations, but some guests reported being startled by the sound of crashing rocks. A USGS geologist who has been studying Yosemite rockslides for the past 20 years joined park staff in assessing the probability of further slides. He reported that there were significant new fractures on the wall Wednesday that hadn't been there during an assessment made the previous day. The biggest was about 30 feet long and several inches wide. He advised that this portion of the cliff could fill within a day or two. Based on his recommendation, the park decided to keep the employee area closed (it houses about 150 YCS employees in 75 tent cabins) and to close another 75 guest cabins. The park has gone into a full ICS mode, with about 75 people brought in from other agencies. Current plans are to maintain the closures and monitor the rock wall. Although media attention has waned a bit since Sunday, the park has had between 600 and 700 press calls and contacts over the past few days and three press conferences with 20 to 25 cameras at each. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 6/16] Monday, June 28, 1999 99-307 - Yosemite NP (CA)- Rape On June 24th, 1999, Valley rangers and special agents responded to the Yosemite Medical Clinic to investigate a reported sexual assault. The victim, a 14-year-old girl, was interviewed and was able to identify both the suspect and the crime scene. Corroborating evidence was subsequently collected. The suspect was questioned by agents and confessed to having sex with the victim. He was identified as H.B., a 36-year-old resident of Fremont, California. H.B. was arrested and booked into the Yosemite jail on charges of aggravated sexual abuse with children (18 USC 2241(c)), a crime which carries a life sentence. The U.S. attorney plans to seek an indictment from a federal grand jury. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 6/25] Monday, July 19, 1999 99-382 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Falling Fatality On the afternoon of Saturday, July 7th, S.P., 31, a park visitor from Diamond Bar, California, died when he slid into the rapid current of the Merced River while soaking his feet near the top of 600-foot Nevada Falls and was swept over the edge. Witnesses saw S.P. go over the brink of the falls and were able to point out the location where he landed. Rangers recovered his body from that location a few hours later. [Jana Pederson, PR, Valley District, YOSE, 7/16] Monday, August 2, 1999 99-398 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Tent Cabin Fire Fire personnel and rangers responded to a tent fire at Tuolumne Meadows at 10:45 p.m. on July 9th. When they arrived, they found that local residents had put out the fire with an extinguisher, but that the concession employee who resided there had suffered first and second degree burns to his face and hands. He was taken by ambulance to the hospital in Mammoth Lakes. The fire occurred when he attempted to light a propane lantern inside the tent cabin and it caught fire. The lantern was knocked over, spreading fire to the tent fly and contents. The resident escaped by making a hole in the rear corner of the tent, as the door was blocked by fire. Damage to the tent and its contents is estimated at $2,0000. [Deron Mills, FMO, YOSE, 7/19] Tuesday, August 3, 1999 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Murder; Follow-up on Triple Homicide On the morning of Thursday, July 22nd, park dispatch received a missing person report on J.R.A. J.R.A., an employee of the Yosemite Institute, a non-profit environmental education organization that operates under a cooperative agreement with the NPS, had been planning to drive to the Bay Area the previous evening. Rangers checked her residence in Foresta and found her truck partly packed for the trip. The house was wide open and no one was around. A search of the area was begun and the area around the house was cordoned-off as a potential crime scene. A ranger/tracker was called in and was able to determine from track evidence that J.R.A. might have gotten into a vehicle with another person. The FBI was notified of the possibility of a kidnapping and an agent was sent from Fresno. In the early afternoon, a search team found J.R.A.'s beheaded body hidden in a small creek several hundred feet from her house. Before the arrival of the FBI, NPS agents identified several leads and started working on them; they also asked the FBI evidence recovery team from Sacramento to process the large crime scene. About 15 FBI agents were assigned to the case. They teamed up with NPS agents and began working leads in the evening. One lead from an NPS employee placed a distinctive vehicle in the Foresta area the previous night around the time of the murder. A lookout was broadcast for the vehicle, and it was subsequently found outside the park in Mariposa County. Rangers and deputies contacted the driver, C.S., and agents from the NPS and FBI jointly interviewed him later that night in the park. C.S. denied ever being in the Foresta area, and, with no good cause to hold him, he was released. The next morning, C.S. failed to show up for work and could not be located. Physical evidence was later identified which tied C.S. to the crime scene. An FBI press briefing stating that C.S. was now being sought for questioning regarding J.R.A.'s murder went out on Friday, July 23rd. C.S. was located on Saturday morning at a nudist resort near Sacramento after citizens who saw press coverage reported him. C.S. was detained for questioning by agents from the Sacramento FBI office, and during questioning admitted to the murder of J.R.A. and to the murders of Carole and Juliana Sund and Silvina Pelosso last February. A criminal complaint charging C.S. with first degree murder in the territorial jurisdiction of the United States (a capital offense) has been filed in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. He is currently awaiting indictment. It is likely that state charges will be filed in the S./P. case. Media coverage of the case has been extensive. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 8/2] Thursday, August 5, 1999 99-421 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Drowning S.M., a resident of Mexico, drowned while swimming in the Merced River at the west end of Yosemite Valley during the early afternoon hours of August 4th. S.M. was swept under a large boulder in a series of short rapids; searchers found his body in a hole approximately ten feet deep. Because of the family's religion and the need to tend to the body within a very short period of time, rangers made a concerted and exceptional effort to recover the body from the swift and dangerous current. Rangers, fire crew members and SAR volunteers diverted a portion of the main river channel by using 16-foot-long four-by-four posts, plywood and ingenuity, thereby lowering the water level enough to enable a safe body recovery. [Bob Andrew, CR, YOSE, 8/4] Wednesday, August 11, 1999 98-497 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Employee Arrest Park legal officer S.C. was charged with kidnapping and several counts of child molestation by Fresno police on July 31, 1998, and subsequently pled guilty in state court to four felony counts involving unlawful sex with minors. He was sentenced on July 9 to 16 months in state prison, but was released shortly thereafter because he had already spent almost a year behind bars and had credits for good behavior. He must register as a sex offender for the rest of his life and report to the state parole office. None of the crimes took place in the park. [Fresno Bee, submitted by Public Affairs, YOSE, 7/12] Thursday, August 19, 1999 99-480 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search in Progress A vehicle associated with a reported missing person was found parked along the Tioga Road in Tuolumne Meadows on August 10th. M.R. had been reported missing from San Jose on July 6th and is believed to have entered the park on July 7th. There are indications that the vehicle has been parked in Tuolumne Meadows since at least July 15th. M.R. is a former Yosemite concessions employee and has been diagnosed with a mental disorder. A limited search has been conducted in both the frontcountry and backcountry areas of the district. M.R. has not been located, and an investigation is now underway. [Maura Longden, IC, YOSE, 8/18] Thursday, August 19, 1999 99-486 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Drowning On August 13th, J.T., 24, drowned in a backcountry lake in the Tuolumne Meadows District. J.T. had packpacked to Polly Dome Lakes with family members and had gone for an evening swim with his 13-year-old nephew. The two were attempting to swim to a rock island when J.T. apparently became exhausted and unable to swim further. J.T.'s brother-in-law and another camper quickly swam to J.T. and pulled him to shore. They began CPR and continued it while the nephew and 11-year-old son of the camper helping with CPR ran three miles to summon help. Park medic Loren Fazio, RN Marty Fazio and a rescue team were flown to the scene, by which time CPR had been in progress for two hours. Advance life support resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful. [Rich Baerwald, IC, YOSE, 8/18] Thursday, September 23, 1999 99-574 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Arson A fire was reported on August 31st around 3:30 p.m. near the base of Washington's Column in Yosemite Valley. Ranger Mary Hinson quickly hiked to the fire, which was located on a rocky talus slope in live oaks. She detained R.M., who was running from the area. When Hinson questioned him about what he was doing in the area, he gave evasive answers and a false name. Hinson arrested him for giving false information and walked him out of the area. The fire was suppressed using helicopter water drops at a cost of $2,700. R.M. was interviewed in custody, but maintained that he had nothing to do with the fire, even though he had 30 cigarette lighters in his vehicle. Special agents investigated the fire and found evidence which tied R.M. to other small fires in the area, all of which had gone out. The U.S. attorney's office declined to prosecute felony arson charges. On September 21st, R.M. pled no contest to setting illegal fires (36 CFR 2.13) in magistrate's court. A probation investigation has been ordered, and restitution for the cost of suppression will be sought as part of sentencing. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 9/22] Tuesday, October 26, 1999 99-617 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Demonstration; BASE Jumping Fatality On Friday, October 22nd, J.D., 60, died while attempting a BASE jump from El Capitan in Yosemite Valley. J.D.'s jump was part of an organized act of civil disobedience protesting the NPS air delivery regulations (36 CFR 2.17(a)), which make BASE jumping illegal in national park areas without a permit. The demonstration organizer, A.B., who is the NPS permittee for the 300-plus BASE jumpers at Bridge Day at New River Gorge NR, wrote a letter to the superintendent informing him of his intention to hold the demonstration. At a meeting with the chief ranger before the event, A.B. was informed that the jump was illegal, that those who did it would be charged criminally, and their equipment would be seized. A.B. would not identify the number of persons who intended to make the illegal jump, but hinted that it might be as many as 50. He also said that there likely would be a large crowd at the landing area in support of the illegal jumpers, and that he intended to attract as much media coverage as he could. With the potential for the demonstration overwhelming the park's resources, a Pacific West SET team (USPP) was called in for the incident. J.D. was the fourth of five jumpers who showed up at the top of El Cap to jump. The first three made successful jumps and landed to the cheers of about 150 people, some of who were waving flags and banners in support of BASE jumping in national park areas, and were taken into custody. J.D. then launched and free-fell for more than 15 seconds until she hit the talus slope at the base of the cliff. Her body was evacuated by long-line under the park's contract helicopter. Those who witnessed the fall saw no sign of her pilot chute ever being deployed to initiate the opening of her main parachute. A.B., who was to be the fifth jumper, opted not to continue and walked off the mountain. At least three TV camera crews and an Associated Press reporter covered the demonstration, and broadcast and print coverage has been intense. Park special agents are investigating the incident; decisions about prosecution will be made following consultation with the U.S. Attorney's Office. [Dan Horner, SA/Ops Chief, YOSE, 10/25] Thursday, October 28, 1999 99-624 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Fraud On September 23rd, A.M., a Moroccan national, was arrested by rangers for making terrorist threats against his girlfriend and being under the influence of alcohol. Checks with the Immigration and Naturalization Service revealed that there was no record of A.M. ever entering or leaving the U.S., and no fingerprint match could be found. INS accordingly placed a custody hold on him. During booking, jailers found about 25 credit card numbers in his wallet. A.M.'s girlfriend had left his luggage in their hotel room when she checked out; rangers removed the luggage from the room and stored it at the jail. With the advice of the U.S. Attorney's Office, the luggage was inventoried and more than 800 additional credit card numbers were found. Initial inquiries with the card companies showed a consistent pattern of fraudulent charges on many of the credit card numbers. The Secret Service took over the case and eventually seized more evidence in Boston, where A.M. had property stored at his girlfriend's residence. On October 21st, A.M. was indicted in U.S. District Court in Fresno for possession of access devices (credit card numbers) with intent to defraud (18 USC 1029(a)(3)), a felony with a penalty of up to ten years in prison. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 10/27] Wednesday, November 10, 1999 99-267/617 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: BASE Jumps Early in November, BASE jumper R.H. applied for a permit for a public assembly of from 50 to 500 people to be held outside of magistrate's court and at El Capitan Meadow and for two memorial services in the El Capitan Meadow area. The purpose was to protest the Service's air delivery regulations (36 CFR 2.17(a)(3)), which make BASE jumping illegal in national parks without a permit, to show support for four individuals appearing in court on BASE jumping related charges, and to hold memorial services for BASE jumpers F.G. III and J.D. F.G. drowned in June when he jumped into the Merced River while fleeing rangers; J.D. died in October when her parachute failed to open after jumping from El Capitan. A permit was issued for 50 persons to assemble outside the court and in the El Capitan Meadow area. Approximately 30 people attended the demonstration and court proceedings. There were no incidents. About eight media representatives were present. [Scott Hinson, SA, YOSE, 11/9] Monday, November 29, 1999 99-703 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Poaching On September 18th, a ranger in the Mather District heard shots coming from inside the park near the boundary and contacted N.S. and two juveniles shortly thereafter. The three were armed with a hunting rifle, shotguns and handguns, and were in possession of dead squirrels. On November 23rd, N.S. appeared in magistrate's court in the park and pled guilty to hunting, possession of dead animals (16 USC 60 and 62), and possession of weapons (36 CFR 2.4). N.S. was fined $500 and placed on a year's probation. The weapons were forfeited to the government for destruction. Also forfeited were N.S.'s California hunting license, ammunition, and other associated hunting items. Under federal juvenile delinquency provisions, the two juveniles will be referred to the county for prosecution. [Beth Stockdale, Acting Prosecutor, YOSE, 11/24] Monday, December 6, 1999 99-720 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Suicide Rangers checking out a report of an abandoned vehicle on November 30th found a suicide note inside it that had been written on the night of the 27th. The bear-scattered remains of a woman were found nearby. She had apparently taken her life by ingesting alcohol and many sleeping pills. Identification and the exact cause of death are both pending. Friday, December 10, 1999 99-727 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the afternoon of October 27th, park dispatch received a 911 cell phone call from a climber 2,000 feet up the face of El Capitan. He reported that his climbing partner had taken a 70-foot leader fall and was seriously injured. The weather at the time was clear enough for flying, but the first winter storm warning of the season was in effect for the upcoming night. Ranger/ medics Keith Lober and Mary Hinson were able to rappel onto the wall from the park helicopter. They found that the injured climber was in an altered mental status and had obvious trauma to his head and left wrist. A support team was flown to the top of El Capitan, just beating nightfall. The plan was to fix lines from the top of El Capitan and raise the injured climber during the night. However, the worsening weather forced the abandonment of the evacuation. The injured climber was moved to a conveniently located cave on the cliff. During the night, the storm hit, bringing heavy rains and gusty winds. The party was able to spend a reasonably comfortable night, with advanced life support continuing. The next morning the storm broke and the victim was packaged in a Stokes litter and short-hauled from the ledge to El Capitan Meadow. He was taken to a Modesto hospital, where he was diagnosed with a subdural hematoma and fractured right wrist. [Mary Hinson, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 12/8] Thursday, December 23, 1999 99-617 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: BASE Jumping Demonstration On Friday, October 22nd, professional stuntwoman J.D., 60, was killed when her parachute failed to open while attempting a BASE jump from El Capitan in Yosemite Valley. J.D.'s jump was part of an organized act of civil disobedience protesting the NPS air delivery regulations (36 CFR 2.17(a)), which make BASE jumping illegal in national park areas without a permit. On December 13th, jumpers Henry Boger, Mick Knutson and Joseph Weber pled no contents to charges of illegal air delivery in magistrate's court in the park. Jumper A.B. pled no contest to aiding and abetting the air delivery of others. Under separate plea offers, each defendant agreed to a sentence of one year's probation, a $2,000 fine, and payment of one-fourth of the $6,155 restitution for the cost of recovering J.D.'s body. All parachute equipment used to make the illegal jumps was permanently forfeited. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 12/13] Monday, January 3, 2000 99-657 - Systemwide - Follow-up: Special Event - Millennium 2000 The incident management team staffing the NPS Y2K "Day One" command center in Washington received no incident reports directly related to a Y2K problem between 8 a.m. on Friday, December 31st, and 7 p.m. on Saturday, January 1st. The only report passed on to the center concerned a structural fire in Yosemite NP (see below). No date rollover failures were detected by the NPS computer system's automated route monitor. The firewall and hacker intrusion monitors on the citizen service web site (nps.gov and rec.gov) did not detect any major increase in hacker activity. Mission critical systems were tested and found to be fully functional. The check-in calls from the points of contact in regional offices and other NPS facilities and systems were made in a timely manner and the required reports were made to the DOI command center. The NPS command center will be staffed until 6 p.m. today. [Kris Fister, IO, IMT, 1/1] Monday, January 3, 2000 00-001 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Structural Fire A structural fire broke out in a private, unoccupied residence in Wawona around 3 a.m. on January 1st. The fire was contained, but one residence was destroyed, a second was a 95% loss, and an outbuilding was a 50% loss. No estimate of damage is yet available. The investigation into the cause is underway. [Ed Walls, CM, YOSE, via Type I IMT, WASO, 1/1] Friday, February 4, 2000 99-259 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Attempted Murder Visitor C.R., 34, of Santa Monica, stabbed her male companion in the back while he slept in their cabin at Housekeeping Camp during the early morning hours of June 4, 1999. C.R. was subsequently indicted for attempted murder (18 USC 1113) and was held in custody and evaluated for competency. C.R. was found to be insane at the time of the act and therefore pled not guilty by reason of insanity. The court has concluded that C.R.'s failure to adhere to her medication and therapy program contributed to the attempted murder. C.R. was unable to prove that her release wouldn't constitute a "substantial risk of bodily injury to another person." The court has accordingly remanded her to the custody of the attorney general until she is cured. [Scott Hinson, YOSE, 2/3] Thursday, April 6, 2000 00-127 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Special Event Secretary Babbitt announced the new draft Yosemite Valley plan at the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco on Monday, March 27th. The plan, a consolidation of several previous planning efforts, seeks to restore portions of the valley to their natural state while simultaneously enhancing the visitor experience. Also attending the event were park staff, other NPS officials and representatives from several major environmental organizations. About 250 people attended the lunchtime speech, which received extensive media coverage (32 news crews were present). The event was followed by a press briefing and a walk-through in the park on Tuesday. The public comment period for the plan runs from April 7th to July 5th; a series of public meetings and hearings will be held throughout the country from late May through mid-June. Secretary Babbitt's speech will be carried on National Public Radio stations some time between April 14th and the 21st. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 3/31] Wednesday, April 19, 2000 00-154 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA; Resource Damage Recovery On August 6, 1998, R.D.R. lost control of his tractor-trailer while traveling on the Big Oak Flat Road. The truck overturned and slid off the roadway and down an embankment, causing extensive damage to the soils and vegetation at the accident scene. Over 30 park emergency response personnel were involved with the accident; a survey team from resource management also responded. It took three days to clear the accident scene. On January 27, 1999, R.D.R. plead guilty under a plea agreement to misdemeanor California vehicle code equipment violations (brakes) and to a 36 CFR 5.6(b) violation (commercial use of park roads). He was fined and placed on 12 months' court probation. Ranger Holly Rife and resource protection specialist Beth Waldow worked with the DOI solicitor's office to prepare a claim under the NPS Resource Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 19jj) to recover the costs for resource damage, response, and the damage assessment process. On March 16th, $14,734.65 was deposited in the department's damage assessment and restoration fund, where it can be distributed directly into park accounts or held for future assessment or restoration work. [Doug Roe, SA, YOSE, 4/17] Wednesday, April 19, 2000 00-155 - Yosemite NP (CA) - EMS Response; Life Saved On the afternoon of April 4th, park employees heard cries for help from the trail behind the Valley District maintenance area. Personnel from the trail crew, jail and fire station responded and found an unconscious 52-year-old male on the Valley Loop trail. The victim had no pulse and was not breathing. Ranger Ted Moe and fire captain Aaron Fritzer began CPR within four minutes of receiving the call; park medic Tom Wilson and the paramedic staffed ambulance from Yosemite Medical Clinic arrived two minutes later. The victim was defibrillated and intubated, an IV line was started, and lidocaine was given. He was transported by litter to the waiting ambulance and taken to the Yosemite medical clinic, then flown by air ambulance to a Fresno hospital. The victim was still unconscious and in critical but stable condition when he arrived there, and was diagnosed as having suffered a myocardial infarction. By the following day, he was awake and responding well to treatment. Doctors credit the rapid and effect initial CPR and advanced cardiac life support for saving his life. [Mark Harvey, PR, YOSE, 4/17] Wednesday, April 19, 2000 00-156 - Yosemite (CA) - Search A search for Irish national K.B., which has been on-going since April 11th, was scaled back on April 17th. About 25 field searchers, five dog teams and a helicopter were committed to the search. K.B. was last seen at Curry Village on April 5th. The concessionaire reported K.B.'s belonging's were still in his room several days after he was scheduled to check out, and his rented car was located in the parking lot. Investigation revealed that K.B. entered Yosemite on April 4th, spent the night in a Curry Village tent, and was last known to be at his room between 1 and 2 p.m. Limited search efforts will continue. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 4/17] Friday, April 28, 2000 00-168 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Paragliding Conviction A bright red paraglider was spotted flying over the north rim of Yosemite Valley around 4:45 p.m. on April 25th. Rangers watched it fly on thermals over various parts of the valley for two hours. The pilot, a German national, landed in Ahwahnee Meadow at 6:45 p.m. and was detained by rangers. He was very cooperative and offered no resistance. His equipment was seized as evidence and he was issued a citation requiring appearance in court the following day. He told rangers that he is a very experienced paraglider pilot and claimed to be unaware of the park's regulations prohibiting such activity without a permit. He said that he'd launched from North Dome. He pled guilty in court and was sentenced to a $500 fine by the magistrate judge. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 4/26] Tuesday, May 9, 2000 00-195 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Rangers received a report of a climber in urgent need of help on the Zenyatta Mondatta route of El Capitan just after noon on May 3rd. When the first rescuers arrived at the base of the wall, they found the climber, J.S., hanging upside-down about 12 feet out from the rock and 150 feet above the ground. J.S.'s rope was wrapped around his leg, causing intense pain and numbness and making the leg unusable. Ranger Keith Lober employed a line gun to shoot a light cord to J.S., who managed to pull up additional gear and a rope, then attach the rescue rope to the rope from which he was hanging. Rescue team member Scott Burk ascended to J.S., clipped him in, set up a free-hanging lowering system, and lowered him to the ground. When J.S. reached the ground, rangers became aware that he smelled of alcohol. He admitted to drinking vodka prior to the start of his climb that morning, but refused to permit an alcohol test. J.S. later explained how the accident occurred. He was attempting to pull up his 40-pound haul bag by counter-weighting it with his 175 pounds of body weight. When he unclipped from his anchor, his only point of attachment was a single jumar ascender on the haul rope. He lost control of the haul when he placed his full weight on that rope and fell about 100 feet as the haul bag came flying up from the ground. He stopped falling only when his leg became wound up in the haul rope. J.S. hung there, attempting to free himself for about two hours. Eventually he became so exhausted that he could not hold himself upright. Because he still could not use his leg after he was on the ground, a rescue helicopter from Lemoore Naval Air Station was used to hoist him from the base of the wall. J.S. refused medical treatment and transport after being evacuated, even though his leg still tingled and he had less than full movement. He will be prosecuted for creating a hazardous condition [36 CFR 2.34(a)(4)]. (Mary Hinson, Shift Supervisor, YOSE, 5/5) Friday, May 26, 2000 00-226 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search and Rescue On the evening of May 18th, Wawona rangers received a report of an overdue hiker in the Glacier Point road corridor. Lung cancer survivor U.G., 79, had planned a short day hike to the Taft Point area but failed to return as scheduled. A major search was begun which included over 70 people from a number of agencies. On May 20th, U.G. was found about three miles south of Taft Point by a seasonal ranger who was on a containment sweep. She was examined by paramedics and found to be in good condition. U.G. said that she'd made many mistakes, should have turned back, and would never hike alone again. She also said that, despite everything, it ended up being "a good hike to get back into shape." [Kevin McMillan, IC, YOSE, 5/25] Thursday, June 1, 2000 00-238 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Structural Fire Park and concession fire crews responded to a structural fire in the Yosemite Concession Services garage just after 10 p.m. on May 25th. The fire was confined to several small rooms and the attic. The building had been remodeled many times since it was constructed in the 1930's, creating void spaces. The fire had extended into several of these void spaces, which made overhaul efforts more difficult. The origin of the fire was determined to have been a diesel-fired steam cleaning unit which had been in service when the fire started. The exact cause, however, has not yet been determined. Damage to the building and its contents has been placed at $20,000. Seventeen NPS and YCS personnel responded. [Deron Mills, FMO, YOSE, 5/30] Saturday, June 17, 2000 00-288 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On June 1st, S.N. of Mammoth Lakes fell about 30 feet while ascending Mt. Dana, fracturing her tibia and fibula and sustaining multiple lacerations. S.N. and two companions were ascending Mt. Dana with the intention of skiing down(Mt. Dana is a popular spring ski descent on the crest of the eastern Sierra). Park medic/ranger Rich Baerwald provided advanced life support care at the scene of the accident, which was at 11,200 feet. Tuolumne rangers and Yosemite SAR team members then lowered S.N. 2,400 feet down steep, snow-covered slopes. Once the team reached Dana Meadows, a snowmobile was used to tow the litter to the Tioga Road, where S.N. was transferred to an ambulance. [Maura Longden, IC, YOSE, 6/8] Saturday, June 17, 2000 00-289 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search and Rescue J.T., 60, became separated from her male companion on May 22nd, the second day of a three-day backcountry trip in the Hetch Hetchy area. The man spent the afternoon searching for her, then spent the night in Tiltill Valley. He hiked out the next day and reported her missing to rangers at 1 p.m. He told them that J.T. was an inexperienced hiker, that she was unfamiliar with the area, and that she was poorly equipped because he was carrying all of the overnight gear for both of them. He also said she took medication for panic disorder. A hasty search was begun that afternoon utilizing ground searchers and the park helicopter. The search was expanded the following day with an additional helicopter, three dog teams, and search teams from four counties. Just before noon, J.T. was spotted from a helicopter in very rugged terrain in Tiltill Creek canyon. She had fallen and could not walk, but was responsive and in good spirits. Park medic/ranger David Horne provided advanced life support at the scene and during litter evacuation to Tiltill Valley. The park helicopter then transported her to the Yosemite Medical Clinic, where she was diagnosed with severe contusions, broken ribs, and a double pneumothorax. J.T. was flown by helicopter ambulance to a Modesto hospital, where her condition worsened. She is currently (June 16th) listed in critical condition and is on a ventilator. [Greg Lawler, Plans Chief, YOSE, 6/16] Sunday, June 18, 2000 00-291 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Two Fatalities On the afternoon of June 8th, ranger Steve Stockdale noticed that a roadside telephone cable box had been hit by a vehicle. He followed a path of debris and damaged vegetation and found a sedan over an embankment and about 150 feet down the road from the damaged cable box. The car, which was in heavy vegetation and invisible from the road, was upside down and wrapped around a tree. The 58-year-old male driver and his 43-year-old wife were dead inside the car. The accident investigation showed that the car, traveling at a high rate of speed, had left the pavement several times on both sides of the road. It had repeatedly glanced off the roadside slopes and returned to the pavement for about a quarter mile before finally flying off the road at a creek culvert. Evidence showed that it flew about 78 feet through the air before hitting the tree seven feet above its base, indicating it was going over 90 mph when it left the road. The roof of the vehicle had to be mechanically removed by NPS firefighters so the bodies could be removed. The autopsy of the driver revealed that he had suffered a heart attack prior to the accident. Based on the time the telephone system was knocked out, the accident had occurred about ten hours before it was discovered. [Jim Tucker, Acting ACR, YOSE, 6/16] Thursday, June 22, 2000 00-306 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Drowning On the afternoon of June 19th, a 34-year-old Japanese woman slipped on the sloping wet granite on Silver Apron and slid into the Merced River at the point where it cascades into the Emerald Pool two-and-a-half miles up the trail at the top of Vernal Fall. She was swept down the cascade and into the recirculating water at the head of the pool. Witnesses lost sight of her for many seconds, then saw her resurface downstream, float briefly facedown, then sink out of sight. Rangers Keith Lober, Steve Yu and John Dill heli-rappelled into the area with swift water rescue gear and searched for about 30 minutes before locating her at the bottom of a pool in about 15 feet of water. She had been submerged for about 90 minutes, but resuscitation efforts were begun because she'd been in cold water. These efforts included chest compressions, ventilation by bag-valve mask, insertion of an endotrachial tube, administration of drugs, and defibrillation with an automatic external defibrillator. She was then flown to Yosemite Valley, where she was pronounced dead at the Yosemite Medical Clinic. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 6/20] Tuesday, June 27, 2000 00-319 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Shots Fired at Bear Rangers Julie Horne, Kevin Harrison and Prashant Lotwala responded to shots being fired in Lower Pines campground at 1:30 a.m. on June 12th. They found the shooter, James Cooper, inside his tent, yelling that he'd shot a bear and that the animal was still in the tree near his campsite. The rangers confiscated and secured Cooper's 9mm handgun. Cooper told the rangers that he had shined his flashlight through the tent's mesh window in the bear's eyes and she bluff charged the tent, reportedly coming to within two feet. He continued yelling at the bear and flashing her with his light and she charged the tent again. When the bear charged the tent a third time, Cooper fired one shot at her from inside the tent from a distance of two to four feet. Numerous tents, motor homes, and other campers were behind the bear and in the line of fire. The sow climbed a nearby tree and was still there with her cub when the rangers arrived. Cooper was arrested and charged with CFR violations of possession of a firearm, using a weapon in a manner that endangers persons and property, and disturbing wildlife. Wildlife technicians who were familiar with this sow were able to haze the bears out of the campground. The sow was later captured and found to have no wounds. Cooper pled guilty to two of the three charges. He was placed on a year's probation, sentenced to pay a $250 fine, and forfeited his weapon and magazines. [Julie Horne, PR, YOSE, 6/26] Thursday, July 6, 2000 00-354 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search and Rescue: Lost Sibling On June 20th, K.B., 21, and her brother, G.B., became lost while attempting to hike to Young Lakes. After spending the night in the Coness Creek drainage, G.B. left the camp to look for the Young Lakes trail. He became disoriented and was unable to relocate their camp, but eventually met up with a park trail crew and reported that his sister was still lost. K.B. went looking for her brother and became similarly disoriented, then lost. She wandered for some time in the drainage, eventually reaching the Glen Aulin High Sierra camp on the evening of the 21st, where she was given food and shelter by other backpackers. A ground and air search for her began on the morning of the 22nd. A searcher contacted G.B. at the camp and she was evacuated by helicopter to Tuolumne Meadows. The B.'s lost camp was found on the 23rd and their gear was retrieved. [Maura Longdon, IC, YOSE, 7/5] Thursday, July 6, 2000 00-355 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue: Fall from Trail Bridge S.S., 55, of Van Nuys, was injured on June 22nd when she was bumped off a bridge on the Glen Aulin trail by a passing pack mule. S.S. was leading a backpacking trip and was standing on the bridge when the incident occurred. She fell about six feet onto rocks, fracturing several vertebrae and sustaining a deep laceration on her hand. A ten-person carryout team evacuated her to Tuolumne Meadows, where she was transferred by ambulance to Mammoth Lakes Hospital. [Maura Longdon, IC, YOSE, 7/5] Thursday, July 6, 2000 00-356 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue: Climbers Injured by Lightning On June 25th, four climbers were injured by lightning while climbing the southeast buttress of Cathedral Peak. When the lightning struck, A.B., 24, B.B., 28, and G.M., 28, were on the final pitch of their ascent, and B.S., 23, and W.E., 42, had just reached the summit. Three of the climbers lost consciousness and four received minor burns. A ham radio operator relayed the first report to the park, stating that just one person had been injured. Because of the storm, it was not possible to fly in by helicopter, so a 12-person rescue team led by rangers Jeff Webb and Paul Austin hiked to the area. While they were en route, they learned that four climbers had been injured and that they were assisting each other on a technical descent on the northwest side of the peak. Four additional rescuers were dispatched to the scene. Paramedic Keith Lober and EMT Steve Yu heli-rappelled into the area once the storm cleared. The Betts brothers were evacuated by trail, then taken by ambulance to the Mammoth Lakes hospitals; the other two injured climbers declined treatment. All are expected to recover from their injuries. [Maura Longdon, IC, YOSE, 7/5] Thursday, July 6, 2000 00-357 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue: Attempted Suicide Park dispatch received a 911 call from nearby residents early on the morning of June 28th, reporting that a man was yelling for help from Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley. Responding rangers found a man from Modesto, California, bleeding from severe lacerations on his neck and wrists. He told rangers and special agents that he had attempted suicide because he wanted "to see what was on the other side of death." Modesto police were asked to make a welfare check on his wife and were told that she had also attempted suicide in the same manner that same morning at their home in that city. The man was flown by helicopter ambulance to a trauma center in Modesto, where he was operated on for his wounds and committed for psychiatric evaluation. Investigation indicates that the injuries both husband and wife suffered were self-inflicted. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 7/5] Wednesday, July 12, 2000 00-386 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue J.K., 44, was injured when a falling rock hit him on the head while he was descending from a climb of Sentinel Rock just after midnight on June 28th. J.K.'s climbing partner descended to Yosemite Valley, contacted rangers at 8:30 a.m., and reported that J.K. had been knocked unconsciousness and suffered blood loss. A two-member rescue team immediately started to climb up to J.K. and was followed shortly by a nine-person carryout team. A rescue helicopter was requested from Lemoore Naval Station. Two ships were diverted from a training exercise and arrived 25 minutes later. Rangers Keith Lober and Steve Yu heli-rappelled to the scene from one of the Navy helicopters. J.K. was placed in a stokes litter, hoisted into the Lemoore helicopter, and flown to the valley floor. He was then transported to the Yosemite Medical Clinic by ambulance. The heli-rappellers and the initial two-person ground team were also hoisted out by the Navy due to the hazardous nature of the route. (Michael Nash, IC, YOSE, 7/11) Thursday, July 13, 2000 00-391 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Armed Confrontation; Weapons Arrest On the afternoon of July 10th, ranger Dave Horne was asked to investigate an unoccupied sport utility vehicle parked in the traffic lane of Highway 140 about 100 yards west of the Arch Rock entrance station. The driver could not be found in the area. Horne checked out the unlocked vehicle and discovered several firearms, ammunition, and medications inside. The truck was registered to T.F., 56, of Fresno, California. Citations to T.F. were found in the truck from the Veterans Administration police in Fresno, who had recently charged him with weapons violations at the VA hospital. Fresh tracks and disturbed earth were found above the road. Horne and special agent Scott Hinson followed the tracks for a short distance when they spotted T.F. hiding in the brush and rocks about 30 feet above them. They took cover and ordered him to come out. T.F. was slow to follow commands; when he finally stood up, they saw that he had a Remington 12-gauge shotgun in his hands. After about a minute, T.F. complied with commands to set the shotgun down and to keep his hands in view. Horne and Hinson held T.F. at gunpoint for a half-hour, awaiting the arrival of additional rangers. During this period, Hinson was advised that T.F. had once been a corrections sergeant in the Fresno County Sheriff's Office. T.F. was taken into custody when backup arrived. His shotgun was found to be loaded with five OO buckshot rounds. A loaded Smith and Wesson .357 magnum revolver and a box of 50 rounds were found at his feet, and a loaded and cocked Walther 9 mm pistol was found in his right front pocket. Additional handguns and a total of 366 rounds of ammunition were found in his vehicle. T.F. was booked into the Yosemite jail and charged with felony and misdemeanor weapons violations. [Scott Hinson, SA, YOSE, 7/11] Friday, August 11, 2000 00-472 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue; Weapons Violation Rangers heard gunshots and a person yelling for help on the cliff bands above Yosemite Chapel around 8 p.m. on August 2nd. When they began shining lights on the cliffs, additional shots were fired. They took cover and employed a PA system to make contact with a man spotted on the cliff, subsequently identified as J.H., 22, of Beverly Hills. J.H. employed the flash on his camera to respond to the rangers. He indicated that he was injured and that he'd reached his present location by climbing down the cliff from Four Mile Trail, but provided conflicting answers to other questions. Further investigation and rescue efforts were delayed by darkness and resumed in the morning. A telescope was used to locate J.H., who was wearing camouflage clothing and carrying a daypack and semi-automatic handgun. Rangers used the PA to instruct him to disassemble the handgun, separate the parts, place the daypack out of reach, and place his hands on his head. J.H. complied with these commands. Rangers Keith Lober, Steve Yu and Michael Nash then heli-rappelled to the site, secured J.H.'s weapon, and escorted him on foot to the valley floor. J.H. told them that he'd gotten stuck while attempting to climb directly to Glacier Point to get back to his car. He was charged for weapons violations and for disorderly conduct by creating a hazardous condition. [Dan Horner, YOSE, 8/8] Friday, September 1, 2000 00-547 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Rangers were notified of an injured climber approximately ten pitches up the Regular Northwest Face route on Half Dome early on the morning of August 4th. The climber, Y.-J.K. of Korea, had taken a ten-foot fall the previous afternoon and had an open fracture of his lower right leg. Two of Y.-J.K.'s partners stayed with him while his other two partners rappelled off of the route to seek assistance. Two ranger/medics heli-rappelled from the park contract helicopter onto a ledge approximately 20 feet below Y.-J.K.. After upgrading his meager anchor system, the rangers treated Y.-J.K. and placed him in a litter. Shortly after noon, Y.-J.K. was short-hauled from the cliff under the park helicopter. The two rangers and the remaining two climbers and all their equipment were then hoisted off the wall by a Navy rescue helicopter from LeMoore Naval Air Station. [Steve Yu, IC, YOSE, 8/29] Friday, September 1, 2000 00-548 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Probable Suicide On August 8th, the park received a message to be on the lookout for a man from Concord, California, who was suicidal and reported to be travelling to the Yosemite area. On August 9th, Tuolumne Meadows rangers found his vehicle in the Tuolumne Lodge parking lot. They searched the area and found his body lying next to a stream several hundred yards upstream from the lodge. He had died from a gunshot wound to the head. The wound appeared to be self-inflicted. The case is being investigated by park special agents. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 8/29] Sunday, September 3, 2000 00-556 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Fatality Two male visitors from Japan were driving westbound on the Tioga road around 4 p.m. on August 26th when the driver lost control of their rental car. It went off the road, rolled over several times, and ended up about 75 feet down a steep embankment. The 19-year-old passenger, who was asleep in the rear seat, was ejected and the vehicle came to rest on top of him. He was pronounced dead at the scene. The driver suffered minor injuries and was flown to a Hospital in Modesto. He was released the next morning. The driver was wearing a seatbelt; the passenger was not. [Mike Kerns, IC, YOSE, 8/31] Friday, September 15, 2000 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Homicides On September 13th, C.S. pled guilty to the murder of J.A. in federal district court in Fresno, California. J.A. was an instructor for the Yosemite Institute, an environmental education organization that operates in the park. Her body was found in a creek near her residence in Foresta on July 22, 1999. Formal sentencing is scheduled for November 30th. C.S. is also facing state charges for the February 1999 murders of C. and J.S. and S.P. in Mariposa County. Mariposa County is expected to begin prosecuting C.S. soon after his sentencing on federal charges. These cases have received extensive media coverage for more than a year and a half. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 9/14] Friday, September 22, 2000 00-601 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Agency Assist: Marijuana Eradication On September 18th, the park's special response team and rangers from the Mather District were asked to help the Forest Service, BLM, Tuolumne County Sheriff's Department and members of the state CAMP (Campaign Against Marijuana Planting) team in a raid on a large garden in the Stanislaus NF near the park. Intelligence indicated that at least three people were living and working in the garden and that they were armed with 12 gauge shotguns. The garden was entered, but no one was found there. The condition of the plants and other evidence found in the associated camps revealed that harvesting of the crops had just begun. More than 8,000 plants were eradicated and flown out of the site in a CAMP helicopter. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOE, 9/21] Friday, October 20, 2000 00-658 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Special Event A ribbon-cutting ceremony was held in El Portal on October 18th to celebrate the completion of the El Portal road improvements project. The road was severely damaged during the flood of 1997 and required extensive repairs. The two-year repair and reconstruction project, undertaken in conjunction with the Federal Highway Administration, was completed at the end of September. The six-and-a-half mile project included widening of lanes, realignment of curves and improvements to drainage along the road. The ceremony concluded with the driving of a historic park vehicle through the park entrance. The event was attended by about 200 people, including about 30 protestors. There were no incidents. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 10/19] Friday, November 17, 2000 00-707 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Special Event Secretary Bruce Babbitt was in the park on November 14th to announce the final Yosemite Valley plan. The draft plan, released in March, generated more than 10,000 comments from the public. Park staff also held 20 public meetings around the country to elicit additional comments from interested parties. The final plan provides a framework to restore degraded areas and reduce development within the Merced River ecosystem of Yosemite Valley. It will also reduce gridlock and automobile congestion by relocating parking to areas outside the valley. The ceremony was led by superintendent Dave Mihalic and included presentations by the secretary and leaders of several major environmental groups. About 350 people and 35 protestors attended the event. There were no incidents. Media coverage was extensive, with 37 news crews in the park. [Scott Gediman, PIO, YOSE, 11/15] Monday, December 4, 2000 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Homicides On September 13th, C.S. pled guilty to the murder of J.A. in federal district court in Fresno, California. J.A. was an instructor for the Yosemite Institute, an environmental education organization that operates in the park. Her body was found in a creek near her residence in Foresta on July 22, 1999. On November 30th, C.S. was sentenced to life without parole. Under a plea bargain that spared him the possibility of a death sentence, C.S. admitted to the murder after kidnapping and trying to sexually assault her. He will now be tried for the February 1999 murders of C. and J.S. and S.P. in Mariposa County. C.S. had this to say in court: "I gave in to the terrible dark dreams that I tried to subdue. The craziness that lurked in my mind for as long as I can remember became a reality in this terrible crime, and I am sorry and ashamed. I wish I could take it back, but I can't. I wish I could tell you why I did such a thing, but I don't even know myself." [Brian Melley, Associated Press, 12/1] Monday, December 4, 2000 00-724 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Rangers received reports of calls for help in the Mirror Lake area of Yosemite valley around 6 p.m. on November 25th. M.L., 27, was found on a ledge about 500 feet above the Mirror Lake trail. M.L. had been scrambling off-trail when he took a 50- to 100-foot tumbling fall and landed on a small ledge. SAR team members worked through the night to secure M.L. in a litter and lower him from the ledge to a more stable area at the top of a large boulder field. Due to the hazardous nature of the boulder field, a rescue helicopter from Lemoore NAS was used in the morning to hoist M.L. from the top of the field. He was taken to Yosemite Medical Clinic and released a few hours later with only minor injuries. [Steve Yu, Operations Chief, YOSE, 11/27] Thursday, December 7, 2000 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Homicides On December 6th, C.S., 39, was arraigned on state murder charges at the Mariposa County Courthouse. The charges are for the murders of C. and J.S. and S.P., which occurred in that county. Although C.S. has confessed to the killings, he plead not guilty, which "places the S.-P. allegations in contest, particularly in relation to potential penalty." Prosecutors won't decide on whether or not to seek the death penalty until a preliminary hearing on March 5th. The arraignment was covered by more than 15 TV crews and many other media representatives. [Scott Gediman, YOSE, 12/6; Wayne Wilson, Sacramento Bee, 12/7] Thursday, December 7, 2000 00-733 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Climbing Fatality On the afternoon of December 3rd, rangers responded to reports of climbers on Washington's Column yelling for help. At the base of the cliff they discovered the body of A.M., 28, of Morebank, Australia. He was attached to two joined ropes by a single ascender. It appears that A.M. placed his weight on one side of a double rope rappel system, which then pulled through the anchor and caused A.M. and the rope to fall several hundred feet to the ground. A.M.'s two climbing partners spent the night on the wall 600 feet above the Valley and rappelled off the following morning. When they got down, they told investigators that A.M. had started to rappel down as they continued climbing. He yelled up to them that his rappel ropes had become stuck. It is likely that he was working to free the rope when the accident happened. A.M. and his climbing partners were part of a six-member Australian military alpine club that had come to Yosemite in duty status to climb. [Jim Tucker, DR, Valley District, YOSE, 12/5] Monday, January 8, 2001 00-779 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Sewage Spill Investigation A cleaning and video inspection of a sewer line from Yosemite Valley to the wastewater treatment plant in El Portal has confirmed that the spill that occurred last July 27th was the result of an intentional act. The test showed that there were no areas of collapse that could have been the source of the large rocks that caused the blockage and spill. This test confirmed the previous suspicion that the spill stemmed from rocks placed purposely in the sewer line. The park is offering a $10,000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons who sabotaged the line. There's also a $500 reward for information helpful in determining who did it. An arrest is not required to collect this money. Confidentiality will be maintained. The contact is special agent Doug Roe (209-372-0614). [Media Relations Office, YOSE, 1/3] Thursday, January 11, 2001 01-008 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Late on the afternoon of January 3rd, Yosemite Valley rangers responded to a cell phone report of shouts for help coming from the cliffs above the Upper Yosemite Falls trail near Columbia Point. A hasty team responded and just before dark located 23-year-old park visitor C.D. of Brooklyn, New York, stuck on a small ledge about 120 feet above the trail. C.D. was nervous, afraid of heights, and kept telling the rangers that he was slipping from his position. The rangers reached C.D. through a series of rappels from above. He was then lowered to the trail and was able to hike out on his own. Although he had taken an approximately 40 foot sliding fall, he had no significant injuries and declined medical treatment. C.D. stated that he stepped off trail to go to the bathroom and got disoriented. [Jim Tucker, Valley DR, YOSE, 1/10] Tuesday, February 13, 2001 01-049 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rockslide A rockslide occurred along El Portal Road about a half mile east of the park boundary around 2:30 a.m. yesterday morning. A slab of granite of unknown size fell about a thousand feet to the road, breaking into many smaller pieces and damaging the roadway. The entrance into the park at Arch Rock has accordingly been closed until further notice. There were no injuries. Highways 41 and 120 remain open, albeit with chain restrictions. Photos of the rockslide can be seen at http://www.nps.gov/yose/rockslide.htm. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 2/12] Wednesday, February 14, 2001 01-049 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rockslide The El Portal Road (Highway 140) reopened yesterday afternoon after being closed since early on Monday due to a rockslide. Crews determined that the release point for the slide had stabilized, then began clearing and repairing the road. Although the road is open, work will continue at the site for the next several days. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 2/13] Wednesday, March 14, 2001 01-089 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Assist; Structural Fire Fire crews from Yosemite Valley and Wawona responded to a structural fire in a two-story condominium at Yosemite West at 1:30 a.m. on March 4th. The area is a private development located just outside the west boundary of the park; the only access road is through the park, and the development is 30 minutes away from the closest fire station. The fire originated on the ground floor at an electric cooking stove and was limited to two adjacent walls. The occupant of the room had fallen asleep and left a pot cooking on the stove for several hours. Fire damage was estimated at $5,000. The building's value is estimated at about $600,000. [Deron Mills, Battalion Chief, YOSE, 3/12] Tuesday, March 27, 2001 01-103 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On March 13th, two park concession employees used a cell phone to call for help from the "ice cut," a section of trail blasted into a cliff on the John Muir trail between Nevada and Vernal Falls that fills with ice and snow in the winter. R.C., 23, and E.P., 27, had become stuck on this section of trail, which is closed seasonally due to avalanches and icy conditions. The two men had gone around a locked gate on the trail and ended up in an area where they could neither continue nor go back. Rangers used crampons, chopped steps with ice axes, and set ice screws to get to the pair. They were put into harnesses, then belayed across the steep ice and snow slope. Neither R.C. nor E.P. was injured. They hiked out under their own power. [Michael Nash, PR, YOSE, 3/26] Tuesday, March 27, 2001 01-014 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Brothers Ad.V. and An.V., ages 22 and 23, began yelling for a rescue in the area of the Royal Arches just before 6:30 p.m. on March 19th. The brothers had started the 17-pitch climb at 9 a.m. that morning. By the time they began calling for help, they had climbed only five pitches and were having problems finding the route. A ranger and a SAR team member climbed the 5.9 route to the same level as the brothers, only to find that they could not reach the two men, who were some 200 yards to the west. The rescue team descended and the brothers spent the 38-degree night on a small ledge. In the morning, the same rescue team climbed back up to the brothers and assisted them in descending to the valley floor. The pair had just one rope with them and were not confident enough to attempt a self-rescue. One brother had two years of climbing experience, but had never attempted a multi-pitch climb without a guide; the other had only climbed at an indoor gym. Neither was injured. [Michael Nash, PR, YOSE, 3/26] Wednesday, June 6, 2001 01-252 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On May 25th, the El Portal District ambulance responded to a mutual aid request for a motorcycle accident outside the park on Highway 140, four miles west of El Portal. The victim was a 48-year-old male suffering from a head injury and from serious internal chest and abdominal injuries. EMS personnel from both the park and county ambulance crews stabilized the man and transferred him to an air ambulance. He was flown to a regional trauma center where he was admitted to the intensive care unit in critical condition. The patient is currently alert, stable, and in good condition and has been moved out of intensive care. [Mark Harvey, PR,YOSE, 6/5] Saturday, June 9, 2001 01-256 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Late in the evening on June 1st, two climbers came to the Yosemite Valley SAR cache and reported that their partner, T.C. of Colorado, was injured at the top of the thirteenth pitch on the Lurking Fear route on El Capitan. They said that he had taken a 20 to 30 foot fall the previous day and had injured his ribs. That night, Yosemite Valley rangers made voice contact with T.C. and his remaining partner and confirmed their location and that they in fact needed to be rescued. On the morning of June 2nd, an eleven-person team was flown to the top of El Capitan by helicopter. They established a series of fixed ropes a thousand feet down the face to Thanksgiving Ledge. From there, two rescuers were lowered to the injured party's position. After a radio call-in to medical control, the go-ahead was given for the injured climber and his partner to ascend the ropes under their own power. All personnel were flown off of El Capitan before dark. [Steve Yu, Operation Chief, YOSE, 6/6] Tuesday, June 26, 2001 01-296 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Concession Employee Fatality T.S., 20, an employee for Yosemite Concession Services, died while hiking the Yosemite Falls Trail on June 24th. T.S. was hiking with four friends to the top of El Capitan when he and another person became separated from the group. He and his companion stopped at the base of Upper Yosemite Fall and scrambled down into the basin at the bottom of the waterfall. While there, T.S. slipped and stumbled, falling 40 feet to his death. The park's SAR team responded by helicopter. T.S. was pronounced dead at the scene. No foul play is suspected. T.S. was a housekeeper at the Ahwahnee and had been working in the park for less than a month. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 6/25] Sunday, July 15, 2001 01-360 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search The park provided mutual aid assistance to the Tuolumne County SO early this month in their search for 28-year-old E.T. E.T. was reported overdue by his father on July 3rd when he failed to return from a four- to five-day backpacking trip through the rugged Emigrant Wilderness, just north of the park. A massive cooperative effort was launched to find him that included numerous county volunteer SAR teams and state and federal agencies. Field searchers, dog teams, mounted searchers, and helicopters were utilized in the seven-day search. Yosemite provided about 40 personnel to the operation. Media interest was high. Searchers were unable to find E.T. or any significant clues to his whereabouts, so the search was scaled back significantly on July 9th. On July 10th, E.T. hiked out of the backcountry and found assistance at a Forest Service campground. He had taken a 30- to 40-foot fall on the first day of his trip after losing the trail, then camped for almost two weeks until he felt well enough to travel out on his own. E.T. sustained a dislocated shoulder and injuries to both of his ankles. [Deb Schweizer, PIO, YOSE, 7/12] Friday, July 20, 2001 01-367 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On July 10th, a 15-year-old boy fell approximately 70 to 80 feet while descending from Cathedral Peak (10,911 feet). The boy sustained a serious head injury and multiple abrasions and lacerations after falling down a series of steep, wet slabs. The leader of the boy's group yelled down for help to other group members near the base of the peak who had not made the climb. Those group members then quickly hiked out and reported the accident to park staff at Tuolumne Meadows. They advised that a fall had occurred and that help was needed, but did not have any further details. Two YOSAR team members immediately started hiking in to size- up the situation. Within an hour, they had reached the injured boy, who was within 300 feet of the summit. Based on the serious condition of the victim, park medic Greg Lawler heli-rappelled to the accident scene and prepared the patient for transport. The boy was evacuated to Tuolumne Meadows by short-haul under the park contract helicopter. He was then loaded inside and flown to the park helibase, where he was transferred to an Air-Med helicopter and taken to a trauma center in Modesto. He was still in intensive care several days after the accident. [Rich Baerwald, IC, YOSE, 7/16] Sunday, July 22, 2001 01-373 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Climbing Accident with Two Fatalities Two climbers fell to their deaths while ascending the North Buttress Direct route on Middle Cathedral Rock in Yosemite Valley on July 12th. Thomas Dunwiddie, 49, of Denver, Colorado, and Monika Elderidge, 41, of Boulder, Colorado, had climbed several routes in the park during the week preceding the accident. Park investigators believe the fall was an accident; foul play is not suspected. Evidence is still being reviewed, and the cause of the accident is under investigation. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 7/20] Saturday, July 28, 2001 01-385 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Special Event: Visit by First Lady First Lady Laura Bush and several of her friends hiked in the park's backcountry during the week of July 9th. Rangers joined the hikers while they trekked to three concession-run camps in the High Sierra Loop out of Tuolumne Meadows. Said Mrs. Bush: "I thoroughly enjoyed my journey through Yosemite. Yosemite is a treasure that the National Park Service can be proud of. I want to thank the park employees for their dedication to sharing the natural beauty of this and other American parks with nature fans across the world." Her trip concluded with an evening at the Ahwahnee Hotel on July 14th. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 7/24] Sunday, July 29, 2001 01-386 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search G.C., the food and beverage manager for the Ahwahnee Hotel, was reported missing from work on the morning of July 12th. The car he'd driven to work that day was also missing. Statewide BOLO (be on the lookout) messages were broadcast, and highways were searched by helicopter both within and outside the park in case he'd been the victim of a motor vehicle accident. The next day, Reena Rauchwerger, an assistant manager at the Ahwahnee, also disappeared. Rangers and special agents canvassed the local community for clues and interviewed friends and relatives of both G.C. and Rauchwerger. On July 18th, the families of both employees received phone calls from them from southern California. G.C.'s vehicle was found where it had been abandoned near Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco and was impounded by the Park Police. The reason for the disappearances is still under investigation. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 7/24] Wednesday, August 1, 2001 99-480 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Search for Missing Person In August, 1999, rangers checked on a vehicle parked at Tuolumne Meadows and found that it was associated with former concession employee M.R., who had been reported missing by his family the previous month. A search was conducted in the area, but no clues to his whereabouts were discovered. The investigation continued, but no leads were found until this past June, when a park trail crew worker hiking cross-country through Cold Canyon north of Tuolumne Meadows found M.R.'s wallet. On June 28th, a park special agent flew to the area and found other identifiable personal items and human remains. Dental records were used to confirm that they were M.R.'s remains. No cause of death has been determined at this time. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 7/30] Wednesday, August 1, 2001 01-402 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Death of Employee Park firefighter J.P., 22, failed to show up for work at the Wawona fire station on July 23rd after his weekend off. J.P., a member of the prescribed fire crew and an experienced climber, had planned to climb several peaks in the Lake Sabrina area out of Bishop, California, during his days off. His car was found at the Sabrina trailhead, and Inyo County began a search for him. On the evening of July 23rd, his body was spotted from a helicopter on the slopes of Picture Peak. Inyo County SAR recovered the body the following day. J.P. would have been a senior this fall at the University of California in Davis, where he was working toward a BS in wildlife biology. This was his first season in Yosemite. Last summer, he worked fire on the El Dorado National Forest. J.P. is survived by his parents and a younger brother. Condolences may be sent to his family through the park's prescribed fire office. [Dan Buckley, Prescribed Fire Manager, YOSE, 7/30] Wednesday, August 1, 2001 01-405 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Falling Fatality On July 25th, the Mono County Sheriff's Office forwarded a report to the park that a hiker had fallen and died while hiking down from Matterhorn Peak on the park's north boundary. Rangers and special agents flew to the scene and recovered the body of L.S., 60, of Spring Valley, California, at the mountain's 11,000-foot altitude. Evidence at the scene and interviews with other members of the hiking party indicate that the fall was an accident. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory SA, YOSE, 7/31] Wednesday, August 8, 2001 01-420 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the afternoon of August 2nd, Yosemite Valley rangers received a report of a stranded hiker in the vicinity of Four-Mile Trail. The hiker, David Gilmore of Orlando, Florida, was uninjured and stuck in a secure spot. A team was sent up the trail from the Valley to do a ground assessment while the park contract helicopter did an aerial size-up. The observer in the helicopter spotted Gilmore almost immediately. He was perched securely on a ledge approximately 400 feet up a steep and loose cliff band approximately 500 feet above the trail. The ground team arrived on scene and determined that it would be a very lengthy proposition to reach him from below. Two rangers then heli-rappelled to a ledge approximately 80 feet above and 100 feet to the east of Gilmore. The rangers then lowered him several rope-lengths to the trail. Gilmore said that he left the trail to take a photo and then attempted to short-cut back to the trail by working his way down the cliff band until he realized he could no longer move up or down safely. [Steve Yu, PR, YOSE, 8/7] Saturday, August 25, 2001 01-472 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Falling Fatality Three Spanish climbers saw a person fall from the top of Half Dome and hit the ground about 250 feet from their position around 6:30 a.m. on August 17th. They then descended to Yosemite Valley and reported the incident around 9:30 a.m. The park's SAR and helitack teams and a special agent flew to the area, investigated, and recovered the body. No identification was found on the victim, and he remained unidentified until his fingerprints were matched to a 24-year-old Santa Clara man on August 21st. The death is being investigated as a possible suicide. [Dan Horner, SA, YOSE, 8/23] Wednesday, September 12, 2001 01-509 - Servicewide - Terrorist Attacks National Park Service personnel systemwide are responding in many ways to the terrorist attacks yesterday on Washington and New York. Here's a summary, as of 11 a.m. today: o Pacific West Region - The USS Arizona and Cabrillo have been closed due to the closures of immediately adjacent naval bases. Lake Mead, Lake Roosevelt, Ross Lake and Whiskeytown remain open, but the dams at all four areas have been closed. Ditto for Hetch-Hetchy in Yosemite. [Bob Martin, RCR, NER, 9/12; Einar Olsen, RCR, NCR, 9/12; Sgt. R. MacLean, USPP, NCR, 9/12; Dennis McGinnis, Type 1 team, SHEN, 9/12; Dennis Burnett, RAD/WASO, 9/12] Wednesday, September 19, 2001 01-509 - Servicewide - Follow-up: Terrorist Attacks The following changes in the status of National Park Service areas and offices were reported yesterday: o Yosemite NP (CA) - Hetch-Hetchy Dam is open. [Pat Buccello, CISM Team, STLI, 9/19; Dennis McGinnis, Type 1 IMT, WASO, 9/19; Sue Masica, Administration, WASO, 9/19; SHEN EICC, 9/18] Friday, September 28, 2001 01-509 - Servicewide - Follow-up: Terrorist Attacks The National Park Service continues to provide support to its parks and employees, gather information on the status of field areas for DOI, and deal with security issues throughout the country, including the brokering of numerous requests for operational support. The Service's Type 1 IMT (Eddie Lopez, IC) continues its operations from the South Interior Building; the Type 2 East Team (Bob Panko, IC) is overseeing the NPS expanded dispatch operation at Shenandoah NP. Here's a current report on the status of parks affected by this incident: o Yosemite - Hetch Hetchy Dam is open. [EICC/Type 2 IMT, SHEN, 9/27; Kris Fister, NPS Type 1 IMT, WASO, 9/28; Pat Buccello, CISM Team, 9/28; Billy Garrett, Superintendent, Jamaica Bay Unit, GATE, 9/27] Wednesday, October 3, 2001 01-535 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the evening of September 24th, park visitors informed Valley rangers of distress signals being flashed from high up on the Mescalito route on El Capitan. Rangers in El Capitan Meadow communicated with a party about 800 feet down from the top of the route and determined that a climber was injured and in need of a rescue. That night, a major thunderstorm hit the park. The next day the weather cleared and a 13-person rescue team was flown to the top of El Capitan. Rescuers were lowered to the location of the victim, a 24 year-old French climber who had a separated shoulder that was the result of a 40-foot swinging fall. She was placed in full spinal immobilization and then raised to the top. Her partners were able to finish the climb after being re-supplied by the SAR team. Twenty new lightning fire starts were discovered the day of the rescue and competed with the SAR effort for helicopter time. [Steve Yu, Operations Chief, YOSE, 10/1] Monday, October 22, 2001 01-509 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up: Terrorism Attacks and Threats On the evening of Friday, October 19th, two visitors entered a cabin that they'd rented in Curry Village and found a white powdery substance on a shelf. They inadvertently exposed themselves to the substance while placing items on the shelf and requested immediate assistance. Responding concessions security officers and a ranger were also exposed. The area was immediately quarantined and a full hazmat response was initiated, including decontamination procedures. County public health medical staff assisted. The material was collected and taken to a state health lab. On Saturday, the county medical director notified the park that no anthrax was involved. Investigators have not found anyone with motive or reasons to intentionally place the white powder in the room. It appears that this was an accidental spill. The lab did not identify the material, but there were no findings that indicated it was in any way dangerous. [Don Coelho/Jeff Sullivan, YOSE, 10-19/20] Thursday, November 1, 2001 01-509 - Servicewide - Follow-up: Terrorism Alerts and Threats Follow-ups on the September 11th attacks and reports on any subsequent incidents that stem from the heightened state of alert in parks Servicewide will continue to appear under this heading. Two reports today: o Yosemite NP (CA) - The Yosemite Valley post office was closed for several hours on Monday, October 29th, due to the discovery of a letter that fit the U.S. Postal Service's profile for suspicious packages. Rangers and fire personnel secured the post office, coordinated the collection of the letter with Mariposa County Public Health and the state's Office of Emergency Services, and transported it to a lab in Stockton, where it was inspected and determined to be benign. [Jim Tucker, DR, YOSE, 10/31; Holly Rife, CR, BISC, 10/31] Wednesday, November 7, 2001 01-591 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Illegal Air Delivery On the afternoon of November 3rd, rangers received a report of a BASE jumper hitting the wall near the East Buttress of El Capitan. The reporting persons said that they had seen a white parachute and a person clad in a red jumpsuit hit the wall four times before disappearing from sight. Rangers investigated and just before nightfall were able to spot a white parachute attached to a red climbing haul bag stuck on a ledge on the cliff about 500 feet above the base of the wall. Rangers contacted two climbers at the base of the route who had just retreated off the wall. The climbers initially denied any knowledge of the incident, but one of them eventually admitted to pitching the haul bag with a parachute made from a porta-ledge rainfly before they rappelled off. One of them was arrested for making a false report, illegal air delivery and creating a hazardous condition. The other was cited for creating a hazardous condition and released to appear in court at a later date. The following day rangers climbed up to the stuck equipment and seized it as evidence. [Jim Tucker, DR, YOSE, 11/5] Thursday, February 14, 2002 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Homicides The trial of C.S., who has been charged with the February, 1999, murders of C. and J.S. and Silvina Pelosso, has been postponed. The trial, which was to have begun later this month, was rescheduled for June 10th. Both prosecutors and defense attorneys told the court that they needed more time to prepare for the trial. In November, 2000, C.S. pled guilty to the July, 1999, murder of Yosemite Institute instructor J.A. and was sentenced to life without parole. [David Mills, KPIX web site, 2/13] Tuesday, February 19, 2002 02-039 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Serious Employee Illness Craig Bates, the park's curator of ethnography, suffered a stroke on February 6th. Following receipt of a 911 call that morning, the park communications center dispatched El Portal rangers and a park ambulance to his residence. A county deputy also responded. He was flown by medevac helicopter to the hospital in Modesto, where he currently recovering. It's expected that he will be released to a rehab center shortly. Visits are not yet encouraged, but cards are welcomed and may be sent to him care of The Stevenot Family, 2129 Cornwell Avenue, Modesto, CA 95350. For updates, call or email Dave Forgang or Norma Craig at 209-379-1283. [Jeffrey Trust, PR, YOSE, 2/15] Wednesday, March 6, 2002 02-050 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Search On March 1st, D.G., 46, of Chatsworth, California, became lost while cross-country skiing near the Badger Pass ski area. D.G. had planned to ski on the marked ski trails for a few hours, then meet her husband at the trailhead at 4:30 p.m. On her return from a visit to Dewey Point, however, she lost the trail. At 6 p.m., her husband reported her overdue, and Wawona rangers began searching the Badger Pass area by snowmobile. Overnight temperatures were in the mid-20s. Teams of skiers and snowshoers and a helicopter were committed to the search the next morning. A single ski track was found descending a steep, bushy drainage. D.G. was spotted from the air as ground searchers were nearing her location around 2:30 p.m. She was in good condition, and was assisted back to the ski area. [Maura Longden, IC, YOSE, 3/5] Tuesday, April 2, 2002 02-079 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Valley rangers received a report of two climbers stranded at the top of the sixteenth pitch of the "Iron Hawk" route on El Capitan at 2:30 on the afternoon of Friday, March 29th. The climbers reported via family band radio that they were uninjured, but that they had dropped both of their hammers and were unable to continue. While planning was underway for the wall rescue, a hiker having a diabetic emergency was reported on the Vernal Falls trail. The hiker was carried out without incident, but this rescue delayed the retrieval of the stranded climbers on El Capitan until the next day. On March 30th, a team of 13 rescuers was flown to the top of El Capitan by helicopter. Team members lowered ranger Jeff Webb 800 feet to the climbers. Webb secured them to the rescue lines and they were hauled to the top. The ropes were then lowered back down to Webb, who was hauled up. Everyone was flown off and the mission was completed without incident by late afternoon. [Steve Yu, IC/PR, YOSE, 4/1] Friday, April 5, 2002 02-086 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the afternoon of March 26th, J.R., 21, of Laguna Niguel, California, was injured in an off-trail fall near Mirror Lake. J.R. fell 20 and 30 feet down granite slabs while scrambling on the north side of Tenaya Canyon. The rescue involved rangers, fire personnel, maintenance staff, volunteer SAR team members, a Navy rescue helicopter from NAS Lemoore, and an Air Med Team air ambulance from Modesto. J.R.'s companions reported his fall late in the afternoon with about three hours of daylight remaining. Ranger Jack Hoeflich quickly hiked to the scene and found that J.R. had sustained significant head and lower leg injuries and needed to be airlifted from the area. Additional rescuers followed Hoeflich to the scene, providing advanced life support and packaging J.R. for a hoist evacuation. The navy helicopter hoisted J.R. from the slope and flew him to Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley. There he was transferred to the waiting helicopter ambulance and flown directly to Doctors Hospital in Modesto, where he was treated for an ankle fracture and a serious scalp laceration. [Jim Tucker, IC/DR, Valley District, YOSE, 4/3] Monday, April 15, 2002 02-106 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Confrontation; Attempted Suicide, Life Saved On April 10th, Yosemite dispatch was notified by the Mariposa Sheriff's Office that W.W. was probably on his way to a friend's apartment in the Rancheria Flat NPS housing area within the El Portal administrative area. W.W., a former El Portal resident, was reported to be suicidal, and was known to have attempted suicide in the past. El Portal ranger Dave Horne went to the apartment to see if W.W. had showed up. Horne spoke to the resident of the apartment and found that W.W. had been there and tried to get a gun from him, but had not obtained one. W.W. became angry, threatened the resident, and then left. Horne searched the area and found W.W.'s truck parked on a utility road leading out of the housing area. The park's special response team (SRT) and Mariposa deputies were dispatched. A perimeter was set up and the area around W.W.'s vehicle was searched. W.W. was located in some rocks on the slope above the housing area about 250 feet from his vehicle. W.W. immediately said that he had injected air into his veins and was waiting to have a heart attack. He had a small syringe in his hand and there was blood on his arm. W.W. said he was not going to surrender and the officers would have to shoot him if he did not have a heart attack. As SRT members Horne, Steve Yu, Jeff Sullivan, and sheriff's sergeant Doug Binnewies were working their way closer to W.W., he stuck the syringe into the side of his neck up to the base of the needle, but did not depress the plunger. The officer's continued to talk with him as they moved closer. When they were near W.W., Binnewies distracted him and Horne grabbed his hands, pulling the needle out. The other three officers overpowered him and placed him in custody. W.W. was transported by ambulance to a mental health facility for evaluation. State criminal charges are being filed by the sheriff's office. [Jeff Sullivan, SSA, YOSE, 4/11] Wednesday, April 17, 2002 02-111 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescues On Saturday, April 13th, rangers received reports of cries for help coming from the general vicinity of the Five Open Books climbing area in Yosemite Valley. Rangers and SAR team members climbed to the party and found that one of them had an open fracture of his left forearm from being hit by a falling rock. After stabilizing his broken arm, the rescuers assisted him in rappelling to the bottom to a waiting litter team. The injured climber was then evacuated down a 600-foot scree slope to the road. While he was being prepared for evacuation, two other climbers hailed the rescuers. They also reported an injury, but were able to self-evacuate to the base of the route. Other rangers met these climbers at the bottom and assisted them to a waiting ambulance. Interviews with the climbers revealed that both parties were hit by the same rockfall. The lead climber of the upper team dislodged a rock the size of his head. This block then struck a glancing blow to the helmet and shoulder of his belayer. The rock then hit the leader of the second party on the pitch below. He received a glancing blow to his helmet, and a solid strike on his forearm, breaking it. The rock went on to strike his belayer in the arm and hip, but luckily just glancing blows. Two lives were saved by climbing helmets. [Steve Yu, IC, YOSE, 4/16] Tuesday, April 23, 2002 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Follow-up on Homicides On April 15th, a California superior court judge ruled that C.S.'s alleged confession to the murders of C. and J.S. and S.P. can be admitted at his murder trial, which is to take place later this year. C.S. is already serving life in federal prison for the murder of J.A. in Yosemite in July, 1999. For further details, see the newspaper story at http://story.news.yahoo.com/news?tmpl=story&u=/nm/20020415/ts_nm/crime_yosemite_dc_1. [Reuters, via Yahoo! News) Tuesday, April 30, 2002 02-134 - Yosemite NP (CA) - EMS/Hazmat Incident On April 25th, a tour bus transporting students to Yosemite Valley stopped at Savages Trading Post outside the park and reported that several of the students were suffering from medical problems. County EMS units responded and subsequently notified the park that three of the "most critical" patients had been removed from the bus and were en route to the park medical clinic by private auto. No further information was provided. Park EMS staff were subsequently summoned to the Arch Rock entrance station to deal with medical problems on a bus full of students, but found no bus at that location. The three "most critical" patients eventually showed up at the Yosemite Lodge front desk. Two were suffering from breathing difficulty; the third was okay. Yosemite Valley EMS was summoned and treated the two students, who had been exposed to an unknown substance. The location of the bus was not known. Valley fire units were dispatched to deal with what was now deemed to likely be a hazmat incident. A vague description of the bus was obtained, and a ranger subsequently found it in Upper Pines Campground. The substance had already been removed from the bus by the driver and placed in a baggage compartment. Six other students on board the bus were complaining of nausea and watering eyes and were isolated. Firefighters donned breathing apparatus, checked out the bus, and identified the substance as concentrated holding tank deodorant containing methyl alcohol and formaldehyde. All six were taken to the clinic, where they joined the other two victims. Investigators learned what had happened. A student had entered the restroom aboard the bus and a number of other students had held the door closed, not allowing him to get out. When he started suffering from claustrophobia, the students released him, and he retaliated by throwing the deodorant solution on the others. All the windows on the bus were closed at the time due to the heavy rain that was falling, which contributed to the spread and concentration of the fumes. All eight were released that night. [Aaron Fritzer, IC, YOSE, 4/29] Friday, May 10, 2002 02-165 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue Two overdue hikers were successfully rescued after being spotted by helicopter searchers on Tuesday, May 7th. R.A., 28, of Redondo Beach, and C.P., 27, of Los Angeles planned a three-day backpacking trip in the Wawona District, which is in the southern part of the park. Their trip went awry when they lost the trail in snowy conditions. They initially tried to follow a drainage, but decided to stop and wait for rescue when they realized that they were lost. Rangers were notified late Monday night by concerned friends and family when the pair did not return to work earlier that day. A search was begun on Tuesday that involved as many as 40 people. Helicopter searchers followed the pair's tracks in the snow, which ultimately led them to the lost hikers. R.A. and C.P. were hungry and dehydrated, but otherwise in good condition. "This incident had a positive outcome because they had the right gear and clothing, but mainly because they stopped and stayed in one spot once they knew they were lost," said ranger Lulis Cuevas, who served as the incident commander. "Terrain in this area is extremely rugged and the hikers could have easily hurt themselves while looking for the trail." [Public Affairs, YOSE, 5/8] Wednesday, May 22, 2002 02-181 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rock Fall A rockslide occurred within the park around 6 p.m. on the evening of Monday, May 20th. The slide occurred along the El Portal Road (Highway 140) approximately one half-mile east of the park boundary near Dog Rock. A slab of granite approximately 12 feet in diameter released roughly 1,000 feet above the road. There was significant damage to the road and to the rock wall. The entrance into the park at Arch Rock, along Highway 140, was closed until noon yesterday, but Highways 41 and 120 remained open. There were no injuries. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 5/21] Thursday, May 30, 2002 02-189 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue On the morning of May 23rd, Yosemite Valley rangers received a report of an injured climber at the base of Half Dome. A.G., 59, of Minneapolis, Minnesota, had taken a 25-foot leader fall the previous evening while climbing the fifth pitch of the Regular Route on the northwest face of the dome. His two partners lowered him to the base of the wall, where the group spent the night. In the morning, when it was clear to A.G.'s partners that they would not be able to get him out on their own, they contacted friends in the Valley via family band radio and asked them to request assistance. The rescue was accomplished using the park's Bell 205 contract helicopter to rappel in a park medic to assess the patient. A Navy rescue helicopter from NAS Lemoore was then brought in to hoist the patient and rescuer from the scene. A.G. was treated at the Yosemite Medical Clinic for fractured ribs, a sprained ankle and superficial head wounds. [Donna Sisson, IC, YOSE, 5/23] Thursday, June 6, 2002 02-209 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Climbing Rescue Just before dusk on June 2nd, Yosemite Valley rangers received a report of a significant rock fall and subsequent shouts for help coming from the Direct North Buttress route on Middle Cathedral. Using a spotting scope and a PA system, rangers were able to determine that 33-year-old J.K. of Durango, Colorado had been caught in the rock fall and that he was suffering from neck pain and a possible shoulder dislocation and fractured elbow. Due to the loose rock in the area and the difficult position of the climbing party at the base of a long chimney, it was decided that it would be safest to wait until morning to begin the rescue effort. J.K.'s climbing partner held his arm in traction throughout the night as they bivvied on a sloping ledge without overnight gear about 1700 feet above the Valley floor. The following morning, rangers John Dill, Dave Horne, Greg Lawler and Ed Visnovske and fire helitack personnel Dan Gleason and Shawn Walters rappelled from the park helicopter to a spire about 300 feet above the injured climber. Horne was then lowered to J.K. Working in a tight area with an abundance of loose rocks, the rescue team raised Horne and J.K. to the top of the spire. From there, Horne and J.K. were short-hauled under the park helicopter to El Capitan Meadow near the base of the wall. J.K. was taken by park ambulance to the Yosemite Medical Clinic, then flown by air ambulance to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto. After the victim was evacuated, the remaining rescuers and J.K.'s partner were all short-hauled to the meadow. In the aftermath of the recent climbing incidents on Mt. Rainier and Mt. Hood, media interest was extremely high. The park's Media Relations Office conducted over 30 press interviews, and the Sacramento ABC affiliate station's helicopter filmed the short haul. The news footage was shown on ABC stations and on Good Morning America as "The Picture of the Day." J.K. and his partner, Casey Shaw, have about 37 years of climbing experience between them. According to Shaw, J.K.'s climbing helmet saved his life. [Todd Bruno, IC/PR, YOSE, 6/4] Friday, June 7, 2002 02-217 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Fatality M.G., 21, was driving westbound on Highway 140 just west of the park boundary through the El Portal administrative area on the afternoon of May 28th when he lost control of his vehicle and went over a steep bank into the Merced River. At this time of year, the river is high due to spring runoff. M.G.'s pickup truck was found on its side, completely submerged in whitewater. A joint search and recovery operation was initiated that involved responders from the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office SAR team and park SAR, fire, law enforcement, and maintenance personnel. The incident commander was a sheriff's sergeant and the operations chief was ranger Dave Horne. The park contract helicopter was used to ferry rescuers to the other side of the river. A highline was set up and an inflatable raft was tethered above the truck. From this platform, ranger Loren Fazio was able to hook up a chain to the submerged wheel of the vehicle, and the truck was then towed out of the river. M.G. was the only occupant and was pronounced dead at the scene. The accident is being investigated by the California Highway Patrol. [Mark Harvey, PR, YOSE, 5/31] Friday, June 7, 2002 02-218 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue At 2:15 p.m. on Sunday, May 26th, Yosemite Valley rangers received a report of an injured climber 700 feet below the top of the Sunkist route on El Capitan. The initial report was that a climber had suffered abdominal injuries in a fall. Twelve members of the Yosemite Valley SAR team were flown to the summit. Ranger/parkmedic John Dill was lowered to the injured climber, B.M., 23. B.M. was placed in a litter and he and Dill were raised to the top. B.M. was carried to the summit after dark. After spending the night on top, B.M. was flown to the Crane Flat helibase by the park helicopter, then on to Doctor's Medical Center in Modesto by air ambulance. SAR technician Micah Dash was lowered to the remaining climber and they and all equipment were hauled out. [Steve Yu, IC, YOSE, 5/31] Tuesday, June 11, 2002 02-226 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Vandalism On June 6th, rangers arrested a 19-year-old man in association with a series of "tagging" incidents that occurred in the park on May 31st and June 1st. Tagging is an act of vandalism, often associated with gangs, that is used to mark territory. Michael Trevino of Riverside, California, has been charged with 43 counts of damage and destruction to property and one count of being a minor in possession of alcohol. The damage was extensive and included vandalism to rocks, trees, buildings, vehicles, and signs in the Camp 6, Housekeeping Camp, Ahwahnee Hotel and Camp Curry areas. Trevino and a 17-year-old juvenile are suspects in the case. Trevino has been arraigned and released on $5,000 bond pending the next court date; the juvenile was released to his parents. Rangers intend to fully prosecute this case to demonstrate that this behavior is unacceptable in Yosemite or any national park. Restoration efforts are being undertaken to eradicate signs of the vandalism with as little damage to trees and rocks as possible. [Public Affairs, YOSE, 6/7] Tuesday, June 18, 2002 02-240 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Climbing Fatality, Rescue; Helicopter Mishap Early on the afternoon of June 13th, off-duty ranger Jack Hoeflich and SAR technician Greg Loniewski were climbing on Higher Cathedral Rock in Yosemite Valley. They heard cries for help and located an injured climber, R.Z., 43, at the base of the "Braille Book" route. R.Z. had been rope soloing and had taken a 70-foot fall to the ground. R.Z.'s self-belay system had slowed but not stopped his fall, and he had sustained an open fracture of his left elbow. R.Z. also complained of pain in his back and pelvis. Hoeflich ran to the Valley floor and caught a ride to the Valley SAR cache with a passing motorist, arriving around 1:45 p.m. Rangers John Dill, Dave Horne and Donna Sisson heli-rappelled to R.Z.'s location two hours later. They stabilized R.Z. and placed him in a Stokes litter. With the help of several other climbers, R.Z. was moved 50 yards to a location from where he could be hoisted. A rescue helicopter from Naval Air Station Lemoore came in and lowered a Navy hospital corpsman to the scene, then lifted the corpsman and the litter up to the helicopter. As the hoist operation was underway, the helicopter began having problems. While the crew attempted to maintain safe flight, the hoist cable separated from the litter and the hoist belay rope caught the litter and attendant. The crew was able to set the litter down in El Capitan Meadow, then land. The corpsman was transported via air ambulance to Doctor's Medical Center in Modesto, where he was treated for a bilateral pneumothorax and a concussion. He was in stable condition at the time of the report. R.Z. was pronounced dead at El Capitan Meadow after a lengthy resuscitation effort. The NPS, DOI Office of Aircraft Services, and the Navy are cooperating on the investigation of the helicopter mishap. [Steve Yu, PR/IC, YOSE, 6/14] Tuesday, July 9, 2002 02-283 - Servicewide - Follow-up: Fourth of July Special Events A number of significant events occurred in the parks on the Fourth of July and the days before and after: • Yosemite NP (CA) - The park was very busy on the Fourth of July weekend, but had very few problems overall. Although exact visitation figures are not yet available, it's estimated that as many as 50,000 people visited the park over the four-day weekend. Despite the full campgrounds and crowded trails, there were very few arrests or search and rescue incidents. Additional reports are anticipated and will appear in future editions. [Ed Wenschhof, CR, ANTI, 7/8; Shauna Dyas, IO, IMT, 7/8; Greg Shine, CR, FOVA, 7/8; Public Affairs, YOSE, 7/8] Tuesday, July 16, 2002 02-039 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Rescue J.F., a 28 year-old student at Stanford University, set out to climb the Southeast Buttress of Cathedral Peak in Tuolumne Meadows with a female partner early on the morning of July 8th. The climb, which includes six pitches covering almost 11,000 feet, is rated a very difficult 5.6. J.F. was leading the fourth pitch around 9 a.m. when he took a 40 to 60 foot fall. He struck a ledge before he was caught by the rope and suffered open fractures to his right femur and arm, broke several ribs, his pelvis and his jaw, and fractured his skull. His breathing was compromised by a hemo-pneumothorax. The accident was not reported to Tuolumne rangers until about 2 p.m. A ground team of four YOSAR members hiked two-and-a-half miles to the base of the climb. A parallel heli-rappel response with the park helicopter was initiated but not used. The ground team climbed fixed ropes to get to J.F., who was about 400 feet up the face on a small ledge. They reached him by 4:40 p.m. and advanced life support treatment was started. The helicopter lowered a litter to the rescuers on the cliff face. J.F. was packaged in the litter, then picked up and shorthauled under the helicopter to Tuolumne Meadows, arriving about 6:30 p.m. He was transferred to an AirMed commercial medical helicopter and flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto. At the time of this report, he was still in critical condition. [Jeff Webb, PR/Ops. Chief, YOSE, 7/15] Monday, August 12, 2002 02-379 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Bike Accident; Life Saved On the afternoon of August 4th, rangers received a report of an injured bicyclist on the bike path near Housekeeping Camp in Yosemite Valley. R.M., 37, had gone off the paved trail and over a drop-off, causing him to go headfirst over his handlebars and hit his head against a boulder. He was not wearing a helmet. Rangers were on scene within minutes of the accident and found R.M. being held in a seated position by his friend. He was unresponsive and not breathing. Rangers immediately repositioned him to open his airway. Ranger Tom Wilson inserted an esophageal airway while other park medics packaged R.M. to protect his spine. He was transported by NPS ambulance directly to a waiting air ambulance and flown to Doctor's Medical Center in Modesto, California, where he was last listed in serious condition with multiple cervical vertebrae fractures. [David Horne, Valley Shift Supervisor, YOSE] Wednesday, August 21, 2002 02-406 - Yosemite NP (CA) - Technical Rescue On Saturday, August 10th, Tuolumne rangers received a report of two climbers stranded near the top of Fairview Dome. At 11 a.m. C.N., 28, of Culver City, and C.C., 45, of Santa Monica, California, began climbing the ten pitch "Regular Route". At about 7 p.m., they reached a prominent ledge at pitch seven. The two were unable to progress beyond this point because of fatigue and dehydration. They were neither clothed nor equipped to be on the face overnight near 10,000 feet in the 30 degree temperatures, so began yelling for help. A friend heard their cries and reported the situation to rangers. At approximately 9:30 p.m., a technical rescue team of rangers and YOSAR members hiked to the top of the dome. Spotlights and a loud speaker were used to locate and communicate with the climbers. Rescuers were lowered 350 feet to them. They were provided with warm clothes and water and assisted in ascending fixed lines. The climbers and rescuers all arrived safely on top by 4 a.m., then hiked off the dome. [George Paiva, PR/IC, YOSE] Friday, August 30, 2002 02-430 - Yosemite NP (CA) - MVA with Fatality On the evening of Friday, August 16th, P.M., 47, of Merced, California, died instantly when his vehicle hit a tree on South Side Drive in Yosemite Valley in an unwitnessed collision. P.M.'s vehicle was found on its side with the roof folded around a tree; his body was trapped inside. Yosemite Valley structural firefighters had to cut the roof off the car to extricate the body. Evidence indicates that alcohol and speed were likely contributing factors. [Leslie Reynolds, PR/IC, YOSE] Monday, September 16, 2002 02-458 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Structural Fires Yosemite Valley firefighters were dispatched to investigate a report of smoke in the women's restroom at the Huff House concession employee housing area near Curry Village on September 8. This is a temporary housing area set up after the 1997 flood to house concession employees. The first units to arrive confirmed that smoke was issuing from the building. Yosemite Concession Services Engine 7 was first to arrive and deployed a single line into the structure. NPS Engine 5 supplied a secondary line and started overhaul. The fire was contained to the area directly underneath a hot water heater. The water heater had malfunctioned, causing excessive heat to build at the base and burning a hole through the linoleum and plywood floor. No other damage occurred. Just after 5 a.m. on September 12, park dispatch received a 911 report of a tent on fire at Tuolumne Lodge. Local rangers were contacted and a structural engine dispatched from Yosemite Valley. The tent was unoccupied at the time, but the neighboring tent was not. The occupants of the neighboring tent were alerted to the fire by the sound of an aerosol container exploding and were able to escape without injury. Concession employees laid hose from the nearest fire hydrant and began attacking the fire. Before water could be applied, however, the neighboring tent caught fire. The fire was knocked down before the first NPS unit arrived. The two tents and contents were a total loss. The tents housed four concession employees who worked at the lodge. Most of the occupants had their summer savings and paychecks stored in metal cans within the tents. Loss was conservatively calculated at $4,000 for the two tents and about $10,000 for the contents. The cause is still under investigation. [Submitted by Aaron J. Fritzer, Valley Station Captain, Yosemite NP] Friday, September 27, 2002 02-492 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Car Clout Investigation Underway On the afternoon and early evening of September 17, there were ten auto break-ins at trailhead parking areas along the Glacier Point and Tioga Pass roads. The method of entry was the same in each - a side window was broken by levering the glass with a tool similar to a large, flat-head screwdriver. Items taken were near the broken windows; there was no systematic theft of items from the vehicles and many valuable items were left behind. Wallets, purses, backpacks and similar containers were removed, then dumped after the valuables were taken. Cash, some credit cards, cell phones and cameras were stolen. If you have had similar car clouts in your park, please contact special agent Dan Horner at 209-372-0361. [Submitted by Dan Horner, Special Agent, Yosemite NP] Friday, October 04, 2002 02-509 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Search Underway for Missing Hiker A search is underway for 66-year-old W.R., whose car was found at the White Wolf trailhead on September 30. W.R. likely took a day hike from White Wolf on or about September 20. Rangers have determined that he is a fast and strong hiker and that he's in excellent physical shape. An active search is underway, including issuance of posters with his photo throughout the area. Efforts are being made to contact anyone who hiked in the White Wolf area at any time between September 19 and September 30. Reports should be called in to the parks communication center at 209-379-1992. [Submitted by Public Affairs Office] Friday, October 11, 2002 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Follow-up on S.-P. Homicides The jury that previously found C.S. guilty of the 1999 murders of C. and J.S. and S.P. has concluded deliberations on the sentence and recommended to the court that he be put to death. C.S. is already serving a life sentence for the murder of naturalist J.A. in the park. Sentencing is set for December 12. For the full story, see the Sacramento Bee story at http://www.sacbee.com/content/news/story/4736100p-5752025c.html. Friday, October 11, 2002 02-532 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Technical Rescue from Lost Brothers Climbing Route On the afternoon of September 28, park dispatch received an emergency cell phone call from a man who reported that his climbing partner was injured on the Lost Brother on the south wall of Yosemite Valley. P.M., 55, and his two partners, all from the Sacramento area, were climbing the historic (and seldom climbed) route when P.M. took a leader fall and ended up hanging injured several feet above his belayer's stance. P.M.'s partners cut him lose from the ropes, secured him at the belay stance, and placed the cell phone call to get help. Rangers and YOSAR team members climbed about 1,000 feet above the Valley floor to P.M.'s position and began medical treatment. P.M. was lowered about 100 feet to a more secure location on a ledge just as darkness fell. It had been raining periodically all day and the heavy cloud cover prevented using a helicopter short haul to evacuate P.M.. The extremely loose rock made a lowering operation very hazardous. P.M.'s condition was stable, so SAR tech/parkmedic Keith Tampa and YOSAR team member Micah Dash stayed on the cliff through the night, monitoring his condition. Early the next morning, the park contract helicopter short hauled P.M. off the cliff to El Capitan Meadow. He was then taken by ambulance to the Yosemite Medical Clinic, where he was diagnosed with a pneumothorax and a broken hip. He was flown out of Yosemite Valley by helicopter ambulance for further medical treatment. [Submitted by Ed Visnovske, Park Ranger/Incident Commander] Monday, October 21, 2002 02-534 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Conviction in Assault on Rangers On July 3, 2001, rangers were called to the Lost Arrow concession dormitory in Yosemite Valley to deal with a fight in progress. When they arrived, they found A.B. bleeding from a cut to his forehead, and another man bleeding from a bottle cut to his forehead and complaining of a bite wound to his leg. A.B. had been drinking and was loud and belligerent. As rangers Tom Wilson and Kevin Harrison were attempting to handcuff A.B., he spit a mouthful of blood into Wilson's face and told the ranger that he now had hepatitis C. A.B. also kicked Harrison in the leg multiple times. A.B. was indicted on July 12, 2001, on two felony counts of assault on a federal officer and a single count of assault with a deadly weapon for hitting the other man in the head with a beer bottle. Search warrants were issued to permit the drawing of A.B.'s blood for testing while he was in custody; grand jury subpoenas for his medical records were served on the Arizona Department of Corrections, where he had been tested and advised that he had hepatitis C. The U.S. Attorney's Office made a plea offer which A.B. refused to take. A trial date was set. On December 13, 2001, A.B. was charged in a six count superseding indictment with the attempted murder of a federal officer (by spitting blood in Wilson's face), attempted murder (by biting the civilian), two counts of assault with intent to commit murder (for assaulting Wilson by spitting and for biting the civilian), assault on a federal officer (for kicking Harrison), and assault with a deadly weapon (for hitting the civilian with the bottle). The U.S. Attorney's Office then made a new plea offer. A.B. eventually agreed to the offer and plead guilty to a single count of assault. He was sentenced on October 3 to 57 months in prison and 36 months supervised release and ordered to pay restitution to the civilian victim for his significant medical expenses. The U.S. Attorney's Office in Fresno was extremely supportive in obtaining the significant sentence in this case. [Submitted by Dan Horner, Special Agent] Monday, October 21, 2002 02-535 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Rescue from El Capitan A climbing party on the Zodiac route on El Capitan contacted the park at 9 a.m. on October 1, advising that a solo climber on the Eagle's Way route just east of them had been injured in a 60-foot fall. T.R., a 22-year-old Englishman, had sustained a serious cut and rope burns on his hand and was asking to be rescued. The weather was cool, with low clouds in the area. A team of 11 rescuers was flown to the top of El Capitan in the park's contract helicopter. Rescue team member Micah Dash was lowered 500 feet to T.R.. The pair were then lowered 800 feet to the base of the east face of El Capitan, about 1,000 feet above the valley floor. T.R. was placed in a Stokes litter, then short-hauled under the helicopter to El Capitan meadow. Bad weather and a shortage of available personnel due to a simultaneous large search hampered rescue operations. [Submitted by Steve Yu, Shift Supervisor/Operations Chief] Friday, October 25, 2002 02-226 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Follow-up on Serious Vandalism Incident On June 1, M.A.T., 19, of Riverside, California, was arrested by rangers in Yosemite Valley for being under the influence of alcohol and for 43 counts of "tagging" cars, rocks, trees and buildings with spray paint (tagging is an act of vandalism, often associated with gangs, that is used to mark territory). A 17-year-old juvenile was also charged for the tagging. On October 15, M.A.T. was sentenced in Yosemite's federal magistrate's court after pleading guilty to 10 counts of vandalism under the terms of a plea agreement. He was placed on two years' probation, ordered to make restitution to the victims to cover clean-up costs, and sentenced to 120 days in the custody of the Bureau of Prisons. No fine was ordered because of M.A.T.'s inability to pay one. The prosecution of the juvenile is continuing. [Submitted by Cheri Murdock, Prosecutor] Friday, October 25, 2002 02-557 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Climbing Fatality Climbers at Cookie Cliff heard a rockfall late on the morning of October 15. "The Cookie" is a popular Yosemite day use climbing area in the Merced River canyon below Yosemite Valley. Later that afternoon, two climbers found the body of 23-year-old P.J. at the base of the cliff near the point where the rockfall had occurred. A sling anchor was found set-up near the top of the cliff, 150 to 200 feet directly above the body, and a rope was found unattached to anything hung-up on the cliff. It is likely that P.J. had fallen at the same time that the rockfall occurred. It appears that he was alone and preparing to rappel when the accident occurred. The accident remains under investigation. [Submitted by Mark Harvey, El Portal Subdistrict Ranger/Incident Commander] Monday, November 18, 2002 02-591 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - Two Missing Backpackers Found and Rescued On November 13, park searchers found two overdue backpackers after spotting them by helicopter. T.S., 35, and C.H., 36, both of Sherwood, Oregon, had obtained a wilderness permit and started their hike on November 4 and were to have completed it by November 8. On November 12, family members contacted the park and reported that Hoffman and T.S. had not yet returned home. Rangers found their car in the Yosemite Valley wilderness parking lot that night, and a search employing trackers and helicopters was begun the next morning. Around noon, the crew of a contract helicopter spotted an "SOS" that the pair had made in the snow and some tarps that they'd laid out to increase their visibility to searchers. Both were tired but otherwise fine. They reported that they'd hiked into the Clark Range in the southeastern section of the park and had been caught in the first winter storm of the year. They endured ferocious conditions that brought snow, rain, high winds, and poor visibility. Although they were well equipped and had considerable survival skills, including training in survival in adverse conditions, they became more and more worried as time passed. They began rationing their food and were planning to try to hike out when they heard the helicopters overhead. "We are so thankful and appreciate everything everyone did to find us," T.S. and C.H. both said. "We are very happy to find them alive and well," said ranger Ron Hamann, who was IC for the operation. "Its great to have a successful search." [Submitted by Public Affairs] Monday, December 23, 2002 99-57/99-401 - Yosemite National Park (CA) - C.S. Sentenced to Death for Murders Near Park On December 12, C.S. was sentenced to die for murdering C. and J.S. and S.P. near the park in 1999. C.S. previously pled guilty to the 1999 murder of Yosemite Institute instructor J.A. in the park. He was sentenced to life without parole for that murder. Many news stories have appeared on the C.S. case, conviction and sentencing which do more justice to this story than can be encapsulated in a brief incident summary. The park recommends a long article by Stacy Finz that appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle on December 15 for an account of both the crimes and the investigation. It can be found at http://www.sfgate.com/stayner/. Please be forewarned that the story is not a pleasant one. We are not unmindful of the time of year that this is appearing, and suggest that you first give some thought about whether or not you need all this detail. Thursday, January 09, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Climbing Fatality While hiking near the base of El Capitan in a snowstorm on the evening of December 28, climbers heard yells for help coming from the Zodiac route and reported the yelling to the park around 7:30 p.m. Ranger Jack Hoeflich hiked to the base of the route in the severe storm, arriving there about 11 p.m. With difficulty, Hoeflich located an unresponsive climber swinging in the wind on a rope about 25 feet above the ground and 15 feet out from the overhanging wall. Additional rangers and rescue team members arrived after 1 a.m. with rescue equipment. A rope was clipped to the climber with considerable effort, using a 25-foot "cheater stick" extendable pole. Hoeflich then ascended a fixed rope about 70 feet to the west of the stranded climber and hanging 15 feet out from the wall. Hoeflich trailed the rope that was attached to the climber. When he was at about the same level as the immobile climber, Hoeflich and the climber were pulled together by the team on the ground using the previously attached rope. Hoeflich rigged him to be lowered and the ground team let him down. Park medics and EMTs did CPR until he was declared dead by medical control via cell phone. The body was then littered over the snow-covered talus slope and hauled to the road shortly after 4 a.m. The climber was later identified as J.E.C., 25, of San Jose, California. Witnesses confirmed that J.E.C. had been solo climbing the Zodiac. [Submitted by David Horne, Supervisory Park Ranger/Team Leader] Thursday, January 30, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Terminated Park Employee Convicted of Theft On August 4, ranger Jack Hoeflich took a report of a video camera stolen from a restroom at Camp 4 where the victim had left it to charge the battery. Hoeflich followed leads that pointed to a seasonal campground maintenance worker as the suspect. Hoeflich turned the information over to special agent Mike Osborne for follow-up. During his investigation, Osborne discovered that the same suspect, R.D., had also been seen stealing the wheels and tires from a disabled car parked along the El Portal road. Agents recovered the wheels and tires from the bed of R.D.'s campground maintenance truck. Osborne interviewed R.D., who admitted to taking the camera and the wheels and tires but said that he intended to return them to the owners if they could be located. During the interview, agents smelled marijuana on R.D.. When questioned about this, he admitted to smoking marijuana on duty and turned over 3.5 grams of dope and a glass pipe from the pocket of his uniform shirt. R.D. was terminated from his job and charged with theft and possession of controlled substance. A trial was held on December 18 in the Yosemite magistrate's court and R.D. was found guilty on all three counts. He was sentenced to nine months in the custody of the Bureau of Prisons. . [Submitted by Mike Osborne, Special Agent] Wednesday, April 09, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Technical Rescue from Grizzly Peak Around 9:15 p.m. on Saturday, March 30th, campers in Yosemite Valley reported that two men from their group had failed to return from a day hike. H.Y.L., 22, from Singapore, and S.S., 23, from Kazakhstan, were last seen at approximately 11:15 a.m. scrambling up the southwest ridge of Grizzly Peak. Hasty searchers hiked the trails in the area that night with light and sound attractors, but were unable to locate the pair. At approximately 11:30 a.m. on Sunday, searchers at the Vernal Fall footbridge met S.S. hiking toward Yosemite Valley. He told them that H.Y.L. was stranded on a ledge near Grizzly Peak. Air and ground spotters were sent out, and at about 12:50 p.m. H.Y.L. was sighted sitting on a ledge near the Grizzly Peak summit. Ranger Ed Visnovske led a five-person technical rescue team up Grizzly Peak from Happy Isles. They reached H.Y.L. at 4:00 p.m. and gave him water and technical gear. He was then lowered down several hundred feet of steep loose terrain. The rescue team and H.Y.L. then walked out to Happy Isles at 6:00 p.m. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, Incident Commander] Friday, April 25, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Special Event: Director's Visit and Congressional Hearing On Monday, April 21st, Director Mainella and Representatives Radanovich (CA), Nunez (CA) and Christensen (Virgin Islands) arrived in Yosemite for field hearings to be conducted the next day by the House Subcommittee on National Parks, Recreation and Public Lands. The weather was unseasonably cold and stormy and chain controls went into effect on the Wawona and Big Oak Flat roads. Both roads ended up being closed by multiple accidents for several hours during the afternoon and evening. Director Mainella was diverted in via the El Portal road below the snow. Special agents provided protection during her transportation to the park and at a dinner that night at the Ahwahnee with the Representatives, Deputy Director Jones, Regional Director Jarvis, Superintend Tollefson, and several park partners. Also attending was Eric Ruff, director of communications for Secretary Norton, who was in the park working on the development of messaging strategies for significant park issues. During the night, rangers and SAR team members searched until after midnight for a Danish man lost in the snow storm without overnight gear five miles up the Little Yosemite Valley trail. The following morning was clear and the field hearings were held in the visitor center auditorium after Director Mainella and Congressman Radanovich met with local school groups on the Village Mall. Testimony was taken from Director Mainella, local businesspersons, special interest groups, and the park concessionaire. All went smoothly in spite of the fact that a group of about 40 demonstrators dressed in jail stripes organized by the American Land Rights Association marched and chanted under the conditions of a special use permit in a designated First Amendment area in front of the visitor center. The event was well covered by the media, with an ABC network and three local station television camera crews and at least eight newspaper reporters. The park and the concessionaire, Yosemite Concession Services, also hosted several exhibits and programs on the mall that were related to Earth Day. The incident was managed under the incident command system utilizing the park special response team and other park staff to provide protection services to the director and the representatives, deal with the media, and to manage the demonstration. Don Coelho was the IC. For more information, go to http:// www.modbee.com/local/story/6599361p-7538777c.html and see the related story on InsideNPS. [Submitted by Don Coelho, Deputy Chief Ranger and IC] Friday, May 09, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue from El Capitan On the evening of May 4th, S.R., 25, of Wilmington, New York, fell 30 feet while climbing the seventh pitch of the Zodiac, a big wall route on El Capitan, with his partner C.M. S.R. struck a ledge during the fall, fracturing his pelvis. Despite pain that he described as nine on a scale of ten, he began rappelling off the cliff. At 9 p.m., he used his cell phone to call a friend living in Yosemite, who alerted the park. The park rescue team hiked half a mile up the steep talus slope to the base of the route and prepared to climb to S.R.'s assistance. S.R., however, managed to continue his descent all the way to the ground, a process that necessitated passing a knot joining his ropes while hanging in a waterfall in the dark. Park medics treated S.R. with IV fluid and morphine for his pain, and the team carried him down the slope, reaching the road at 2:20 a.m. S.R. was transported by ground ambulance to the Mariposa airport, then flown to Memorial Hospital in Modesto by Mediflight helicopter. He was released later the same day to convalesce at home. Twenty-three rescuers participated in the incident, most of them required for the carryout. [Submitted by John Dill, Incident Commander] Tuesday, June 03, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Drowning in Merced River Late on the afternoon of May 22nd, M.M., Jr., 22, of Riverside, California, drowned after falling into the Merced River below the Vernal Fall footbridge. The river is in spring run-off and flowing at a very high level. M.M. and three friends were on a large sloping granite boulder that extended out into the river. Witnesses reported that M.M. had gone to the river's edge to take a photograph when he slipped and fell into the raging waters. He was visible in the water briefly, then disappeared down the cataract. A witness called 911 by cell phone and reported the incident to park dispatch. Search and rescue personnel searched the river corridor for several hours that evening but could not locate M.M.. Two dog teams and shore-based searchers continued the effort the following morning. A dog handler spotted M.M.'s body wrapped over a log near the river's edge in an eddy about 400 yards downstream from the point where he slipped into the water. Rescue team members were able to recover the body from shore by staying on top of the log. [Submitted by Doug Roe, Special Agent] Friday, June 06, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Climbing Fatality on Lower Cathedral Rock On the morning of Saturday, May 31st, C.H., 25, of Breckenridge, Colorado, died while climbing the Overhang Bypass route on Lower Cathedral Rock in Yosemite Valley. Climbing a considerable distance above his last protection, C.H. took a leader fall of at least 80 feet and was caught by his partner, S.H. C.H. ended up around a corner from S.H. and did not respond to her yells. Minutes after the fall another climber, B.J., happened upon S.H. while free soloing the same route. B.J. climbed up to a point on the route where he could see C.H. hanging more than 40 feet below. B.J. called out to C.H. and encouraged him to try to climb back up. C.H. could not climb and appeared disoriented to B.J.. C.H. also said that he could not see. Without gear to descend to C.H., B.J. down-climbed the route and then drove to the Valley SAR cache, where he reported the incident at 12:15 p.m. SAR team members responded and a paramedic was with C.H. by 1:57 p.m. Medical control at the Yosemite Medical Clinic pronounced C.H. dead via the radio at 2:12 p.m. C.H.'s body was lowered about 300 feet to a ledge. From there he was transported by long line under the park helicopter to the Crane Flat Helibase. C.H. received severe trauma to his head in the fall. He was not wearing a helmet. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, IC] Tuesday, June 24, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue Of Injured Hiker Near Vernal Falls On the afternoon of June 17th, Yosemite dispatch received a 911 call from a visitor on a cell phone reporting an injured hiker on a rock slab near the Emerald Pool, just above the Vernal Falls spillover. Ranger Laura Pearson was first on scene, She found that G.F., 39, from Germany, was suffering from an open fracture of his left elbow, a severely angulated left ankle, and various other injures. G.F. had been scrambling by himself on the rocky ledges above the pool when he fell and tumbled approximately 150 feet before stopping. Still out of sight or earshot of anyone, he then crawled a significant distance out into the open where, after almost two hours, he was able to get the attention of other hikers. Due to G.F.'s location and the severity of his injuries, additional rescuers were flown into the area in the park's contract helicopter. G.F.'s injuries were stabilized and he was packaged for extrication. A California Highway Patrol helicopter was used to hoist the patient off of the slab and fly him to Yosemite Valley, where he was met by a helicopter air ambulance and flown to a Modesto trauma center. [Submitted by Chad Andrews, Park Ranger] Tuesday, June 24, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Injured Hiker Rescued From Tenaya Canyon G.B.-B., 18, of Saint Louis Missouri fell while hiking cross-country down Tenaya Canyon around 4 p.m. on Friday, June 20th. When G.B.-B. reached "the Narrows", a steep narrow section of the canyon, he was unable to continue without technical gear due to the vertical terrain. He traversed out onto the canyon wall and located a fixed rope which had been abandoned on an overhanging cliff. When he attempted to descend the rope hand-over-hand, he fell off, landing in a pool of water and breaking his right femur. G.B.-B. was able to crawl out of the water and used his cell phone, which miraculously survived both the fall and the water, to dial 911. Rescuers flew to the area aboard the park's contract helicopter and spotted Bailey lying on a ledge. A landing area was found about a quarter mile away in the bottom of the canyon below the narrows. SAR personnel scrambled up to G.B.-B.'s position. He was packaged in a vacuum body splint and litter and hoisted from the ledge by a California Highway Patrol helicopter and taken to Yosemite Valley. An AirMed helicopter then took him to the hospital in Modesto. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, Incident Commander] Tuesday, July 01, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue of Injured Concession Employee On the afternoon of Tuesday, June 24th, dispatch received a 911cell phone call from K.K., a 20-year old new concession employee who had been in the park only a few days. K.K. reported that she was hiking by herself, had fallen near Hidden Falls, and had likely broken her leg. She told the dispatcher that she was wet, cold, and in a great deal of pain. Hidden Falls is located about a mile and a half up Tenaya Canyon from Mirror Lake. Most of that distance can be covered on a well-maintained trail, but the final half mile is over a rough, unmaintained social trail. A ten-person rescue team was sent and arrived on scene about 4:30 p.m. K.K. had a broken femur and her pain was immediately reduced when a traction splint was applied. She was packaged in a vacuum body splint, placed in a litter, and carried to an open area. Because of K.K.'s condition and the rough terrain, the litter was lifted out of the canyon on the hoist of a California Highway Patrol helicopter. K.K. was flown to Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley where she was reloaded inside the CHP helicopter and then flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto for further treatment. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, Field Team Leader] Tuesday, July 15, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Concessioner Bus Accident with Multiple Injuries On the morning of Saturday, July 5th, a Wawona maintenance worker reported by radio that there was a bus accident near Washburn Point on the Glacier Point Road. A Yosemite Concessions Services bus carrying 25 passengers was going down the switchbacks towards Glacier Point when the brakes failed. The driver put the bus into low gear, but this was not effective at keeping the bus at a safe speed. She then tried to shift into park, but the transmission just made a grinding noise and the bus lost all engine power. The driver warned the passengers that she had lost control of the bus and couldn't keep it on the road. The bus then went off the road and hit a tree. Five passengers received minor injuries, including possible fractures of an ankle and an arm, two back injuries, and one facial laceration. All of the injured were transported by ambulance to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. Among the uninjured passengers were the park superintendent, Michael Tollefson, and his wife. The response included one fire engine, three ambulances, and five ranger patrol units. [Submitted by Michael Brindeiro, IC, Wawona District] Monday, July 21, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rock Fall Closes Trail, Injures Three A significant rockfall occurred in the park around noon on July 17th. The rocks fell from the Panorama Cliffs and came down on the John Muir Trail at a point roughly six switchbacks above the John Muir Trail/Mist Trail junction near the Vernal Fall footbridge. At least three visitors were injured in the rockfall - a 33-year-old man suffered a head injury, a 30-year-old woman suffered a leg fracture, and a 21-month-old child sustained unknown injuries. The trail was closed. At the time of the report, park staff were assessing the area to determine the extent of the rockfall, the amount of damage to the trail, and the danger of further falls. [Submitted by Public Affairs] Monday, July 21, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Climber Killed When Rappel Anchor Fails Tuolumne rangers received a cell phone call on the afternoon of July 2nd, reporting that a climber had fallen on the West Pillar of Eichorn Pinnacle route on Cathedral Peak. M.L., 48, of Tahoe City, California, was climbing with three other friends. One of the group was having trouble and they all decided to rappel off the mountain. A rappel was rigged from an existing anchor, which consisted of webbing and cord that was evidently threaded behind a constriction in a finger-width crack. The lead climber rappelled down 25 feet to M.L.'s position. M.L. then rappelled from there. When he was 25 feet down, the rappel anchor failed and M.L. fell approximately 230 feet to the base of the route, sustaining mortal injuries. The rappel anchor was found intact on the ground with the rappel rope still attached. The climber who rigged the rappel told rangers that he had evaluated the anchor by tugging on it several times, but did not thoroughly inspect it visually. One of other climbers ran down the trail to the Tioga Road and reported the incident to rangers via cell phone. Rangers responded to the accident scene in the park helicopter and on foot to investigate and recover M.L.'s body. Just before dusk, the body was flown off the peak by long line. [George Paiva, SAR Coordinator, Tuolumne Wednesday, July 23, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rock Fall Injures Family Of Three Around noon on Thursday, July 17th, a ranger at Glacier Point reported by radio that a large rockslide and dust plume could be seen near Panorama Cliff. A short time later, Yosemite dispatch received a cell phone call from a hiker on the John Muir Trail just below the base of Panorama Cliff, reporting that there were at least three injured hikers, including a baby. On-duty rangers responded immediately from Yosemite Valley and Little Yosemite Valley. A multiple casualty team made up of search and rescue team members, rangers from both the Valley District and Tuolumne Subdistrict, and trail and forestry crew members responded to the scene. The injured hikers were about two miles up the trail. The initial responders found R.G. and G.G. and their 21-month-old daughter in the rubble. About 250 feet of trail was covered with rocks up to four feet in diameter. R.G. reportedly had been struck in the back of the head by a basketball-sized rock. He was conscious, but extremely disoriented, and he could not see. G.G. and the baby had received minor back and leg injuries. Rudy was placed in a vacuum body splint and transported down the trail in a wheeled litter. G.G. and her daughter were transported together in another wheeled litter. The patients were met at the trailhead by ambulances. Rudy was transported to the Ahwahnee Meadow, and then flown by helicopter ambulance to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto. G.G. and the infant were transported to the Yosemite Medical Clinic where they were treated and released later that day. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, Valley District] Wednesday, July 23, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Successful Search For Missing Hiker On the morning of Saturday, July 6th, Tuolumne rangers took a report of a lost backpacker who had last been seen near 11,000 feet on Donahue Pass, headed into the park. H.S., 38, of Seattle, Washington, became separated from his hiking partner, Ken Mendoza, the previous day when they left the trail on a large snowfield above upper Lyell base camp. When H.S. did not catch up, Mendoza spent the remainder of the day and night looking for him with no success. On the following morning, Mendoza hiked out and reported the incident at Tuolumne. H.S. had minimal overnight gear for the elevation (nighttime temperatures in the low 30s), was inexperienced at backcountry travel, and was out of food. He also had some medical concerns. Searchers were flown into the area for containment via the park helicopter while other teams hiked in. The search continued all day and found no clues. An observer in the helicopter spotted H.S. off trail near Kuna Creek around 8 p.m. He was picked up and flown to Tuolumne Meadows. H.S. later told rangers that he had crossed the snow-covered trail and continued walking northeast along easy terrain under the belief that he would encounter the trail within a short time. [Submitted by George Paiva, IC] Monday, July 28, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Four-Vehicle Accident with Fifteen Visitors Injured On the afternoon of July 11th, a four-vehicle, multi-casualty accident occurred on the Wawona Road near Avalanche Creek. The accident involved two vans, a sedan and an SUV that collectively had 16 occupants. The SUV rolled over in the crash. A parkwide response ensued that included three fire engines, six ambulances (four from the park, two from outside the park), and nine rangers. Fifteen of the 16 sustained injuries, ranging from minor cuts and lacerations to broken clavicles and head injuries. Due to the violence of the accident, 14 were transported on backboards; 10 were taken to Yosemite Medical Clinic and the other five were transported to hospitals in Mariposa and Oakhurst. One of the victims taken to the park clinic was subsequently flown out to a regional hospital. The highway was closed for more than two hours. [Submitted by Cameron Sholly, Incident Commander] Tuesday, July 29, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Search and Climbing Accidents On Tuesday, July 15th, rangers responded to a number of single-day SAR incidents in the Tuolumne Subdistrict. At 11:30 a.m., rangers took a report of a missing concession employee. C.R., a 19-year old employee of the Tuolumne Grill, had planned to hike down to Yosemite Valley from Tuolumne Meadows via the Snow Creek Trail, but she never arrived. When C.R. failed to show up for work at 11 a.m., rangers were advised. At noon, search teams from the Tuolumne Meadows Subdistrict and Valley District began searching the Tenaya Canyon and Snow Creek areas on foot and by park helicopter. No clues had been found by 3 p.m., so the search effort was scaled up. At about 3:20 p.m., a climber fall on the Hermaphrodite Flake route on Stately Pleasure Dome was reported. Twenty-five-year-old G.G. of England had rappelled off the end of his rope while descending the route, then slid more than 200 feet down steep slabs to a ledge. Tuolumne rangers and YOSAR team members responded with the ambulance and technical rescue equipment. At approximately 3:35 p.m., while on the way to the above accident, the Tuolumne ambulance was flagged down by other climbers who reported that a man had fallen 90 feet while leading the Dike Route on Pywiack Dome. Additional Mather District and Valley District personnel responded to assist with this accident. Another park ambulance and the June Lake Paramedics from outside the park were also dispatched. At about 4 p.m., the park helicopter located C.R., the missing hiker, off the trail near Tenaya Canyon and picked her up. By 5:30 p.m., Tuolumne rangers and YOSAR members had lowered the injured climber at Stately Pleasure Dome 200 feet to the ground. Both fall victims were stabilized and then transported to medical treatment by separate ambulances. [Submitted by George Paiva, Incident Commander] Wednesday, July 30, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Serious Employee Injury At 5:30 a.m. on the morning of July 15th, stock packer O.C., 47, was preparing to pack a string of mules at the Hetch Hetchy corral to supply a trail crew in the park's north backcountry. While he was working with the stock in the coral, a mule pinned him against the five-foot-high steel fence, crushing his chest. Trail crew personnel assisted O.C. and called for help. Mather District rangers responded with the park ambulance, and a helicopter ambulance was dispatched from Modesto. Medics treated O.C., who was having severe chest pain and difficulty breathing, and transported him to meet the helicopter at the Hetch Hetchy helipad. He was flown to Doctors Hospital in Modesto, where he was diagnosed with four broken ribs. He was treated and released the next day. O.C. is recovering well and has returned to light duty. [Submitted by Greg Lawler, IC/Subdistrict Ranger, Canyon Ranch Subdistrict] Wednesday, July 30, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) BASE Jumping Arrests At dusk on July 15th, Valley rangers were dispatched to the Mirror Lake area in response to a report of BASE jumpers seen coming off Half Dome. About 30 minutes later, three men, each carrying full backpacks that were consistent with concealing BASE gear, were observed briskly walking down the Mirror Lake Loop trail. When rangers questioned them, they gave answers that did not make sense. K.W.H., who was holding a head-sized, ball-shaped object tightly wrapped in a shirt, told rangers that it was just his sweatshirt. Further investigation revealed that it was a skydiving helmet with a digital camcorder attached. K.W.H. and his cohorts, A.D.F. and B.K.C., were all arrested for conspiracy and air delivery. A search of their packs incident to arrest revealed another skydiving helmet and camcorder, three parachutes and harnesses, and two Birdman wingsuits (flight suits with cloth "wings" under the arms and between the legs used to greatly increase horizontal glide and freefall time). [Submitted by Todd W. Bruno, Ranger, Valley District] Monday, August 18, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Drowning at Emerald Pool Rangers from Yosemite Valley and the Little Yosemite Valley backcountry station responded to the Emerald Pool above Vernal Fall on the evening of August 4th to checkout a cell phone report of an unconscious man who had been pulled from the water and was currently receiving CPR. After over an hour of CPR and advanced life support measures by NPS medics, 20-year old M.L.P., of Milpitas, California, was pronounced dead by medical control at the Yosemite Medical Clinic over the radio. According to witnesses, M.L.P. was attempting to swim across the Emerald Pool when he began to struggle near the middle of the pool. He went underwater and about two minutes elapsed before friends brought him to the surface and got him on shore. His friends did not know CPR and it was another three or four minutes before a park visitor began resuscitation efforts. [Submitted by Todd W. Bruno, Park Ranger/ Case Investigator] Monday, August 18, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Major Search Conducted for Missing Hiker On August 5th, rangers received a report of a missing hiker who had failed to return from a trip into the Yosemite backcountry. F.C., 46, of Livermore, California, had planned a four-day solo hike starting at Twin Lakes, a popular trailhead north of the park near Bridgeport. F.C.'s planned itinerary was to circle the Sawtooth Ridge and 12,279-foot Matterhorn Peak. This ridge is the park boundary on the crest of the Sierra and includes glaciers and some of the most rugged terrain in the park. A joint command was established with Mono County to search inside and outside the park. Extensive air searching by helicopters from Yosemite, the California Highway Patrol, Inyo National Forest, Stanislaus National Forest and the California Air National Guard, coupled with ground searches by park and county SAR personnel and search dogs, were conducted throughout the area, but found no clues as to F.C.'s whereabouts. Rangers conducted a thorough investigation, which included 100 interviews, and searches of his vehicle, office, and home. A total of 142 persons were involved in the joint search effort. On August 10th, the ground search was scaled back. Limited continuous search operations will remain in effect as NPS and Mono County investigators pursue leads. [Submitted by Greg Lawler, Canyon Ranch SDR/IC] Monday, August 25, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue of Injured Climber at Glacier Point Valley rangers received a report of an injured climber on the afternoon of August 14th. They found K.R., 44, of Rocklin, California, at the base of the Glacier Point Apron, suffering from serious injuries incurred during a fall from a climbing route called "The Gob." K.R. had been scrambling unroped and was descending when she slipped and slid about 50 feet down steep granite slabs. Rangers employed advanced life support measures to stabilize her; she was then evacuated over scree by the Valley SAR team. K.R. was flown to a trauma center in Modesto, where she was treated for significant internal injuries. She was reported in critical but stable condition the day after the incident. [Submitted by Steve Yu, IC] Friday, September 05, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Assist with Rescue of Injured Searcher On the afternoon of Saturday, August 23rd, J.F., a Mono County volunteer searcher, was standing on a boulder that shifted and rolled over his lower right leg, crushing and fracturing it. The accident occurred during the joint, limited, continuing search for missing hiker F.C. by Mono County and Yosemite National Park (previously reported in InsideNPS on August 15th and The Morning Report on August 18th). J.F. was near 10,000 feet in steep, rugged terrain just outside of the park boundary. Mono County asked Yosemite's contract helicopter to assist with the rescue. The park's Super 205 flew the mission with two rescue team members, three helitack crew members, and pilot Gary Spidell. The ship landed at a flat area about a mile from the scene and rigged for the rescue. At about 6:30 p.m., ranger/paramedic Keith Lober was inserted at the accident site by shorthaul under the helicopter with helitack foreman Eric Small spotting. Lober stabilized J.F. in a vacuum body splint and placed him in a Stokes litter. J.F. and Lober were then shorthauled from the scene back to the landing area, where J.F. was loaded inside the helicopter. They then flew back to the park helibase and transferred J.F. to a waiting commercial air ambulance. He was flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto, where he underwent surgery to repair his injured leg. [Submitted by Keith Lober, SAR Manager] Friday, September 12, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue of Injured Hiker Around 9 p.m. on Monday, August 25th, Tuolumne rangers received a report of a hiker who had fallen and injured himself while scrambling up Tresidder Peak. M.M., 52, of Oakhurst, California, and a 37-year-old friend were traveling cross country up fourth- and easy fifth-class terrain on the 10,600 foot peak when they found themselves climbing rock that was more difficult than they could negotiate. Unable to continue up, M.M. tried to down-climb, but found that he was stuck. Eventually he deliberately let go of his grip and fell approximately 15 feet to a ledge, fracturing his left ankle and shattering his wrist. His friend was able to descend the peak and ran down the trail to report the accident. A team of Tuolumne rangers and SAR team members reached M.M. within an hour of the report. His injuries were splinted and he was packaged in a Stokes litter. Rescue personnel lowered M.M. with ropes 300 feet down steep slabs, then transported him four miles to the trailhead in a wheeled litter. He was taken to the Yosemite Medical Clinic by ambulance. The rescue lasted through the night until 7 a.m. the next morning and was complicated by thunderstorms. [Submitted by George Paiva, IC] Wednesday, October 01, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue Of Climber After 200 Foot Fall At quarter of ten on the evening of Thursday, September 18th, Valley District rangers received a report of an injured climber high in North Dome Gully. The climber had taken a 200 foot tumbling fall while carrying a 50-pound haul bag as he was traversing unroped from the top of Washington Column to the start of the North Dome Gully descent route. An initial response team was immediately dispatched, and they were followed with technical evacuation and medical teams. The rescuers ascended North Dome Gully on foot. The first team reached the patient, 35-year-old S.G. of Yosemite, at 12:25 a.m. the next morning. The evac and medical teams arrived on scene at about 1:15 a.m. S.G. was stabilized in a vacuum body splint and litter and given ALS care through the night. The litter was raised approximately 20 feet to a large ledge, where S.G. and medics waited until morning. At approximately 7:50 a.m., Yosemite's contract helicopter shorthauled S.G. to the Ahwahnee Meadow. There he was transferred to a waiting medical helicopter and flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto. Miraculously, S.G. walked out of the hospital with only bruises and abrasions. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, Park Ranger] Friday, October 24, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rangers Threatened by Knife-Wielding Man On the morning of Tuesday, October 7th, rangers Todd Bruno and Lincoln Else responded to a report of a suspicious person in Lower Pines campground. The man, K.S.B., appeared nervous and agitated when rangers questioned him about the earlier arrest of his camping partner for possession of a controlled substance. When rangers asked for permission to conduct a consent search of his belongings, K.S.B. became extremely belligerent; when they asked him if he had any weapons, K.S.B. quickly unsheathed and brandished a 13-inch knife, raised it over his head and stabbed it into a picnic table, then backed away. K.S.B. refused to go to the ground as ordered by the rangers. He then walked back to the table, grabbed the knife, and told Bruno that he was going kill him. With firearms drawn, the rangers commanded K.S.B. to drop the knife. After several seconds of standoff, K.S.B. finally tossed the knife back on the table. He ignored further commands to get on the ground and picked up steel bicycle floor pump and brandished it at the rangers shouting, "You'll have to kill me". The rangers pepper-sprayed K.S.B., who then ran away from the campsite. They caught up to him and took him into custody. A bag of marijuana was found in K.S.B.'s camping gear when it was impounded and inventoried. On October 16th, K.S.B. was indicted by a federal grand jury on two felony counts - assaulting a federal officer and threatening a federal officer. [Submitted by Todd Bruno, Park Ranger] Thursday, December 04, 2003 Yosemite National Park (CA) Visitor Suicide in Curry Village Just after midnight on November 28th, the park's emergency communications center received a request from the Curry Village front desk for a welfare check by law enforcement staff on a 33-year-old male guest staying in a tent cabin. The Sacramento man had not been seen since being told by other members of his party that he needed to get some counseling for relationship problems with his girlfriend. Ranger/paramedic Duane Grego met with them and was told that they had became concerned about his welfare when they heard some banging and gurgling noises coming from inside his tent cabin. Grego went to the cabin and found the door locked from the inside. After seeing the form of a person suspended by the neck from a ceiling beam through a window, Grego forced entry. The man was found to be pulseless and breathless. CPR was begun by Grego and Yosemite clinic ambulance paramedics, but there was no viable response. The man was pronounced dead at the scene. Rangers and special agents are investigating the death. [Submitted by Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory Special Agent] Friday, April 02, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue Response at Hetch Hetchy On Saturday, March 20th, Yosemite's communication center received a late-night 911 call from a man reporting that a member of his camping party was unresponsive and not breathing and that other members of the party had begun CPR. The reporting party had hiked seven miles to the Hetch Hetchy trailhead to call for help. Rangers responded by boat, using night vision optics to navigate the Hetch Hetchy reservoir to reach the remote campsite at Rancheria Falls. When ranger medics reached the 53-year-old victim, they found that he had died. The next six hours were spent extricating the body by wheeled litter two miles down a rugged trail to the lakeshore for transport by boat. A total of twelve rangers were involved in the evacuation. An autopsy revealed the cause of death to be sudden cardiac arrest. [Submitted by Dave Lattimore, Mather District Ranger] Tuesday, May 11, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Drowning in Tenaya Creek On the evening of May 5th, A.M., 26, and D.M., 23, both from the St. Louis area, were scrambling on the rocks in Tenaya Creek near Mirror Lake when A.M. slipped and fell into the water. He was quickly carried downstream in extreme whitewater conditions and was pinned underwater by the current. D.M. jumped into the stream in an attempt to rescue his friend, but was unsuccessful due to the swiftwater conditions and water temperature in the low 40s. Rangers arrived on scene within three minutes. Although they could see the victim under the water, they were unable to free him. A technical rescue was begun immediately, but was suspended after two hours due to darkness. The operation continued at sunrise, using a complex rigging system of multiple high lines to gain mechanical advantage against the swollen stream. After five hours of effort, the body was recovered. [Submitted by Leslie Reynolds, Valley Shift Supervisor/IC] Friday, July 09, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) EMS Rescue of Anaphylactic Shock Victim On July 2nd, the park received a 911 cell phone transfer from the California Highway Patrol. The caller, Dr. J.J., reported that his son, M.J., 17, was experiencing anaphylactic shock from a nut he had eaten. Dr. J.J. reported that they were just below Nevada Fall on the Mist Trail, and that Matt's face was swelling, that he was displaying hives, and that he was weak and dizzy. Ranger Katie Lyons and park EMT Dave Pope started hiking from the Little Yosemite Valley backcountry station as a helicopter was ordered. When Pope arrived, J.J. was experiencing difficulty breathing and his tongue was noticeably swollen. Pope injected an initial dose of epinephrine to stabilize J.J.'s anaphylactic reaction. Park medic Dave Horne and firefighter Shawn Walters rappelled from the park's contract helicopter to the scene. Horne took over J.J.'s care and administered more drugs. The helicopter then landed a litter team below the scene on the Mist Trail. When J.J. was stabilized, he was moved by litter down the trail to the helicopter. He was then flown to Yosemite Valley for further medical treatment at the Yosemite Medical Clinic. [Submitted by Mark Faherty, Park Ranger/IC] Tuesday, July 13, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue of Pack Mules A park concession mule train supplying the Merced Lake High Sierra Camp wrecked on the Bunnell switchbacks in the Merced River Canyon around noon on July 9th. Four loaded mules, strung together by rope, tumbled and slid for approximately 200 feet across low-angle granite slabs below the trail and came to rest upon a granite bench. The animals sustained only slight injuries in their fall. An NPS trail crew working nearby responded and assisted in stabilizing the mules and assessing the situation. The trail crew members decided that more resources and equipment were needed to safely extricate the animals from where they were now stuck. The concession stables foreman, the park trails branch supervisor, and two SAR team members were flown to the scene in the park's contract helicopter. The mules' metal shoes were covered with tape to simulate "sticky rubber" climbing shoes. A rope system was set up to "belay" the mules as they made their way back across the slick rock and up to the trail. Three of four mules danced, high-stepped, and stumbled as they were lead across the slabs back to safety. One mule, weighing about a thousand pounds, slipped and rolled, but was caught by the rope team. She was able to right herself and safely continue. When all four mules were back on the trail, they were repacked and continued up the trail to the camp. [Submitted by Jason Gayeski-Peters, SAR Team] Thursday, July 15, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Fatal Fall Near Half Dome Park dispatch received a 911 cell phone transfer from the California Highway Patrol on the afternoon of June 23rd. The caller reported that he was on the shoulder of Half Dome and that he'd been told by other hikers that someone had fallen off the top of Half Dome. Intern Mike Van Pelt from the Little Yosemite Valley backcountry station immediately started hiking up the Half Dome Trail. While on the trail, Van Pelt received additional reports of a man on the shoulder of Half Dome suffering from shortness of breath and chest pain. When Van Pelt reached the shoulder, park visitors directed him to the body of 48-year old D.A.C. of Saratoga, California, at the base of the rock. Witnesses said that D.A.C. had been hiking down from Half Dome and was on the steps cut into the rock below the cables when he complained of chest pain and shortness of breath and asked passing hikers to get him help. Sometime after asking for assistance D.A.C. fell, unwitnessed, from the steps. Others saw him slide and tumble approximately 300 feet down steep granite slabs. The park's contract helicopter landed ranger/medics Dave Horne, Loren Fazio, and Keith Lober near the scene and they confirmed that D.A.C. had no signs of life. Later that afternoon, D.A.C.'s body was evacuated by long line under the helicopter to the Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley. [Submitted by Jack Hoeflich, IC] Wednesday, July 28, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rangers Assist County Sheriff in Arrest of Kidnapper On the evening of July 21st, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office asked for assistance in locating J.L., a fugitive wanted on a $500,000 warrant for the kidnapping of two women in Merced County. J.L., a Sureno gang member, had said that he would not be taken alive. The sheriff's office received information that J.L. was hiding in the Super 8 Hotel on Mariposa's main street, and was being supplied food, money and weapons by other gang members. Surveillance of the room was begun. A room entry that night was ruled out because the hotel and others nearby were fully occupied. The sheriff's office asked that Yosemite's Special Response Team (SRT) assist them in a joint operation to apprehend J.L. in the morning. Three other persons were in the room with J.L. In the morning, an escapee from the California Youth Authority and his juvenile girlfriend were both apprehended on the street when they were walking to a store at about 8:30 a.m. The sheriff's office then began systematically evacuating the hotel by calling each room. The evacuation was completed in 30 minutes. Once the hotel was clear, squads from SRT and from the sheriff's Critical Incident Response Team (CIRT) entered the hotel and established an inner perimeter in the hallway outside the second story room. A sheriff's office hostage negotiator then called the room and advised J.L. to surrender. J.L. tried to escape out the hotel window, but deputies on an adjacent roof confronted him and ordered him back into the room. J.L. then barricaded the door and told the negotiator that he was not coming out and that they were going to have to kill him. A woman still in the room initially told the negotiator that she was a hostage. It was later determined that she was J.L.'s girlfriend and would not leave. After four hours of negotiation, J.L. agreed to surrender. He was directed out of the room and was taken into custody at gunpoint by SRT and CIRT members in the hall. He was eventually transported back to Merced. The other three individuals are being charged with obstruction of justice and being under the influence of narcotics. [Submitted by Jeff Sullivan, Special Agent] Thursday, July 29, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue of Injured Climber A.S., 27, and A.B., 28, both from New York City, were climbing the Northwest Books route on Lembert Dome around 5:30 p.m. on July 15th when A.S., who was leading the third pitch, fell about 20 feet, struck his head and was knocked unconscious. A.B. lowered A.S. to the belay ledge, where he regained consciousness. A.B. yelled for help and some nearby climbers reported the accident. Tuolumne SAR team members climbed the route and treated A.S. A.B. was lowered off the cliff. It was after dark when A.S. was placed in a litter and lowered 325 feet, with team member Janet Harrington, a registered nurse, attending. Portable spotlights were used to illuminate the wall during the lowering. When they were off the cliff, A.S. was carried to the road, then transported by ambulance to the Mammoth Lakes Hospital. He was treated for a concussion, a fractured forearm, and a strained neck. [Submitted by George Paiva, Tuolumne SAR Coordinator] Tuesday, August 10, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Rescue from Near Drowning On Sunday, August 1st, rangers received a report of a man unconscious and underwater at Devils Elbow in the Merced River in Yosemite Valley. When they arrived, they found that F.R., 40, from Van Nuys, California, had been pulled from the water by his two children, ages 10 and 11. Bystanders were performing CPR on him. Advanced life support treatment was started at the scene by rangers and ambulance paramedics. F.R. eventually regained his pulse and respirations. He was taken by ground ambulance to meet a medical helicopter and then flown to Memorial North Hospital in Modesto. F.R. is presently doing well and is expected to be released from the hospital soon. [Submitted by Leslie Reynolds, Valley Shift Supervisor] Wednesday, August 11, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Weapons Arrest in West Yosemite On Thursday evening, August 5th, rangers received a message to be on the lookout for a vehicle and a man with a rifle who was "hunting people" in the Stanislaus National Forest west of the park. The unoccupied vehicle was found in west Yosemite Valley and kept under observation. Within an hour, two men returned and rangers questioned them about weapons. The men admitted that there was a loaded rifle in the vehicle. J.D., 46, of Pinole, California, claimed ownership of the rifle. The other man with him provided information corroborating the initial Forest Service report, saying that his friend was "losing it" and had been making people pick up litter at gunpoint in a national forest campground. J.D. was arrested for possession of the loaded weapon in the vehicle, and the rifle was seized. Special agents worked with Stanislaus Forest law enforcement officers on the case and provided a photo lineup so witnesses could identify the suspect. On August 9th, the Forest Service filed state charges with the Tuolumne County district attorney following their investigation. J.D. remains in federal custody pending a detention hearing in federal district court in Fresno. [Submitted by Dan Horner, Special Agent] Wednesday, August 11, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Fatal Motorcycle Accident Rangers and fire personnel responded to a head-on motorcycle — bus accident on Highway 140 shortly after 1 p.m. on August 7th and were on scene within minutes. A Sun-Diego Tours bus with 45 persons on board was traveling uphill (eastbound) when the motorcycle, driven by M.W.G., 38, of Oceanside, California, collided with the left front of the bus. M.W.G. was pronounced dead at the scene. Evidence at the scene indicated that the bus was well inside its lane when the collision occurred. Witnesses on the bus said that M.W.G. was traveling at a high rate of speed and was in the uphill lane when they first saw him, and that just before impact the motorcycle leaned hard in a vain attempt to miss the bus. Marijuana was found scattered at the scene and in M.W.G.'s possession. It is unknown at this time if marijuana use was a contributing factor in the collision. An autopsy will be conducted. El Portal station captain Bernard Spielman was incident commander.[Submitted by Steve Yu, Criminal Investigator] Thursday, August 26, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Major Search Ends in Happy Family Reunion A major search and rescue operation concluded successfully on August 20th with the finding of overdue hiker M.V., a 57-year-old woman from Bakersfield who'd gotten lost while on a solo backpacking trip. M.V. began her hike on the John Muir trail on August 12th, headed for Mt. Whitney. She was scheduled to pick up food caches at Tuolumne Meadows and Reds Meadow (in the Inyo National Forest) on August 15th and August 18th, respectively. As of August 20th, she had not picked up either cache. Rangers were notified that M.V. was overdue on August 19th and began an initial search of the John Muir trail and neighboring trails. They also posted trail blocks at all critical trailheads. Searchers from Mono and Fresno counties also began searching portions of the John Muir trail in their jurisdictions to rule out the possibility that she might be ahead of her schedule. Searchers from Fresno County SAR made voice contact with a female hiker at approximately 8:30 p.m. Following her voice, they reached the hiker around 9:00 p.m. They were able to confirm that it was M.V. and that she was in good health. M.V. was found near Moraine Dome. She had lost the trail, so set up a camp and attempted to contact rangers using smoke signals. Searchers were able to focus on that area after Mono County Search and Rescue interviewed a hiker who had seen her in that vicinity. Rescuers stayed with M.V. throughout the night. She was then flown by helicopter to Yosemite Valley and reunited with her husband and daughter. Searchers from the park and teams from Marin, Mariposa, Mono, Madera, and Fresno counties worked cooperatively to search the John Muir trail and the network of trails that connected to it. The operation was supported by people from throughout the Yosemite community. Yosemite School provided shelter for rescuers in Yosemite Valley, and Delaware North Parks and Resorts provided logistical support. [Submitted by Deb Schweizer] Thursday, September 02, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Four Rescues in Four Days On August 23rd, 35-year old D.F. and 37-year old D.C., both from Portland, Oregon, were scrambling across Shepard's Pass (elevation 11,500 feet) when D.F. slipped while crossing a steep frozen snowfield and slid more than 60 feet into talus. He sustained an open fracture of his left ankle and a three-inch avulsion to his right leg. D.C. hiked out and reported the accident by telephone. SAR team members flew to the scene in the park's fire management helicopter and D.F. was short-hauled from the scene. He was transferred inside the helicopter, then transported directly to Mammoth Lakes Hospital. Twenty minutes after receiving the above report, notification was received that 63-year old Sharon Reed of San Diego had fallen from a horse while on a commercial outfitter trip in Virginia Canyon, injuring her knee. Rangers flew to the scene in a second aircraft, the Yosemite/Sequoia fire severity helicopter, which is currently based in Yosemite, and flew her out. Two days later, M.S. and D.P. were rock climbing on the Matthes Crest. At about 3 p.m., M.S. fell and severely fractured — nearly amputated — his right ankle. Another climbing party rappelled off and ran six trail miles to report the accident. At 6:30 p.m., SAR personnel flew in the fire management helicopter and shorthauled M.S. off the Crest, transferred him inside the helicopter, then flew him directly to the Mammoth Lakes Hospital for surgery. On August 26th, J.K., 54, of New York City, fell off a mule and landed on a rock on his chest, fracturing his sternum. Tuolumne rangers hiked to the scene and found that J.K. was having difficulty breathing. The fire management helicopter was used to transport J.K. from the scene to Yosemite Valley, where he was transferred to a commercial helicopter ambulance for immediate transport to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto.[Submitted by George Paiva, Tuolumne SAR Coordinator] Tuesday, September 07, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Multiple SAR Operations Between August 19th and 22nd, park staff conducted several SAR missions — two of which required the callout of assistance from other agencies and lasted through the night. The first of these was the search for Michael Virga (previously reported in these pages), which concluded on the 20th; the second was for Inhyuk Hwang, an autistic eight-year-old Korean boy who wandered away from his family as they were beginning a hike to Sentinel Dome on the 21st. The report on the missing boy came in around 8 p.m. Due to the possibility that the boy had been abducted, the Glacier Point Road was closed and checkpoints were setup at all park exits to check vehicles. Meanwhile, a hasty search was conducted of all area trails, a grid search was completed of the area surrounding the point last seen, and trackers and search dogs worked through the night to find the boy. At 6 a.m. an infrared-equipped helicopter provided by the California Highway Patrol began an air search and ground teams were redeployed. Around noon, Hwang was located by helicopter 500 feet below the rim of Yosemite Valley on a small ledge above a cliff. A technical raising was used to extricate the boy. He was not injured. Rescuers brought him to the trailhead and reunited him with his family. While these two major searches were underway, park staff also dealt with the following: * On the 20th, Mather District rangers were asked to evacuate a visitor with an ankle fracture from the Pate Valley. A helicopter and medical personnel were diverted from the Virga search to extricate the victim and fly him from the Pate Valley to Yosemite Valley and eventually to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. * A report was received from the Vogelsang High Sierra Camp of a man with chest pains at 10:30 a.m. that same morning. A ranger/paramedic was flown in and he was evacuated by helicopter to Tuolumne Meadows, then transported by ground ambulance to Mammoth Lakes Hospital. * At 2:20 p.m. on the 20th, a Virga ground searcher fractured his lower leg in Tenaya Canyon. The California Highway Patrol helicopter provided a hoist-equipped helicopter and the injured searcher was hoisted from the scene and transported to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. * Around 4 p.m. the same day, a visitor with a lower leg injury near Nevada Falls asked for assistance. A SAR team member hiked to the falls and the patient was flown to the Yosemite Medical Center by an aircraft diverted from the Virga incident. * Around 1:45 p.m. on the 21st, a concession mule trip guide reported that a 39-year-old man was having a heart attack just below the shoulder of Half Dome. A ranger/park medic and a SAR technician/RN flew in and provided advanced life support. He was transported to the Yosemite Medical Clinic by helicopter. * While this operation was underway, a 74-year-old woman fell from her mule and injured her hip on the Half Dome trail. Rangers were flown to the scene, immobilized her in a vacuum splint, and flew her to the Ahwahnee Meadow. She was then transferred to the care of the Yosemite Medical Clinic. * At 7 p.m. that evening, rangers in Little Yosemite Valley were contacted by visitors who reported that their 15-year-old family member was suffering from acute abdominal pain. A ranger/park medic responded and provided advanced life support. She was transported by a "call when needed" helicopter to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. [Submitted by Keith Lober, Yosemite Search and Rescue Manager] Wednesday, September 15, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Assist in Marijuana Eradication During an aerial reconnaissance flight on August 19th, park investigators spotted a marijuana garden in thick chaparral less than a mile from the boundary of the El Portal administrative site. The garden lay within the Stanislaus National Forest, which shares jurisdiction with Mariposa County at this location. A joint agency plan was put into effect that involved personnel from the park, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office and the Stanislaus National Forest. On the morning of August 29th, park staff watching the site saw a man tending the garden. Personnel from all three agencies mobilized and raided the garden later that morning. Although they weren't able to apprehend the gardener, they destroyed 3,219 marijuana plants. Evidence collected at the scene indicated that the garden was being prepared for use on a larger scale for the 2005 growing season. A California Highway Patrol Helicopter provided air support for the mission by flying the plants out as sling-loads. Yosemite Fire assisted with the flights on the ground. [Submitted by Steve Yu, Criminal Investigator] Wednesday, September 29, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) BASE Jumping Arrest At dusk on Sunday, September 12th, Valley ranger Carly Lober was on foot patrol in El Capitan Meadow when she heard parachutes open above her. She saw C.P., 23, and C.H., 19, of Bremerton and Gig Harbor, Washington, respectively, land at the east end of the meadow. They gathered up their chutes and ran into a grove of trees. Lober caught up to them as they were trying to finish packing their equipment into stash bags and arrested them. All their gear, including a helmet-cam video tape of the approach and jump, was seized as evidence. On September 14th, C.P. and C.H. appeared in federal magistrate's court in the park and pled guilty to illegal jumping charges. They were sentenced to a year of unsupervised probation, fined $2,000 each, and forfeited all their jumping gear.[Submitted by Dan Horner, Special Agent] Thursday, September 30, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Search for Lost Hiker J.B., 61, of Aptos, California, hiked to Half Dome on September 19th as part of a large, loosely organized group of sponsored hikers for a charity. While descending, she got off the trail somewhere below the shoulder of the dome and was last seen about 1:00 p.m. during an unseasonable early snow storm. J.B. was not equipped to spend the night out in cold conditions. A large scale search was started in the late morning under clearing skies when J.B. was reported overdue. Searchers found her in the Lost Lake area on the back (south) side of Half Dome within two hours of the initial report. When she was picked up by the park's fire management helicopter, she was moderately hypothermic, tired and hungry. About 20 minutes after she was rescued, a second snow storm swept through the area. [Submitted by Leslie Reynolds, IC] Monday, October 18, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Wildland Fire Started by Arsonist Near Hetch Hetchy Around 11:30 a.m. on the morning of Friday, October 15th, fire managers at the Crane Flat lookout spotted smoke near Hetch Hetchy Reservoir. A helicopter was dispatched and confirmed at fire at that location. Responding firefighters evacuated two hikers who were in the area. The hikers reported that a man on the trail was lighting the fires and that he had displayed a firearm. In addition, park employees on the helicopter observed the man igniting fires with what appeared to be a handheld propane torch. Rangers spotted the man shortly thereafter in the Tiltill Valley, but were unable to get close to the location because of the intense fire activity. They instead took strategic locations outside the perimeter of the fire. Other rangers were able to identify the suspect by interviewing witnesses and locating his vehicle, which was parked in the Hetch Hetchy area. On Saturday, rangers discovered a body of a man in that location who matched the witness descriptions and strongly believe that he was the arsonist who ignited the Hetchy Fire. It appears that he died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound.[Submitted by Media Relations Office] Tuesday, October 19, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Arsonist Suspected in Three Homicides Around 11 a.m. opn Friday, October 15th, the Yosemite Communications Center received a report of visible smoke in the Tiltill Valley area northeast of the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir. The park helicopter immediately responded to perform a fire reconnaissance. Fire personnel on the helicopter saw a man lighting fires with some type of lighting device. As the helicopter hovered overhead, the man pulled out a black object resembling a handgun and the helicopter pilot immediately diverted back to the heli-base and requested law enforcement assistance. While flying back to the heli-base, the pilot landed to pick up two hikers and evacuated them from the area. The hikers later informed investigators that they had been in contact with the man and he had brandished a handgun at them and ordered them to leave the area before they got killed. Numerous rangers responded to the heli-base, including members of the Yosemite Special Response Team (SRT). Two additional helicopters were ordered, including one from the California Highway Patrol (CHP) which immediately flew several SRT members to the point where the man had last been seen. By that time, however, the fire intensity had grown to the point where it was unsafe to land anyone; moreover, the man could not be located by air because of heavy smoke. Several tactical teams were flown to strategic locations, safely outside the fire's perimeter, while rangers in helicopters worked to evacuate backcountry campers from the area. Fire suppression efforts were suspended because the man's location was not known. Rangers continued searching for him from the air, but without luck. They continued to monitor the perimeter throughout the night in hopes of capturing him if he left the area. Meanwhile, an intensive investigative effort undertaken by special agents and rangers tentatively identified the man as R.C. of Brentwood, California. DMV photos were shown to witnesses in the park who confirmed that the arson/brandishing suspect was indeed R.C. By Saturday, the fire had grown to nearly 1,500 acres and was still too hot and unpredictable to permit the landing of tactical teams. Investigators worked diligently with the Brentwood Police Department, asking them to perform a welfare check at R.C.'s residence. Several Brentwood police officers subsequently entered the residence and found the bodies of a woman and her two daughters, who appeared to be homicide victims. At approximately 1:30 p.m., while on a fire recon, an observer in the park helicopter saw a man lying in a meadow within the fire's perimeter. From the air, it appeared that he was dead; a firearm was seen next to his body. A team of agents and rangers were quickly inserted to secure the scene, investigate, and extract the body. The man was preliminarily identified as Richard R.C. and the cause of death appeared to be self-inflicted gunshot wound. R.C. lighted the fires using a lighter and aerosol spray can. The entire incident involved over 25 NPS rangers, numerous firefighters, support personnel from the U.S. Forest Service, and three helicopters. The final acreage of the fire has yet to be determined but is estimated at 2,000 acres. Steady rain started early Sunday morning and extinguished most of the fire. The Brentwood Police Department is in the process of investigating the crime scene at the R.C. residence and considers R.C. a prime suspect in the homicides. Media interest has been exceedingly high. Click on "More Information" below for a related story from the _Modesto Bee._[Submitted by Cameron Sholly, IC] More Information... Thursday, October 21, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Major Marijuana Plantation Discovered On October 8th, rangers from the Wawona District were working a boundary patrol in the Iron Creek Drainage for illegal hunting activities when they discovered a large marijuana garden. They also spotted several men in the garden in the process of harvesting thousands of plants. The men immediately fled the area when they saw the rangers, who opted not to pursue and instead pulled back to a secure surveillance point and requested additional assistance. An immediate aerial reconnaissance of the area was done by law enforcement personnel in the park's fire management helicopter to determine the size of the garden. The garden was situated on the boundary, partially in the Sierra National Forest and partially within the park. Park and Forest Service personnel monitored the garden through the night. On October 9th, the park's special response team, Forest Service officers and Mariposa County Sheriff's Department officers entered the plantation, secured it, collected evidence, and began eradicating plants. Items found at the site linked the garden to one of the Mexican drug trafficking organizations currently being investigated in central California. During the operation, 7,049 plants were seized, along with approximately 23 pounds of processed marijuana. Based on the quality and size of these marijuana plants, the estimated street value of this crop has been placed at $30 million. Late that afternoon, a local citizen reported two men walking out of the woods near the Wawona golf course. Rangers were dispatched and detained them. The rangers who discovered the garden positively identified them as the men who had fled the previous afternoon. They were taken into custody by the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, as they were outside the park when spotted. The park's criminal investigations unit is working with the sheriff's office and Forest Service to develop intelligence on the drug trafficking organization involved and to prepare the case for prosecution. The park, benefiting from the similar experiences of Sequoia-Kings Canyon NPs and Hawaii Volcanoes NP, is battling the unacceptable safety and resource effects of foreign-sponsored marijuana growing on park lands by working with surrounding jurisdictions to preclude establishment of illegal operations in the Yosemite region. Initial assistance from Washington has aided this prevention-oriented campaign. Once in a park, these operations are difficult, expensive and dangerous to remove. Yosemite's objective is to aggressively check the activity before it is entrenched.[Submitted by Chief Ranger's Office] Tuesday, October 26, 2004 Yosemite National Park (CA) Storm Rescues and Fatalities During the first major storm of the season on Tuesday, October 19th, rangers and search and rescue teams began a full-scale effort to rescue seven climbers on four different routes on El Capitan, located at the west end of Yosemite Valley. Yosemite Search and Rescue team members surveyed the climbing routes on El Capitan after the first wave of the storm passed and saw two climbers from Japan on "The Nose" who were without a porta-ledge and were not moving (a porta-ledge is a tent-like storm shelter that climbers carry on long climbs and can be hung from the cliff). Weather conditions initially made use of the park helicopter impossible. The rescue team hiked over 11 miles in driving snow, extreme wind, and poor visibility, then conducted a technical rescue to get down to the stranded climbers. A break in the weather on Wednesday made it possible to fly to the site by helicopter. The helicopter flew very close to the two Japanese climbers on "The Nose," a difficult but popular route that stretches from the Yosemite Valley floor to the summit of El Capitan, and rangers on board could tell that both were deceased. Rescuers then diverted their attentions to other parties on El Capitan. David Turner was solo climbing and had been on the rock for 17 days. He had almost reached the top of his climb when he realized that he needed assistance. Turner was taken to the summit, then transported by helicopter to El Capitan Meadow on Wednesday. They next focused on two climbing teams on the cliff. The first climbing team of two, T.T. and E.E., both Californians, was climbing on the route named "Never Never Land." They were safely taken to the summit, then flown to El Capitan Meadow on Thursday. The second climbing team of two was on Salathe Wall. M.M.V. from Santa Torre, Mexico, and her climbing partner, T.A. of New Paltz, New York, were taken to the summit, then flown to El Capitan Meadow on Friday afternoon. All five of the rescued climbers are considered very capable and extremely skilled climbers and were in good condition after being rescued. The two deceased Japanese climbers were taken off the rock on Thursday. They were taken to the Mariposa County Coroner's Office, where they were identified as M.R., 27, and R.Y., 26. The cause of death was deemed hypothermia. M.R. and her climbing partner Yamanoto were from Hyogo, Japan, and were visiting Yosemite with two friends. Marin County, Placer County, and Mariposa County Search and Rescue teams assisted Yosemite Search and Rescue. About 100 people were involved in the rescue operations.[Submitted by Raye Santos, Public Affairs] Wednesday, April 20, 2005 Yosemite National Park (CA) Assault on Ranger On the evening of April 12th, Yosemite Valley rangers responded to Upper Pines campground to a report of a nude man who was harassing campers. They found 23-year-old S.S. sitting on a picnic table, attempting to wear his jeans like a shirt. He was wearing no other clothing. S.S. was uncooperative and eventually took a swing at one of the rangers, striking him in the eye. He was quickly subdued, placed in custody, and charged with assault on a federal officer. Further investigation revealed that S.S. had ingested hallucinogenic mushrooms and smoked marijuana prior to the rangers' arrival. Witnesses reported that S.S. had been acting lewdly when he was completely nude and was yelling profanities in an adjacent campsite which was occupied by a family that included two daughters, ages 12 and 14. S.S. was further charged with lewd conduct and disorderly conduct. [Submitted by Todd Bruno, Valley Assistant Shift Supervisor] Wednesday, June 29, 2005 Yosemite National Park (CA) Search in Progress for Missing Backpacker On the evening of Tuesday, June 21st, rangers were notified that M.F., a 51-year-old solo backpacker, was two days overdue from a planned six-day wilderness trip in the Hetch Hetchy area of the Mather District. A hasty search was begun on Wednesday, and command of the search was transferred to an interagency Type III incident management team on Thursday. About 180 people have been involved in the ongoing search, including numerous volunteer search teams, the US Forest Service, and Marines from the Mountain Warfare Training Center. Ground and dog teams and helicopters are being utilized. Current weather conditions and M.F.'s fitness and experience level indicate a high possibility of survival. However, difficult terrain, high water runoff from the above average snowpack, and the huge search area are making the searching difficult on both the ground and in the air. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, M.F. SAR Information Officer] Thursday, July 14, 2005 Yosemite National Park (CA) Update on Search for Missing Hiker The search for missing backpacker M.F. was scaled down to a limited continuous search strategy on June 30th. M.F., a 51-year-old experienced hiker from Santa Barbara, California, disappeared during a six-day solo trip into the wilderness north of Hetch Hetchy. M.F.'s backpack was located on the first day of the search, but no other clues were discovered despite an intensive ground and aerial search operation involving over 250 people and four helicopters. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, M.F. SAR Information Officer] Thursday, August 11, 2005 Yosemite NP Recovery of Body of Missing Hiker H.A., a 25-year-old South Korean exchange student who had just completed a year at the University of California/Davis, obtained a wilderness permit for an ambitious eleven-day hike on the John Muir Trail from Yosemite Valley to Mount Whitney on June 20th. After the hike, H.A. planned to visit several other sites in the U.S. and had tickets for his return flight to Korea for July 21st. He apparently started the hike on June 21st, but changed his route due to the late lingering snow pack in the Sierra. On July 21st, the park was notified by the Davis police department that H.A. had missed his flight home. Intensive investigation, including several hundred telephone calls to wilderness permit holders by volunteers, led to backcountry witnesses who had spoken with H.A. on June 22nd and 25th. The areas identified from these clues were intensively searched by helicopter, ground searchers and dogs. When H.A. was not found, the search was scaled back after the weekend of July 30th. Through the following week, limited field searching continued. On Friday, August 5th, a single search team was traversing Tenaya Canyon, an area that had not been previously ground searched, when they found H.A.'s backpack on the bank of Tenaya Creek. The next day the area downstream from the pack was searched. H.A.'s body was found about a mile downstream from the pack. It appeared that H.A. had fallen in the creek, swollen by spring runoff, and had been underwater until the creek receded. H.A.'s body was flown from the remote canyon by the park's fire management helicopter. An autopsy found that his death was caused by multiple blunt force injuries. A journal and digital camera found at the scene lead to the conclusion that H.A. died sometime midday on June 26th. [Steve Yu, Criminal Investigator] Friday, August 12, 2005 Yosemite National Park (CA) Man Washes Over Vernal Fall On July 30th, C.D.C., a 24-year-old citizen of India residing in Sunnyvale, California, hiked to the top of Vernal Fall with four friends. When C.D.C. reached the lookout point at the top of the fall, he crossed through a metal railing, intending to wet his face with river water. The railing is designed to keep visitors back from the swiftly moving water and the wet, river-polished rock near the lip of the waterfall. Signs warning of the danger of going over the falls were in place. After crossing the railing, C.D.C. slipped and fell near the edge of the water. He recovered, but then slipped again, this time sliding into the rapidly moving water. He was carried by the current 20 to 30 yards, then went over the lip of the 317-foot waterfall. The incident was witnessed by many people. The river below Vernal Fall is a raging cataract with powerful winds generated by tons of falling water. Minutes after the accident, park dispatch received a 911 cell phone report from a witness. YOSAR responded with shore-based searchers and spotters and established downstream containment observers. The park's fire management helicopter was also used in the search. The search effort continued for three days. C.D.C.'s body has still not been located as of this report. [Submitted by Mark Faherty, Valley Ranger and Incident Investigator] Wednesday, September 21, 2005 Yosemite NP Marijuana Garden Eradicated On July 22nd, ranger Chris Kuvlesky discovered a small marijuana garden in the Hat Creek drainage north of the Hetch Hetchy reservoir. Rangers conducted a secondary reconnaissance the next day and found a sophisticated automated watering system in the garden. The plants were measured and found to be six inches to two feet tall. On September 16th, Mather District and Wilderness Unit rangers and a criminal investigator eradicated the nearly 300 plants, some of which were now six feet tall. Evidence collected at the scene indicated that the site had been in use for about ten years. It is being analyzed in an attempt to identify suspects. [Chris Smith, IC] Tuesday, September 27, 2005 Yosemite NP Death of Special Agent Dan Madrid Special Agent Dan Madrid died Saturday while investigating a previous visitor fatality in the park. Madrid was hiking to the scene of that fatality when he collapsed on the Mist Trail below Vernal Fall. Resuscitation efforts by fellow park rangers and a passing doctor were unsuccessful. Madrid was duty stationed in Midwest Region at Ozark National Scenic Riverways in Missouri. He was on a temporary detail to Pacific West Region while other special agents and park rangers were assigned to hurricane response efforts along the Gulf Coast. Madrid was one of 48 National Park Service special agents and the first to die in the line of duty. He was 51 years old and is survived by his wife, R., and two adult children, son C. and daughter H. Dan Madrid was born on March 14, 1954, in Globe, Arizona. After graduating from Miami High School in Miami, Arizona, in 1972, he attended Mesa Community College and Gila Pueblo College, both in Arizona. He started his federal government career in June, 1973, as a seasonal forestry aid with the Forest Service Arizona. From November, 1977, until February, 1985, he worked seasonally and accepted more responsibilities each year. During this time, he was temporarily assigned to a Young Adult Conservation Corps (YACC) crew to supervise six to eight young adults on forest resources, performed law enforcement duties, served as the district fire engine supervisor, and acted as the district fire management officer on occasion. In February, 1985, he became a full time firefighter/engineer/medic with the city of Globe and was a commissioned reserve police office for the city at the same time. In June, 1987, Dan began his career with the National Park Service, accepting a position as a protection ranger at Lake Mead National Recreation Area. While at Lake Mead, he coordinated technical rescues in the Katherine District and remained active as a firefighter with certifications such as strike team leader, line locator, division group supervisor, and crew representative. Dan accepted a promotion to supervisory protection ranger at Everglades National Park in October, 1988, working as the frontcountry subdistrict ranger in the Flamingo Ranger District. He was involved in drug interdiction cases, managed the structural fire program, and was the senior park medic and the park's EMS coordinator. He still maintained his fire red card, stayed involved in search and rescue, worked with resource management, managed a campground, and dealt with concession managers. In August, 1990, he accepted a promotion at Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, to become the Wahweap supervisory subdistrict ranger. He supervised law enforcement and emergency response operations by vehicle, boat, and foot, including SAR, structural fire, EMS, resource and wildlife protection. In 1995, Dan accepted a position as a special agent as Ozark NSR and received two promotions there, including assignment to the Washington Office as the Ozark area field agent in 2004. While working at Ozark, Dan exemplified himself by leading and successfully investigating many significant criminal investigations, including several investigations of national significance. Dan was awarded special commendations by the United States Attorney's Office on three occasions for his casework, including leading the first successful hate crime prosecution in the Department of the Interior. Dan devoted nearly 29 years to Federal Service. Flags at all parks nationwide, except for those within the National Mall and Memorial Parks in downtown Washington, are to be lowered to half staff, effective this morning. They are to remain at half staff until the date of interment, which will be published as soon at it is known. Flags on the National Mall (the Washington Monument, Lincoln Monument, etc.) are to remain at full staff. [Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Thursday, September 29, 2005 Yosemite NP Funeral Arrangements for Special Agent Dan Madrid Funeral arrangements have been announced for Special Agent Dan Madrid. Visitation will be from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday, October 2nd, at the Kutis Funeral Home on 2906 Gravois Road, St. Louis, Missouri 63118 (314-772-3000). The funeral will be at 10 a.m. on Monday, October 3rd, at the Basilica of Saint Louis the King (the Old Cathedral on the Gateway Arch grounds), 209 Walnut Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63102 (314-231-3250). Following the service, there will be a procession from Old Cathedral to Saints Peter and Paul Cemetery on 7030 Gravois Road in St. Louis. The NPS uniform of the day is winter dress. The dress service jacket or blouse is preferred. For the funeral service at the Old Cathedral, all uniformed NPS personnel, with or without marked vehicles, must arrive no later than 9 a.m. Lodging information for NPS employees will follow. As noted previously, flags at all parks nationwide, except for those within the National Mall and Memorial Parks in downtown Washington, are to be lowered to half staff through the date of interment, now determined as Monday, October 3rd. Flags are to be returned to full staff on Tuesday, October 4th. Employees are authorized to wear mourning bands on their badges or other suitable mourning devices if in civilian clothes through Monday. [Frank Mares, Public Information Officer] Friday, September 30, 2005 Yosemite NP More on Funeral Arrangements for Dan Madrid The following first few paragraphs are repeated from yesterday's edition. The items in bold face at bottom are new. Funeral arrangements have been announced for Special Agent Dan Madrid. Visitation will be from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday, October 2nd, at the Kutis Funeral Home on 2906 Gravois Road, St. Louis, Missouri 63118 (314-772-3000). The funeral will be at 10 a.m. on Monday, October 3rd, at the Basilica of Saint Louis the King (the Old Cathedral on the Gateway Arch grounds), 209 Walnut Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63102 (314-231-3250). Following the service, there will be a procession from Old Cathedral to Saints Peter and Paul Cemetery on 7030 Gravois Road in St. Louis. The NPS uniform of the day is winter dress. The dress service jacket or blouse is preferred. For the funeral service at the Old Cathedral, all uniformed NPS personnel, with or without marked vehicles, must arrive no later than 9 a.m. Lodging information for NPS employees will follow. Due to a baseball game and a large convention, downtown St. Louis hotel rooms are booking very quickly. We recommend calling the hotels on the following list for availability as soon as possible, or making your reservations through one of the online travel sites: Renaissance St. Louis Suites Hotel, 827 Washington Avenue; 314-621-9700 Embassy Suites, 901 North First Street Drury Plaza Hotel, Fourth and Market; 314-231-3003 Adams Mark, Fourth and Chestnut Hilton Downtown, 400 Olive; 314-436-0002 Hampton Inn, 333 Washington; 314-621-7900 Pavilion Hotel, Broadway and Market; 314-421-1776 Cards, letters and other forms of condolence may be sent to the Madrid Family, c/o Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, 11 North Fourth Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63102. In lieu of flowers, the family requests contributions be made in memory of Daniel P. Madrid to the Old Cathedral, 209 Walnut Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63102. [Frank Mares, Public Information Officer] Wednesday, October 5, 2005 Yosemite NP Missing Son and Mother Found On Saturday, September 24th, Yosemite rangers and Mariposa County Sheriff's deputies received reports of two missing Chinese citizens. A 60-year-old woman from Beijing was traveling with her 34-year-old son, a resident of Atlanta, Georgia. The pair were traveling in a rented car from Las Vegas, Nevada, to the park. The son had been telephoning his wife daily until the night of September 22nd, when he called from Yosemite Valley. After that, all telephone calls ceased. The next morning the two presumably left Yosemite Valley to drive back toward Las Vegas. Rangers at first searched the park for their vehicle without locating it. When the pair missed their scheduled flight back to Atlanta on the 25th, concern for them intensified. A park criminal investigator focused on the case exclusively. The roadsides in the park were searched by helicopter and from the ground for four days. The park coordinated with surrounding jurisdictions, which also searched their segments of highway. The search efforts did not bear fruit until mid-afternoon on Thursday, September 29th, when an Inyo National Forest LEO spotted the car approximately 250 feet below the road in Lee Vining Canyon outside the park, about six miles east of Tioga Pass. The vehicle had sustained massive damage from vaulting off the edge of the roadway and rolling over several times. It had come to rest on its side against a stand of trees with the undercarriage facing the road. This attitude made it difficult to see from the air and the highway edge. Both mother and son died immediately in the crash. [Steve Yu, Criminal Investigator] Thursday, November 17, 2005 Yosemite NP Felony Knife Assault In the early hours of November 5th, Valley rangers responded to a report of an intoxicated man brandishing a knife and threatening to kill residents in their cabin in a concession housing area. The 27-year old man eluded the first ranger to arrive on scene and fled on foot. About an hour later, he was seen coming out of a tent cabin in the Boystown housing area. He disobeyed the ranger's commands to stop and again fled on foot. Rangers pursued and saw him turn into the woods and run at full speed into the middle of a large, thorny blackberry patch, where the pursuit quickly ended. He was taken into custody after being extricated from the brambles. Rangers found a sheathed knife on his belt at the time of arrest. The U.S. Attorney's Office authorized charges of felony assault with a deadly weapon, felony assault/interfering with a federal officer, brandishing a weapon, trespassing, and disorderly conduct. The man was ordered detained and is awaiting indictment. [Todd Bruno, Valley Assistant Shift Supervisor] Tuesday, November 29, 2005 Yosemite NP Vehicular Suicide About dawn on Thursday, November 10th, a 47-year-old man from Northridge, California, was killed in an unwitnessed high speed motor vehicle accident at the Discovery View overlook on the Wawona Road at the north end of the Wawona Tunnel. The victim, who was pronounced dead at the scene, was found inside his vehicle about 300 feet down a steep embankment. The vehicle had come out of the Wawona Tunnel at an extremely high rate of speed, crashed through a sign post and a rock wall, then launched into the air. It flew 132 feet before hitting the ground and then cartwheeled roughly 150 feet futher before coming to rest on its side. Based on physical evidence at the scene, interviews, and a six-page note to his wife left in his home, rangers determined that the driver intentionally caused the accident that took his life. Park firefighters had to use power hydraulic cutting and spreading tools to remove the body from the vehicle. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley Shift Supervisor] Monday, February 27, 2006 Yosemite NP Holiday Weekend Storm Causes Multiple Accidents On Sunday, February 19th, the Big Oak Flat Entrance Station received a report of a single vehicle accident just outside the park boundary on State Highway 120. Rangers responded and discovered a sport utility vehicle that had struck a large pine tree, causing multiple injuries to the occupants. EMS, law enforcement, and fire personnel responded from Tuolumne County, the California Highway Patrol (CHP) and the park. Due to blizzard conditions, response was slow and extremely hazardous. Ranger/medics coordinated the medical care, while Tuolumne County Fire and Yosemite Fire handled extrication of one patient, CHP investigated the accident, and plow drivers directed traffic. A total of six people were transported by county and two park ambulances with transport times greater than one hour to trauma centers. Two patients remain in intensive care at this time. During the holiday weekend, rangers responded to about 30 other motor vehicle accidents, one involving eight vehicles and an ambulance that slid off the icy road and two in which vehicles collided with NPS snowplows. Temporary road closures and mandatory tire chain requirements continued throughout the weekend. Other incidents included two SARs, two arrests, and a major power outage which closed lifts at Yosemite's Badger Pass ski area. [Greg Lawler, Subdistrict Ranger] Wednesday, April 5, 2006 Yosemite NP Conviction for Illegal Aircraft Landing On July 1, 2005, two visitors set up a camp a few hundred feet back from the edge of Mildred Lake, several miles south of the Tioga Pass road near Tenaya Lake. At about 7 p.m., a helicopter flew in low and slowly circled the lake, appearing to the visitors to be looking for anyone in the area. It landed and the pilot and a young boy got out and began fishing in the lake. The visitors were upset at this infringement of wilderness and went toward the helicopter and took photographs that identified the helicopter by its registration number. When the pilot saw them, he ran back to the helicopter and quickly took off. Several days later, the visitors reported the incident to rangers when they came out of the backcountry. An investigation was opened by special agents. They identified the pilot and attempted to interview him at the aircraft sales business he owns in the San Diego area. He refused to answer questions but did not deny that he was the owner of the helicopter and the person sitting at the controls in the visitor's photos. The agents were also able to photograph the helicopter parked in the company's hanger. He was later charged in magistrate's court and pled guilty to a violation of air delivery regulations under the terms of a plea agreement on March 14th. He was sentenced to serve one year's court probation, to pay a $2,000 fine, and to perform two days of unpaid community service flight time with his aircraft. [Dan Horner, Special Agent] Wednesday, June 7, 2006 Yosemite NP Major Slide Closes Highway 140 A massive landslide closed Highway 140 about ten miles west of El Portal last week. The park is working closely with the Forest Service, BLM, Cal Trans, Mariposa County and PG&E on the future of the highway, which will likely remain closed for at least six months. The slide continues to be active and much of the roadbed is no longer there. Park staff are also working with DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, the park's primary concessioner, on issues such as temporary employee housing, alternate work schedules, bus and or van transportation, and other issues facing park employees. Efforts are underway to work with gateway communities to mitigate negative publicity surrounding the road closure and its effects on business in Mariposa during the beginning of the busy summer visitor season. Highway 140 remains open from the park to El Portal. Businesses and accommodations in El Portal and throughout the Mariposa area are open. Two alternative routes from Mariposa to Yosemite Valley are available. Additionally, Highway 120 (west) and Highway 41 (south) are open 24 hours per day. [Scott Gediman, Chief, Media & External Relations] Wednesday, June 14, 2006 Yosemite NP Update on Landslide on Route 140 Yosemite National Park continues to deal with the closure of Highway 140 near Savages Trading Post, about seven miles outside the park's boundary. The closure, known as the "Ferguson Rockslide Incident," is currently being managed by the South Central Sierra interagency incident management team (Allen Johnson, IC) out of Mariposa. USGS geologists are currently on-site analyzing the slide as alternatives are being formulated. There is currently no estimate for the reopening of the road. The geologists, along with engineers, are looking at possible solutions that would replace the current road. The slide continues to be active and has so far deposited about 300 million cubic yards of shale onto the roadway and into the Merced River. About 400 NPS and concession employees living in Midpines and Mariposa are commuting up to two-and-a-half hours each way every day to arrive at work sites in El Portal and Yosemite Valley. The park is looking at transportation mechanisms to get employees into the park. Additionally, the park is setting up temporary housing units in El Portal and Yosemite Valley and taking measures such as allowing self-contained trailers and RV's to locate temporarily in the El Portal trailer park. The economic impact to all of the gateway communities (Mariposa, Groveland, Sonora, Oakhurst) is unknown at this point, but business is noticeably down. The economy of Mariposa is largely dependent on visitors to the park. Participating agencies include the National Park Service, US Forest Service, BLM, Mariposa County Sheriffs Office, Cal Trans, California Highway Patrol, PG&E, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Public meetings about the closure and its impacts are being conducted in Mariposa and El Portal. [Scott Gediman, Chief, Media & External Relations] Monday, July 10, 2006 Yosemite NP Update On Impacts Of Ferguson Rockslide The park and its partners continue to deal with the impacts of the Ferguson rockslide, which fell on and closed a portion of Highway 140 through the Sierra National Forest back on April 29th. Highway 140 is one of four routes that serve the park. Managers at the park and at DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc. have altered schedules and setup employee car pools to facilitate the needs of approximately 500 employees who commute from the Midpines and Mariposa areas. The Yosemite Area Regional Transportation System (YARTS) has also modified its schedule and bus routes to assist in transporting commuting employees to work. Temporary housing units and RV campsites have been arranged in and around the park to accommodate those who do not wish to commute the roughly two-and-a-half hours each way to and from work. May visitor use statistics showed an 18% increase, however, indicating that the rockslide is not affecting visitor numbers. This has partially been attributed to the melt from this year's snow pack, nearly twice its normal depth, which has made for tremendous waterfalls and lush vegetation. An information center has been set up in Mariposa to provide a centralized location for visitors, residents and business owners to obtain information about the rock slide. The information center is staffed Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Call 209-966-6174 for additional information. The California Department of Transportation (CalTrans) is currently working on an emergency temporary solution. Two bridges are being constructed around the slide, utilizing the historic roadbed on the opposite side of the river. The date for completion of the emergency temporary solution is unknown, but is expected to be before Labor Day. [Sheree Peshlakai, Park Ranger] Monday, July 17, 2006 Yosemite NP Body Of Missing CCC Worker Found The search for a missing California Conservation Corps (CCC) trail crew member working in the park ended on Friday, July 14th, when his body was located half-way down the Royal Arches wall north of the Ahwahnee Hotel. M.G., 24, stationed at the CCC's San Luis Obispo Center, was reported missing by members of his CCC trail crew when he did not arrive at their new base camp last Thursday. A full-scale search was launched immediately, utilizing both National Park Service ground search crews and helicopters from the California Highway Patrol and the California Army National Guard. M.G. had been working on the trail crew in Yosemite for nearly three months as part of the CCC's elite backcountry trails program. He had been a CCC Corps member for nearly three years, having attained the rank of specialist. M.G. was known as a reliable, hardworking young man, and was widely respected by his peers. The cause of death is still under investigation. The California Conservation Corps and the park have had a collaborative partnership for over 25 years. Through the backcountry trails program, the CCC provides thousands of hours per year building and maintaining trails throughout the park. [Sheree Peshlakai, Public Affairs Office] Wednesday, July 19, 2006 Yosemite NP Follow-up On Ferguson Rockslide The Ferguson rockslide, located on the Sierra National Forest in the Merced River Canyon, remains active, with smaller size rocks falling on a regular basis. Highway 140 into the park therefore remains closed. Forest Service field observers are monitoring the slide around the clock and procedures are in place to report any catastrophic movement or river inundation. The geology report and the multi-agency response plan are available on the forest website ( HYPERLINK "http://www.fs.fed.us/r5/sierra/conditions" http://www.fs.fed.us/r5/sierra/conditions). A temporary bypass around the slide is being constructed. Teichert Construction has been contracted by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to complete the work. Construction of the downstream bridge has begun, with concrete being poured into the bridge footings last week. Roadbed improvements to Incline Road area also continuing. Phase one of this work is projected to be completed by the end of July. This phase includes only the construction of the downstream bridge, with one-way traffic crossing back to the west side of the river on the Foresta Bridge. Access to the roadway during this time will likely be limited to several hours in the morning and evening. Mariposa, Midpines, El Portal, and Yosemite National Park visitor and information centers, businesses, and accommodations are all open for business. Commercial rafting companies remain open and continue to offer rafting trips seven days a week. [Mary Kline] Tuesday, August 1, 2006 Yosemite NP Rescue Of Seriously Injured Concession Employee Employees at the May Lake High Sierra Camp in the Tuolumne Subdistrict reported hearing cries for help coming from the east buttress of Mt. Hoffman just before 10 a.m. on July 25th. Rangers and concession employees responded immediately to the area, a steep loose granite slope. They found park concession employee C.D., 25, lying on the ground with a severe head injury and a collapsed lung. He was unresponsive and was having difficulty maintaining his airway. Witnesses reported that C.D. was scrambling up a Mt Hoffman route when he fell over 100 feet, striking his head. Rangers and search and rescue personnel provided advanced life support while a short-haul rescue was organized due to the steep terrain. C.D. was short-hauled from the site, then transported to Awahnee Meadow, where he was met by a medevac helicopter that flew him to Modesto for treatment of his life-threatening injuries. The rescue team consisted of 16 park employees. The initial response by concession employees was paramount in providing patient care and in assuring the overall success of the operation. Later the same day, Tuolumne rangers conducted a second helicopter evacuation for a patient experiencing chest pains. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Friday, August 4, 2006 Yosemite NP Rescue Of Injured Hiker Yosemite dispatch received a report of a woman with a head injury near the Porcupine Creek trailhead at 6:30 p.m. on July 28th. The injury resulted from a ground level fall that had occurred at 2 p.m. The woman soon started having headaches and became dizzy. Members of the hiking party, including two medical doctors, asked other visitors to call 911. Rangers from the Mather District responded along with the Tuolumne SAR team. After rangers arrived on scene, the woman began seizing and became unresponsive. The litter team ran two miles, fully loaded with gear, in order to expedite a wheeled litter carryout to a waiting ambulance. Due to paramedic interventions at the scene, the woman began to become responsive again. She was taken to a waiting medical helicopter for immediate transport to a trauma center in Modesto. [Christopher Kuvlesky, Park Ranger/IC] Thursday, August 10, 2006 Yosemite NP Falling Fatality At Bridal Veil Falls On Thursday, August 3rd, Valley District rangers and SAR personnel responded to a report of a person who had fallen onto the boulders at the base of Bridal Veil Fall. The victim, a 17-year-old boy from Phoenix, Arizona, had been scrambling on the wet rocks when he slipped and fell about 30 feet, landing head first in the rocks below a smaller waterfall and suffering serious head trauma. The first ranger on scene, a park medic, provided advanced life support to the boy, who was still breathing. His pulse soon stopped, though, so the medic began CPR and conducted it with the assistance of bystanders and the arriving SAR team. The base hospital physician was contacted by radio and eventually ended the resuscitation efforts. The boy was evacuated from the area by belayed litter. [Leslie Reynolds, Acting Valley District Ranger] Monday, August 14, 2006 Yosemite NP Over 12,000 Marijuana Plants Seized From Three Plantations On August 9th and 10th, the park's special response team and special agents assigned to Yosemite assisted officers from the Forest Service, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, the Bureau of Land Management, and an eradication team from CAMP (Campaign Against Marijuana Production, part of the California Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement) in the investigation and eradication of three marijuana plantations in the Merced River Canyon on the western boundary of the park. The gardens had been spotted by NPS agents and sheriff's deputies while conducting reconnaissance flights with the California National Guard in July of this year. The two raids netted 12,451 marijuana plants, with an estimated street value of approximately $35,720,000. Two of the gardens had suspects in them, but they were able to elude apprehension. Two firearms were seized in the gardens and evidence collected will be valuable in curtailing international marijuana cultivation on public lands. [Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory Special Agent] Tuesday, August 15, 2006 Yosemite NP Head-on Collision With Injuries And Felony Arrest A high-speed, head-on collision occurred on the Wawona road near Avalanche Creek around 6 a.m. on Friday, August 11th. Valley and Wawona rangers, two ambulances, a Valley fire engine and two tow trucks responded. The road was closed for two hours. Two people were taken to the Yosemite Medical Clinic with serious injuries, one of whom was later taken to Doctors Hospital in Modesto. The accident investigation showed that the driver of one of the vehicles crossed into the oncoming lane. He was arrested at the scene and charged with felony driving under the influence of alcohol. [Leslie Reynolds, Acting Valley District Ranger] Monday, August 21, 2006 Yosemite NP Highway 140 Reopens In a ribbon-cutting ceremony this past Friday morning, the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) opened the Ferguson rock slide bypass on Highway 140 between the town of Mariposa and Yosemite National Park. The road has been closed since late April due to a massive slide that covered Highway 140 in the Merced River canyon. This is a major commuting route for NPS employees, concession employees and park visitors, and the closure had necessitated commutes of up to two-and-a-half hours each way for some staff. The bypass, which was completed about two weeks ahead of schedule, utilizes two temporary bridges and the existing historical roadway to go around the slide. The road is currently open from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. daily for vehicles less than 28 feet long. Once an automated system for monitoring the slide is operational, the road will be open 24 hours a day. Caltrans will now be concentrating on a permanent solution for repairing the road. The slide still remains active. Media coverage of the closure and of the event was high. [Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, August 21, 2006 Yosemite NP Two Short Haul Rescues On the afternoon of August 12th, a Tuolumne SAR team member climbing Mt. Conness with friends on her own time saw a solo hiker fall about 40 feet and end up in a snow moat. This was just outside the park in Mono County. The man, who ended up wedged between snow and rock, sustained serious injuries and was unconscious. Runners were sent out to report the accident while other members of the group stayed with the injured man. Under a mutual aid agreement with the county, rangers and helitack personnel flew to the scene and evacuated him by short haul under the park's helicopter. He was then flown to the Mammoth Lakes airport, transferred to a commercial helicopter ambulance, and flown to a Reno, Nevada, trauma center, where he remains in critical condition. While the helicopter was refueling, a second injury was reported near Virginia Peak on the northern boundary of the park. The same team flew to this accident and conducted a second short haul rescue. A 26-year-old man had suffered a leg injury in a tumbling fall the previous night. He'd spent the night on a talus slope while his companion hiked out to report the accident. [Sally Sprouse, IC] Tuesday, August 22, 2006 Yosemite NP Multiple Overlapping Incidents In Mather District Over the course the evening of Sunday, August 13th, and the following Monday, staff in the park's Mather District dealt with an array of overlapping SAR, medical and law enforcement incidents: At 9 p.m. on August 13th, two climbers were reported to be unable to finish their climb on Fairview Dome and also unable to descend. Moreover, neither was prepared for low overnight temperatures. Rangers and SAR team members started a rescue operation around midnight. By 6 a.m., the mildly hypothermic but uninjured climbers had been rescued. As the above rescue was beginning, rangers received a report of a domestic altercation in the Tuolumne Meadows campground involving a 17-year-old boy who had a history of violent behavior and suicide attempts. He'd last been seen running into the woods north of the Tioga Pass Road. A search was begun throughout the Tuolumne Meadows area and a lookout for the boy was broadcast. Shortly thereafter, Mammoth Lakes PD advised the park that the boy was at their station. He was charged with disorderly conduct, then reunited with his family. Just before midnight on the 13th and while the two above incidents were in progress, rangers received a report of an overdue hiker at Young Lakes, seven trail miles from Tuolumne Meadows. The missing woman had parted company with her fellow hikers during a day trip to Mt. Conness, intending to return by herself to their campsite. She was carrying only a windbreaker with her. A hasty search was begun early the next morning as the Fairview Dome rescue was demobilizing. A helicopter, dog teams, trail blockers and ground search teams were deployed. The woman was spotted from the helicopter around 2 p.m. She was found to be in good condition and was flown out of the backcountry. Around 5:30 a.m. on the 14th, a fire was reported in the concession employee housing area. The resident had placed ashes from a woodstove in a cardboard box and left the box next to the ten. The ashes ignited the tent's canvas walls and roof. Nearby residents saw the blaze and got the employee out, then put out the fire with extinguishers. At 9 a.m., as the two searches were underway, Tuolumne rangers and a SAR team medic responded to and treated a youth who was having seizures at the Tuolumne Meadows store. As the search for the missing boy was demobilizing, rangers were notified of an injured climber on Lembert Dome. He'd taken a 100 foot sliding fall, which resulted in a severely angulated lower leg and severe pain. Rangers and SAR team members evacuated him by litter to a waiting ambulance. As rangers from other areas of the Mather District were responding for assignments to these incidents at Tuolumne Meadows, dispatch received a 911 call reporting gunshots in the Porcupine Flat campground. The rangers diverted to the campground and contacted the man. They found that he had several loaded weapons on him, including a submachine pistol and a sawed-off shotgun, and that he also had methamphetamine and marijuana in his possession. He was arrested and taken to jail. Felony weapons charges are pending. The last incident on the 14th took place at about 6:30 p.m. A man at the Tuolumne Meadows VC reported several abdominal pain. Rangers and a SAR team medic responded, treated him, and took him to a hospital. [Dave Lattimore, Mather District Ranger] Thursday, September 14, 2006 Yosemite NP Ranger Assaulted At Hetch Hetchy On Sunday, September 3rd, ranger Jason Terlano saw a man coming out of the wilderness area at Hetch Hetchy on a bicycle. Terlano attempted to stop him, but the man was uncooperative and rode away. Terlano pursued him down a dead end road below O'Shaughnessy Dam and again contacted him. The man then assaulted Terlano and fled on foot. Terlano continued the chase until his assailant jumped into the Tuolumne River, swam to the other side, and disappeared into the brush. Rangers from the Mather District and the park's special response team responded and began an unsuccessful search for the man. Later that evening, a Hetch Hetchy entrance station employee attending the Strawberry Music Festival at Camp Mather saw a man who fit his description and notified festival security staff. They in turn notified rangers. Terlano and special agents Jeff Sullivan and Steve Yu went to the festival, where Terlano positively identified his assailant, a stagehand at the festival. The man was taken into custody and charged with felony assault on a federal officer. He subsequently confessed to the assault. [Dave Lattimore, Mather District Ranger] Thursday, September 14, 2006 Yosemite NP Short Haul Rescue From Mount Ritter On Friday, September 7th, the park received a mutual aid request from Mono County SAR for assistance in rescuing a stranded climbing party on Mount Ritter, a few miles southeast of the park. On Thursday, five men between the ages of 15 and 21 reached the summit of the mountain (13,157 feet) without resorting to technical climbing. While descending, though, they were hit by a storm with sleet and snow. They became disoriented and down-climbed off-route into highly technical terrain. Without technical gear and with inadequate clothing, they were forced to huddle together at about 12,500 feet through the night. Eventually they called the Mono County Sheriff's Office by cell phone, and the county contacted the park. A rescue team comprised of Yosemite helitack crew members Eric Small, Nick Fowler and John DeMay, Valley District ranger Jack Hoeflich, and Mather District rangers Eric Gabriel and Jason Ramsdell flew to the area in the park helicopter, piloted by Dave Boden. The stranded climbers were spotted from the air on the north face of the peak in fifth class terrain. Rescuers were shorthauled under the helicopter onto the wall and the stranded party rigged for evacuation. In three separate evolutions, all of the climbers and rescuers were safely short-hauled off the peak to a meadow at the base of the mountain. The climbers were wet, cold and dehydrated, but were able to walk back to their campsite. However, given the weather, temperatures, and lack of warm clothing, the outcome could have been more serious had they been forced to spend another night on the wall. [Jason Ramsdell, Mather District SAR Coordinator] Thursday, September 21, 2006 Yosemite NP Rescue From Nevada Falls Park dispatch received a 911 cell phone transfer from a woman at the top of Nevada Falls around 3:30 p.m. on September 17th. She reported that her friend had suddenly collapsed and fallen to the ground, striking his head. His altered mental state suggested a potentially significant closed-head injury, further evidenced by loss of memory of the event and repetitive questioning. A park helicopter was immediately committed to the incident, and ranger Katie Lyons was dispatched to the scene from Little Yosemite Valley. A medical team was flown into the valley, the closest landing area to the accident scene but still almost a mile away. During the initial medical evaluation, the man nearly blacked out. Medics determined that his condition was sufficiently critical to warrant a short-haul evacuation. He was secured to a stokes litter, lifted from Nevada Falls via short-haul, and flown to an air ambulance waiting at Ahwahnee Meadow. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Friday, September 22, 2006 Yosemite NP Man Arrested For Starting Wildland Fire Just after midnight on the morning of Saturday, September 16th, a ranger contacted a man who was walking up the El Portal road, wearing a backpack and carrying a plastic bag of beer on ice in his hand. The man, who had not yet started to drink the beer, said that he was walking to Yosemite Valley. The ranger warned him that camping was only allowed in designated campgrounds and the man continued up the road. At about 5 a.m., park dispatch received a report of a wildland fire along the El Portal road. It quickly grew to three-and-a-half acres and was aggressively attacked by NPS, Forest Service and California Division of Forestry firefighters. A special agent was called in to investigate the fire, and dispatch broadcast a lookout for the man that the ranger had contacted along the road. About 45 minutes after the lookout went out, another ranger found the man, identified as 42-year-old W.R., walking along a road in Yosemite Valley. He had second-degree burns on his face and hands and immediately admitted to starting the fire. W.R. said that he had gone up into the woods and camped about a half mile from the point where the ranger had talked to him. He built a small fire, which escaped when he fell asleep. He said that the explosion of one of his beer cans woke him up and that fire was by then all around him. He got burned while trying to extinguish the fire with his sleeping bag. He was arrested and remains detained for a felony violation of 18 USC 1855 (setting timber afire) and for 36 CFR violations (illegal camping and lighting an illegal fire). Recovery of the cost of the suppression of the fire will be sought. [Dan Horner, Special Agent] Friday, October 6, 2006 Yosemite NP Yosemite Association President Dies In Auto Accident S.P.M., longtime president of the Yosemite Association, died in a single vehicle automobile accident this morning while traveling to work in Yosemite National Park. He was 55 years old. S.P.M. had served as president of the non-profit Yosemite Association since 1985. The association supports the National Park Service in many ways. These include donating profits from educational materials to the NPS, providing volunteers and interns, and providing service to the Yosemite community. Prior to joining the Yosemite Association, S.P.M. worked for the National Park Service as a park naturalist, research librarian and museum curator. Overall, he'd worked in the park for 35 years. S.P.M. had a BA in film and broadcast from Stanford, a master of library science from the University of Oregon, and a law degree from the J.D. King School of Law at the University of California at Davis. He worked as an attorney in private practice before joining the Yosemite Association. During his time at the Yosemite Association, S.P.M. edited and produced over 50 different publications. Many of his books have been recognized with awards and his _Complete Guidebook to Yosemite_ has sold almost 100,000 copies to date. S.P.M. is survived by his beloved wife Jane, and three sons, Andy, Joe, and Charlie. Memorial services are pending. "This is a huge loss for the Yosemite family," said superintendent Mike Tollefson. "In addition to S.P.M.'s innumerable contributions to the park, he was known for his quick wit, dedication, and sense of accomplishment. This is a tragic loss and Steve will be missed terribly." [Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, October 23, 2006 Yosemite NP Fatal Motorcycle Accident The park's emergency communications center received a report of a car-motorcycle accident around 11:15 a.m. on Sunday, October 7th. CPR was reportedly in progress. Responding units included two park medics and Medic 3, which has advanced life support capabilities. ALS measures were utilized, but without success. The motorcycle's operator, a 46-year-old man from Ventura, succumbed to his injuries. The investigation continues. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, October 24, 2006 Yosemite NP Multiple Weekend Rescues On the weekend of September 30th, park staff managed five significant SAR incidents while also dealing with a major search and the onset of the area's first winter storm. Together, these incidents were triple the normal SAR case load for this time of year. The park combined most of the rescues under one command structure, with a single incident command staff responsible for triaging all developing rescue incidents and allocating assets as appropriate: _Tamarack Flats Campground_ - On Saturday, Mather District rangers took a missing persons report for S.C., 26, who'd last been seen on Friday when he'd walked barefoot out of the Tamarack campground. The district began a major search for him on Sunday, drawing a large number of searchers from around the park. The operation was eventually scaled back to a limited continuous search. _Cathedral Peak, Tuolumne Meadows_ - Just after midnight on Saturday morning, Tuolumne rangers were alerted to a seriously injured climber who'd taken a 40-foot roped climbing fall. Tuolumne SAR staff worked through the night to find and begin treating him. The helicopter and medical personnel committed to the S.C. search were diverted to this incident. Due to the severity of his injuries, the climber was flown from the Cathedral Peak area directly to Mammoth Lakes Hospital. _Zodiac Route, El Capitan, Yosemite Valley_ - Park dispatch received a 911 transfer call from CHP on Saturday afternoon, reporting a request for the rescue of a climbing team on the Zodiac Route on El Capitan. The Korean climbers on the wall spoke no English, and a Korean climber/interpreter who was assisting SAR personnel spoke only limited English. Clarifying the situation was accordingly difficult, but it was eventually determined that the climbers wanted to be rescued simply because their haul bag rope was tangled and they couldn't figure out a means to correct the problem. Following a careful evaluation of the situation, SAR staff declined to launch a rescue at that time. Cold, rainy weather engulfed El Capitan the next morning, though, raising the concerns of SAR personnel. Due to the team's obvious inexperience and the ongoing poor weather, SAR staff continued to monitor the progress of this team until they completed the route three days later. _Cables Route, Half Dome, Yosemite Valley_ - On Sunday, the park received several 911 cell phone transfers regarding a person who'd slipped outside the cables on Half Dome and slid 100 to 150 feet down onto the blank face. He was lying precariously on the face, using only the friction of his body against the rock to stop him from falling more than 800 feet to the ground. A ranger and a SAR climbing team were immediately dispatched to the incident location. The Yosemite rescue/fire helicopter was unavailable, so a primary rescue team was put on standby to await the arrival of another helicopter to fly them to the shoulder of Half Dome. A helicopter from Sequoia/Kings Canyon responded to the request for mutual aid assistance and was the first available for the mission. Unfortunately, due to the time it took to free up a helicopter, more than two hours passed before technical rescuers were on scene. SAR technicians then repelled down to the man and rescued him. Although uninjured, he was treated for hypothermia at Yosemite Medical Center and later released. _Union Point, Four Mile Trail, Yosemite Valley_ - At almost the same time as the Half Dome SAR was being reported, dispatch received another SAR request from a visitor who's lost the trail and become ledged out and stranded above the switchbacks of Four Mile trail. He was unable to move from his location due to the steep cliffs below and the dense brush above. The helicopter from Sequoia/Kings Canyon inserted a rescuer at the hiker's location. Together with other technical SAR staff, they were able to extricate him from his location. _Upper Yosemite Falls Trail, Yosemite Valley_ - On Sunday afternoon, dispatch received a SAR request for assistance from a woman with a lower leg injury. An EMS/carryout team was formed from staff who'd previously been assigned to other incidents. Her injuries mandated a litter evacuation to the trailhead. She was then taken to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. [David Pope, Keith Lober, Yosemite Search and Rescue] Thursday, October 26, 2006 Yosemite NP Noted Climber Falls To Death An experienced rock climber fell to his death this past Monday while climbing near Bridalveil Fall in Yosemite Valley. T.S., 47, of Lander, Wyoming, a renowned climber and author. was climbing a route on the Leaning Tower when he fell approximately 500 feet to his death. T.S.'s climbing partner reported the fall at around 4 p.m. T.S. was pronounced dead at the scene. He is survived by his wife and three children. The exact cause of death is under investigation. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs] HYPERLINK "http://www.dailynews.com/news/ci_4544981" Monday, October 30, 2006 Yosemite NP Follow-up On Fatal Climbing Fall On the afternoon of October 23rd, dispatch received a telephone call reporting a fatal climbing fall. J.H. reported that he and his partner, well-known climber T.S., had been working on a first free ascent of the "Jesus Built My Hotrod" route on the overhanging west face of the Leaning Tower. T.S.'s fall occurred when he was rappelling. J.H. told investigators that he had been above T.S. when he fell. As he was rappelling on the low-stretch ropes that they had fixed on the route, J.H. came to T.S.'s Grigri descent device on the rope at the point where he'd fallen. The Grigri had a still-locked carabiner attached which had been connected to T.S.'s harness. When T.S.'s body was recovered, the belay loop on his harness was missing. The next day, rangers recovered a broken harness belay loop in vegetation at the base of the wall. It was very worn at the spot where the break had occurred. J.H. later told investigators that T.S. was aware that the belay loop on his harness was in a weakened condition prior to the climb, and that they had talked about its poor condition three days earlier. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] HYPERLINK "http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/10/26/MNGMBM08VF1.DTL&hw=skinner&sn=001&sc=1000" Monday, October 30, 2006 Yosemite NP Rescue Of Seriously Injured Rock Scrambler On Sunday, October 22nd, Valley District rangers and SAR team members responded to a report of a 35-year-old woman who had a rock weighing an estimated 1,000 pounds roll over her while she was scrambling on a talus slope. The woman, who was located about 600 feet above the valley floor in Le Conte Gully, suffered chest, spine and lower leg injuries. The medical team stabilized her and placed her in a litter; she was then hoisted out of the gully by a California Highway Patrol helicopter. The CHP helicopter landed at Ahwahnee Meadow and transferred her to a waiting Air Med helicopter to be taken to a trauma center in Modesto. The entire operation lasted just under two hours. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Tuesday, October 31, 2006 Yosemite NP Visitor Dies In 400-Foot Fall On Sunday, October 29th, Valley District rangers, SAR personnel and a California Highway Patrol helicopter were involved in a hasty search for a 28-year-old Missouri man who was overdue from a hike. Patrick Watt had last been seen the day before scrambling up the Grizzly Peak Gully by himself east of the John Muir trailhead in the Merced River Canyon above Yosemite Valley. Ground searchers found Watt's body southeast of Grizzly Peak above the tree line between Vernal Fall and the Vernal Fall foot bridge. It appears that he fell at least 400 feet. The body was hoisted out of the area by the CHP helicopter. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Tuesday, November 14, 2006 Yosemite NP Fatal Fall From Half Dome On about 1:30 p.m. on Wednesday, November 8th, Valley District rangers, SAR personnel and trail crew members responded to vague cell phone reports that there'd been a fall with serious injury from the Half Dome cables (in October, the cable hand lines are laid down on the rock and the stanchions which hold the cables up are removed to prevent them from being damaged by avalanches). Responding personnel had to hike up the nine miles of trail and the slab approach to the northwest face due to marginal flying conditions. Orders were placed for several helicopters; two eventually made it into the Valley but were unable to transport crews to the site of the accident due to low clouds surrounding the dome. The medical hasty team arrived on scene at 5 p.m. and found the body of E.S., a 25-year-old New Mexico resident and graduate of the University of Montana, at a spot about 300 feet below the base of the cables. According to her hiking partner, E.S. was descending the cables when she slipped on the wet rock, lost her grip on the cable, and slid out of sight. Her body was flown out by long line under a helicopter the following day. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Thursday, November 16, 2006 Yosemite NP Life Saved By Park Medics On the afternoon of November 6th, the park's emergency operations center received a 911 call from a man on the Vernal Falls footbridge who was complaining of chest pains. Park medics Barry Lewis and Chad Andrews responded on foot and began immediate intervention. Additional assistance was provided by the staff of Medic 3, including paramedics. The 60-year-old man was littered down the trail and transported by ambulance and medevac helicopter to a local hospital. While en route, he experienced symptoms consistent with a heart attack. The advanced care provided by the two medics is credited with saving his life. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Monday, December 18, 2006 Yosemite NP BASE Jumpers Apprehended Ranger Keith Lober was descending from El Capitan while off-duty on December 3rd when he came upon two men who were ascending fixed ropes on the rappel route. While waiting at an anchor with the first man, it became apparent to Lober that the second man was not a climber due to his attire and lack of climbing skill. Suspecting that they were BASE jumpers, Lober engaged them in conversation. The men asked Lober if he was a ranger; when he assured them that he wasn't, they told him that they were going to BASE jump from El Cap that night. Later in the evening, they jumped from El Cpitan by the light of the full moon. Lober and other rangers were waiting for them when they landed. F.M.. 29, of Oakland, California, landed in the meadow, stashed his gear, and evaded the rangers in the dark, but W.G., 28 of Angwin, California, was arrested as he landed. F.M. turned himself in two hours later in an effort to retrieve his vehicle and BASE jumping gear, all of which had been seized as evidence. Both were charged with illegal air delivery, and F.M. was also charged with possession of marijuana. Evidence seized by the rangers included video from F.M.'s helmet camera. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Monday, December 18, 2006 Yosemite NP AWOL Army Soldier Arrested In Backcountry On Sunday, November 26th, rangers arrested C.P. in Little Yosemite Valley, a backcountry camping area six trail miles from Yosemite Valley. A limited search for C.P. had begun on the night of November 19th, when rangers noted that a vehicle registered to him had been parked at a trailhead for a long period of time. When rangers ran the vehicles' registration, they discovered that C.P. was AWOL from an Army base in Virginia. Further checks revealed that C.P. had obtained a wilderness permit for the John Muir Trail for the period from November 6th to November 20th. When he did not return to his vehicle on the 20th, rangers investigated further. They found that C.P. had come out of the backcountry to buy supplies at a store in Yosemite Valley on November 16th. Missing person flyers were posted and hikers eventually reported that C.P. was camping in Little Yosemite Valley. On the eve of an impending winter storm, rangers hiked to the valley and contacted C.P. They found that he had a loaded .38 caliber handgun in his possession, and he told rangers that he'd contemplated suicide. C.P. was arrested and escorted down the trail. An Army AWOL apprehension team took him into custody. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Wednesday, December 27, 2006 Yosemite NP Sentencing Of Man Who Started Fire On November 20th, W.R. III was sentenced in federal court in Fresno, California, after pleading guilty to leaving a fire unattended and unextinguished (18 USC 1856) and to illegal camping (36 CFR 2.10). W.R. started the three-and-a-half acre Powerhouse Fire along the El Portal road in mid September (click on "More Information" for the original report). He was sentenced to nine months in jail and five years probation and was ordered to pay $22,293 in restitution to the United States. [Dan Horner, Special Agent] HYPERLINK "http://classicinside.nps.gov/headline.cfm?type=Incidents&id=2879" Friday, January 12, 2007 Yosemite National Park (CA) Sentencing On Threat, Retaliation Charges On September 6, 2004, rangers George Paiva and Leigh Guenther arrested C.B. for DUI in the Tuolumne Meadows subdistrict. During the course of the investigation and arrest, C.B. made several threatening statements to Guenther. C.B. pled guilty to the DUI charge on the following day. Two days after that, a neighbor of Paiva's notified him that two of the tires on Paiva's personal vehicle had been slashed. Subsequent investigation led to C.B. confessing to slashing Paiva's tires. On January 4, 2005, C.B. was indicted by a federal grand jury for assault on a federal officer (18 USC 111(a)) and retaliating against a witness (18 USC 1513 (b)). On December 18, 2006, under the terms of a plea agreement, C.B. pled guilty to one count of vandalism (36 CFR 2.31 (a)(3)). He was sentenced to six months in prison and ordered to stay out of Yosemite National Park for a period of three years after he serves his jail time. [Submitted by Steve Yu, Special Agent] Monday, January 22, 2007 Yosemite NP Visitors Rescued From Vehicle In River On January, 11th, a winter storm passed over the park, producing little snow but creating very icy road conditions. Although crews treated park roads and rangers put four-wheel-drive or snow chain restrictions into effect, a Nissan Pathfinder slid off Highway 140 near Pohono Bridge shortly after passing a chain control area. According to the initial report, everyone was out of the vehicle and there were no injuries. Park telecommunication supervisor David Thorpe was in the area, though, and provided additional information. Thorpe, who is also a Mariposa County swiftwater rescuer, told rangers that the Pathfinder began rocking when the occupants were attempting to get out, suggesting that it was unstable; the evacuation was accordingly stopped until the vehicle could be stabilized. Still inside in the front passenger seat was a 62-year-old man with an artificial hip and restricted mobility. That part of the vehicle, including the tire and bumper, were touching a deep pool of swiftly moving water. Rangers, Yosemite SAR personnel and members of two fire battalions responded. The Pathfinder was secured and the man was carefully extricated and raised up a slick, rough scree slope in a litter. Meanwhile, traffic management personnel, road crews and tow trucks from the Valley worked at sanding the road, managing the closure, and moving other vehicles involved in collisions back onto the roadway. The icy conditions were caused by frozen rain falling on the roadway. Although there wasn't much of an accumulation, the compressed particles created a very slick surface. [Jason Gayeski, Valley Patrol] Thursday, April 26, 2007 Yosemite NP Fatal Fall From Half Dome Cables At 3 p.m. on Thursday, April 19th, Yosemite dispatch received a cell phone report from witnesses who reported that about two hours earlier a solo hiker had slipped off the Half Dome cables and slid out of sight. The cables are laid down on the rock this time of year and the stanchions which hold the cables up are removed to prevent damage by avalanches. Rescue personnel began hiking up the nine trail miles toward Half Dome because weather made flying impossible. The team was turned around above the shoulder of the dome several hours later by heavy snow, wind, and icy conditions that made travel on the exposed ridge too dangerous even before they reached the bottom of the cables. The bad weather continued throughout the following day and the dome was never out of the clouds. The weather broke the following morning and a spotter posted across Tenaya Canyon from Half Dome picked out what he believed was a body in the gully to the north of and below the cables. The location of the body, about 1,000 feet below the base of the cables, was confirmed from a helicopter. A recovery team was flown to the shoulder of Half Dome and was able to descend to the victim utilizing crampons, ice axes and roped climbing. The body was flown out by long line under a helicopter. She was eventually identified as Jennie Bettles, a 43-years old marketing executive and marathon runner from Oakland, California. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Monday, May 5, 2007 Yosemite NP Entrapped Woman Rescued From Tenaya Creek The park's communications center dispatched rescue personnel to Mirror Lake for a swiftwater rescue at 4 p.m. on April 6th. The first ranger on scene saw two people in Tenaya Creek just below the outlet to Mirror Lake - a woman who'd become entrapped and a man who had come to her rescue. Witnesses said that the woman had been in the water for about an hour. She was attempting to cross to the other side of Mirror Lake when she slipped and fell into the creek. She became entrapped while attempting to get out of the water. Bystanders made several attempts to reach her, but without success. A man eventually made his way to her, with rescuers arriving shortly thereafter - the park's swiftwater team, the Valley fire battalion, the park's SAR team (YOSAR), and an EMS unit. Two rescuers - Jack Hoeflich and Mark Faherty - swam to the pair and extricated them with the assistance of the engine's 24-foot ladder. The woman was limp, fatigued and showing signs of exposure. She was transported to a medical facility, treated and released. [Jason Gayeski, IC] Wednesday, May 23, 2007 Yosemite NP Multi-Agency Search For Missing Hiker On Sunday, May 13th, 40-year-old T.X. was hiking with family members in the woods in Sierra National Forest near the boundary with Yosemite when she became separated from her party. The family searched for her for five hours before driving to the nearby town of Oakhurst to call 911. Sheriff's deputies from Madera and Mariposa Counties joined Yosemite rangers in a hasty search of the area. While the point last seen was in Mariposa County, the majority of the search area was within Yosemite. Thirteen SAR personnel from Mariposa County and 31 SAR personnel from Yosemite participated in a ground search that began just before sunset. T.X., scared but uninjured, was found in a densely forested area approximately a half mile from the point last seen by a Mariposa County search team in the early morning hours of May 14th. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, May 29, 2007 Yosemite NP Seriously Injured Climber Rescued From El Capitan The park received a 911 call reporting a climbing fall on El Capitan around 9:30 a.m. on the morning of Thursday, May 17th. Initial reports were that the climber - A.S., a German national - had sustained a very serious injury and that a long blood trail could be seen below the ledge where he was awaiting aid. SAR personnel were paged and efforts to find and reach him began immediately. A.S. was climbing the seventeenth pitch of the Nose Route on the south face of El Capitan when the accident occurred. He was leapfrogging his protection when he fell about 100 feet, striking Eagle Ledge during his fall and coming to rest ten feet below the ledge, hanging from the climbing rope that had ultimately arrested his fall. With the assistance of a California Highway Patrol helicopter, rescuers were on the four-foot-long by eighteen-inch-wide ledge within three hours of the call. A.S. was packaged, flown to El Cap Meadow, then transferred to a waiting air ambulance. A.S. sustained injuries, including fractures to a femur, three vertebrae and his jaw. Rob Lewis was IC. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Monday, June 4, 2007 Yosemite NP Driver Rescued From Vehicle In Merced River Off-duty dispatcher Ansley Rothell radioed park dispatch just after 10:30 p.m. on May 25th, reporting that she thought she'd heard cries for help coming from above the old El Portal housing community. Rangers from Yosemite Valley and El Portal were dispatched to investigate. Shortly thereafter, dispatch received another report of cries for help, narrowing the location to the Merced River in the area of Crane Creek off Highway 140. The park's swift water team and numerous patrol, fire and rescue units all responded. Ranger Brendan Bonner found a vehicle in the river with the driver, R.Y. of Brooklyn, New York, wedged between river boulders around mid-stream. The swift water team rescued him, utilizing a tethered river board. R.Y. said that he'd become disoriented when an oncoming motorist failed to dim his headlights, causing him to drove off the road and into the river. Following the rescue, R.Y.'s vehicle became submerged in the river. The California Highway Patrol is investigating. The Mariposa County Sheriff's Department was an active participant in the rescue and the vehicle recovery effort. Jason Gayeski was IC. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Monday, June 4, 2007 Yosemite NP Visitor Falls Into River And Drowns On May 19th, K.Y., 27, of Santa Clara and India, went hiking on the Vernal-Nevada Falls Trail with a group of friends. K.Y. left the trail and walked about 10 yards to the edge of the Merced River, where he slipped and fell in. Witnesses reported that they'd seen him in the river below the Vernal Falls footbridge, but that he'd then disappeared. Search efforts began in earnest when the park received a call for assistance. Search dogs alerted along the river downstream from the footbridge the following day. Although past its peak spring runoff, the river continues to run at a significant volume, and its velocity near the footbridge made it too hazardous for SAR personnel to enter the water. On Tuesday, May 29th, K.Y.'s body was spotted by a park ranger. The recovery, which entailed the use of a high line, took about three-and-a-half hours. Mike Foster and Jack Hoeflich were incident commanders during the initial search and later recovery efforts. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, June 19, 2007 Yosemite NP Hiker Dies In Fall From Half Dome H.N., 37, slipped and fell while ascending the Half Dome cables on the afternoon of June 16th. H.N., a Japanese citizen in the United States on a work visa, was hiking with four friends when the fall occurred. He fell approximately 300 feet from the left side of the cables and was pronounced dead at the scene. An investigation into the cause of the slip and subsequent fall is underway. The Half Dome hike is a round-trip hike of 17 miles and considered extremely strenuous. Hikers gain 4,800 feet of elevation along the hike, which passes such highlights as Vernal Fall, Nevada Fall, and Half Dome itself. A series of metal cables are placed along the steep shoulder of the dome to assist hikers to the summit. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] HYPERLINK "http://www.modbee.com/local/story/13701680p-14289760c.html" Friday, July 20, 2007 Yosemite NP Visitor Death On Half Dome Trail Valley rangers received a report of an unconscious and unresponsive man on the Half Dome trail about a half mile up from the Sunrise trail intersection early on the afternoon of Wednesday, July 11th. Off-duty park safety officer Roger Farmer soon arrived on scene and reported that CPR was in progress. Helicopter 551 was immediately requested and flew to the area. Ranger/paramedic Keith Lober and ranger Jason Gayeski-Peters heli-rappelled to the man's location. The victim. J.V., 53, of Lodi, California, was pronounced dead at the scene. His body was short-hauled from the area. The cause of death has not yet been determined. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Monday, July 30, 2007 Yosemite NP Short-Haul Evacuation Of Injured Fisherman On the morning of July 26th, ranger Sam Flourney was contacted by members of a fishing party who reported that a 77-year-old member of their group had suffered a dramatically angulated leg fracture in a ground-level fall. Flourney and SAR technicians Chris Nanamura and Jen Imai headed to the man's location, about 25 minutes east of the Little Yosemite Valley campground. Flourney advised incident command that a helicopter short-haul would be required to extricate the man, as he was in heavy timber on an inaccessible side of the Merced River. A medical team was flown into Little Yosemite Valley and dropped onto the site via heli-rappel. The injured man and medic Matt Stark were then short-hauled from the accident site and flown about five miles to the Ahwahnee Meadows helispot in Yosemite Valley proper. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Manager] Thursday, August 2, 2007 Yosemite NP Major Search In Progress For Missing Woman On July 30th, the park received a report that an 80-year-old woman had become separated from her hiking group. The woman was part of a small group hiking in the Yosemite wilderness and staying at the Vogelsang High Sierra Camp. They were hiking to Ireland Lake when she decided to return to the camp to retrieve some food. She failed to rejoin the group. Information from other hikers indicated that she'd been near Emeric Lake on the afternoon of the 30th. Emeric Lake is about two-and-a-half miles west of Vogelsang, while Ireland Lake is five miles to the east. The woman has a history of memory loss. Search operations began that evening and expanded throughout the following day. Four search dog teams, two helicopters and over 100 searchers have been committed to the search. Sally Sprouse is the IC. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger; Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Specialist] Friday, August 3, 2007 Yosemite NP Search For Missing Woman Continues The search for O."T."B., 80, continues. O.B. was last seen on July 30th near Vogelsang High Sierra Camp. Over 100 searchers from Marin, Mariposa, Merced, Mono, Ventura, Santa Clara, and Fresno counties, as well as from the Bay Area Mountain Rescue Unit, the National Park Service, and DNC Parks and Resorts in Yosemite, Inc., are participating in the search effort. Dog teams and helicopters are also being employed. On Wednesday, a bloodhound got a positive hit on the Fletcher Creek trail, but lost the scent. No other significant clues have yet been found. Although daytime temperatures have been in the 70s, they've dropped into the 30s at night. The search area covers terrain running from about 7,000 feet to 10,500 feet. O.B. is described as 5'0" tall, with dyed blond hair and brown eyes. She is an experienced hiker but has a history of memory loss which can lead to confusion. Anyone hiking in the backcountry areas around Tuolumne Meadows or east of Merced Lake (especially those near the Vogelsang or Merced High Sierra Camps or Emeric Lake) should call 209-372-0778. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Specialist; Eric Gabriel, Mather District Ranger] Tuesday, August 7, 2007 Yosemite NP Search For Missing Woman Scaled Back The search for an 80-year-old woman who's been missing since July 30th has been scaled back. O.B. of Schererville, Indiana, was part of a small group hiking in the Yosemite wilderness and staying at the Vogelsang High Sierra Camp. They were hiking to Ireland Lake when she decided to return to the camp to retrieve some food. She failed to rejoin the group. At its peak this past weekend, nearly 150 people from the NPS and numerous county and state teams participated in the search. Yesterday, the search was scaled back to SAR and ranger staff only, pending discovery of any further clues. Protection staff were involved in a number of other operations during the O.B. SAR, including a helicopter evacuation from Half Dome, a medical assist at May Lake for a cardiac arrest, two serious ankle injuries, a helicopter evacuation from Vogelsang High Sierra Camp for abdominal pain, three lost persons (all of whom self-recovered with ranger assistance), and a short-haul operation for an injured backpacker near Pate Valley. SAR staff also responded to a personal locator beacon (PLB) which activated while the owner was miles from the park, safely in his vehicle. Approximately 10 staff members hiked into a remote area near Yosemite Creek drainage after dark to respond to the beacon. With the exception of the Half Dome evacuation, all of the incidents were handled by the same subdistrict as the major SAR. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Specialist] Thursday, August 16, 2007 Yosemite NP Body Of Missing Woman Found The search for a missing woman in ended on Tuesday, August 14th, when her body was located in the Echo Creek drainage, a rugged wilderness area southwest of Tuolumne Meadows. O.B., 80, was reported missing by friends when she failed to return to the Vogelsang High Sierra Camp after a day-hike on July 30th. Over 150 searchers from the National Park Service, counties throughout California, and DNC Parks and Resorts in Yosemite, Inc., participated in the search effort. Dog teams and helicopters were used as well. The cause of death is still under investigation. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Specialist] Friday, August 17, 2007 Yosemite NP Marijuana Gardens Raided On Monday, August 13th, rangers located and seized 7,428 mature marijuana plants from three gardens in the park, all part of the same growing operation. The value of the marijuana plants is estimated at about $22 million. A number of agencies cooperated in Monday's multi-agency operation - several national parks, the Mariposa County Sheriffs Office, the Army National Guard, and the California Department of Justice's Campaign Against Marijuana Planting (CAMP). The illegal cultivation sites bore the characteristics of a Mexican drug trafficking enterprise, including a sophisticated watering system and use of fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides. The growing operation resulted in considerable natural resource destruction. Yosemite National Park, along with other national parks in California, is taking an aggressive stand against growing marijuana on park lands. "This is an unacceptable activity that will not be tolerated in Yosemite National Park", said acting superintendent Kevin Cann. "We will work with the Justice Department on these cases to ensure that marijuana cultivation does not get established in Yosemite and that the park remains safe for visitors." The park's strategy is to completely deny access to marijuana growers. Chief ranger Steve Shackelton said that the park is maintaining a "full court press" on the Mexican organizations that have extended their network of marijuana gardens throughout the Sierra Nevada. The park is working with several California counties, the Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the California Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement, and other national parks to mount a comprehensive campaign against the California-based crime families that often use illiterate and financially desperate Mexican nationals to do the actual cultivation. "For years we've been seeing these people make millions of dollars in profit while they devastate the environment on private property and California's majestic public lands," said Shackelton. "They destroy habitat, pollute streams with poisons and nitrogen fertilizers, kill wildlife, and pose a fire threat. The only thing missing is public outrage." [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, August 21, 2007 Yosemite NP Arrest For Abusive Sexual Contact With Children Yosemite agents and Madera County deputies executed a federal arrest warrant on N.C., 76, in Oakhurst, California, on August 10th. This action brought to a culmination a three-month-long investigation into sexual abuse of children at Camp Wawona, a Seventh Day Adventist church camp on private property within the boundaries of the park. The criminal activity occurred over a period of many years. N.C. had been a maintenance worker at the camp. A federal magistrate judge signed a criminal complaint on August 9th, charging N.C. with 15 counts of abusive sexual contact with children (18 USC 2244(a)(5)). Each count carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. [Thane Weigand, Special Agent] Monday, August 27, 2007 Yosemite NP Injured Climber Rescued From Half Dome Valley rangers received a report of an injured climber on the northwest face of Half Dome at 4:30 a.m. on August 21st. The climber, R.K., had taken a leader fall of about 80 feet after having gotten off route. During the fall, R.K. zippered out at least four additional protection pieces that he'd used as climbing aids. R.K.'s fall was finally arrested by his climbing rope, but not before he injured his back in a glancing blow off a protruding ledge. Rescuers were flown to the top of Half Dome in the park's contract helicopter. Two rescuers were then lowered 600 feet down the overhanging face to R.K.'s location. He was packaged in a vacuum body splint, raised to the top of Half Dome, then flown to a trauma center in Modesto. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Tuesday, August 28, 2007 Yosemite NP Mutual Aid Response To Serious Accident Park fire and EMS personnel responded to a mutual aid request from Mariposa County for an assist at a head-on collision on Highway 140 near El Portal just before 3 p.m. on August 24th. The high-speed collision caused major structural damage to both vehicles. Four people were injured. Two air ambulances landed on the roadway near the accident scene and transported the two most critically injured victims. One, a teenager, was flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto and taken directly to surgery. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Wednesday, August 29, 2007 Yosemite NP Park Provides Helicopter Short-Haul Assist In Rescue The Inyo County Sheriff's Office contacted the park around 2:30 p.m. on August 21st and requested the park's contract helicopter for a short-haul rescue of an injured climber from a ridge at the 11,100-foot elevation on Mount Ritter. A 15-year-old boy had reported that his father had taken a 150-foot fall and was having trouble breathing. Rescue personnel had difficulty in finding the accident site at the outset due to very limited information. The fall had occurred on Sunday, August 19th, but the victim had to wait three days for rescuers to arrive. Once found, though, the short-haul was carried out without incident. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Monday, September 17, 2007 Yosemite National Park (CA) Major Search Underway For Missing Hiker A large-scale search is underway in the park for R.H., 58, of Corcoran, California, who was last heard from on September 14th via cell phone while driving to the Sentinel Dome/Taft Point area near Glacier Point. R.H. is described as 5'8" tall with brown hair and brown eyes. He is not an experienced hiker but is in good health. Search and rescue teams from Fresno, Madera, Marin, Mono, and Tulare Counties have joined park staff in the search effort. Dog teams and air searchers are being used as well. Anyone who was hiking near the Sentinel Dome/Taft Point area or off of the Glacier Point Road between Friday and Sunday is asked to call Yosemite National Park at 209-372-0529. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, September 17, 2007 Yosemite NP Major Search Underway For Missing Hiker A large-scale search is underway in the park for R.H., 58, of Corcoran, California, who was last heard from on September 14th via cell phone while driving to the Sentinel Dome/Taft Point area near Glacier Point. R.H. is described as 5'8" tall with brown hair and brown eyes. He is not an experienced hiker but is in good health. Search and rescue teams from Fresno, Madera, Marin, Mono, and Tulare Counties have joined park staff in the search effort. Dog teams and air searchers are being used as well. Anyone who was hiking near the Sentinel Dome/Taft Point area or off of the Glacier Point Road between Friday and Sunday is asked to call Yosemite National Park at 209-372-0529. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, September 18, 2007 Yosemite NP Update: Searchers Find Missing Hiker R.H., 58, of Corcoran, California, was found by ground searchers around 8:30 a.m. on Monday morning near Glacier Point. He was mildly dehydrated but otherwise okay. R.H. was reported missing to park officials on Saturday afternoon when he did not return from a day hike. His truck was subsequently located at the Sentinel Dome/Taft Point trailhead off the Glacier Point Road. A search was begun and continued through Saturday night. On Sunday, it was expanded into a much more significant effort. Approximately 70 searchers from counties throughout California and from Yosemite and Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Parks and DNC Parks and Resorts in Yosemite participated in the operation. Dog teams and helicopters were used as well. Participating were SAR teams from Fresno, Madera, Marin, Ventura, Tulare, Mono, Los Angeles, Mariposa, and San Bernadino Counties, along with China Lake SAR and Sierra Madre SAR. Yosemite National Park wishes to thank these cooperating search teams for their quick response and continued effort. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, September 19, 2007 Yosemite NP Climber Rescued From Half Dome Park dispatch received a 911 call from a climber at the base of the Northwest Face of Half Dome around 10 p.m. on September 4th. He told the dispatcher that he'd been in contact with a climber from another team who was experiencing a medical problem of unknown origin that caused him to suddenly collapse and that the climber was unable to either continue his ascent or rappel the route. The climber, Marco Feith, was stranded on a small ledge about 2,000 feet up the Northwest Face. Due to the late hour of the report, rescue operations were organized to begin early the next morning. A 17-person technical rescue team was flown to the top of Half Dome by the park's contract helicopter. Ranger/park medic Eric Gabriel was lowered 500 feet down the overhanging face to the ledge. Gabriel and Feith were then hauled back to the top. This was repeated a second time so that ranger Aaron Smith could retrieve Feith's partner. The lowering and raising operations took a total of less than three hours to complete. Feith was taken to the park clinic, treated for severe dehydration, and released later the same day. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Thursday, October 4, 2007 Yosemite NP Marijuana Eradication And Arrests On September 26th and 27th, Mariposa County Sheriff's Office deputies, United States Forest Service officers, California Department of Justice Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement officers, and Yosemite rangers and special agents raided four illegal marijuana cultivation sites in the Wawona District at the south end of the park. Three of the sites were located right on the park boundary between the Wawona road and the South Fork of the Merced River. The fourth site was a short distance outside the park on the Sierra National Forest. A total of 14,536 plants were seized and two Mexican nationals were arrested, one an adult and the other a 17 year-old juvenile. [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Thursday, November 15, 2007 Yosemite NP Climber Caught In Storm Dies Following Descent On the morning of November 11th, Tuolumne ranger Jason Ramsdell encountered a man at the Cathedral trailhead who had just walked out of the backcountry during a snowstorm and was shivering uncontrollably. The man told Ramsdell that a friend was unconscious along the trail to Cathedral Peak and was probably dead from hypothermia. Ramsdell warmed the man, then launched a rescue operation. Rangers found the body of 43-year-old P.N. near the Budd Creek trail about a mile and a half above the Tioga Road just after 10 a.m. Although the investigation is still underway, it appears that P.N. succumbed to the cold after climbing Cathedral Peak. The two men had become severely hypothermic while rappelling down after climbing the southeast buttress as blowing sleet and snow moved into the area in the early morning hours. Intending to be out of the backcountry by just after dark, the men did not have warm clothing with them and had not taken along much food. Equipment, including warm hats, matches and waterproof jackets, had been left behind near the base of the climbing route. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Thursday, November 15, 2007 Yosemite NP Visitor's Life Saved Through Rangers Prompt Action On November 10th, rangers Jason Ramsdell and Aaron Smith received a report of a 61-year-old male with chest pains approximately two miles down the Saddlebag Lake trail just outside the park. The Mono County Sheriff's Department requested assistance from the park. Ramsdell and Smith responded on foot, found that the man was experiencing severe chest pain radiating down his left arm and was pale and sweaty, and accordingly began implementing advanced life support measures. The man had a history of heart disease and told a friend on scene that he thought he was dying. Ramsdell and Smith treated him according to chest pain protocol and set up a landing zone for a life flight helicopter. Their quick action saved the man's life, as he was later diagnosed with a near 100% blockage of a coronary artery and underwent angioplasty that same evening. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, November 27, 2007 Yosemite NP Climber Seriously Injured In Fall On Royal Arches Route On the evening of Tuesday, November 20th, Valley District rangers received a report of an injured climber on the second pitch of the Royal Arches climbing route. The climber, M.S., had taken an estimated 50- to 80-foot fall while rappelling. M.S. was off the standard descent rappel route and was trying to reach an anchor that was just below her and out of the reach of her rappel rope when she fell. She was aware that she was near the very end of the rope and was attempting to clip into an off route rappel anchor when the accident occurred. M.S. came to rest on a boulder-strewn ledge 200 foot above the ground. She was critically injured in the fall, sustaining a C2-C3 fracture and a pneumothorax. The fall was evidently partially arrested by her rappel rope being pulled through the system as she fell. Members of her climbing party descended to report the accident. M.S. was packaged in a vacuum body splint and lowered 200 feet to the ground, where she was received by a carryout team. She was flown out to a trauma center in Modesto later that evening. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Wednesday, December 26, 2007 Yosemite NP Rock Fall Closes Northside Drive A series of winter storms brought snow and ice to the park during the week of December 18th and caused several rockslides along Northside Drive between Camp 4 and the El Capitan crossover. A large boulder was reported on the roadway around 4 p.m. that afternoon, the product of a rock fall that occurred near the cliff face of Middle Brother in Yosemite Valley. The drive was immediately closed. Since vehicles couldn't exit from the road due to a large downed oak tree at El Capitan straightaway, they had to be escorted out through a construction road closure. There were no injuries, but employees leaving work were inconvenienced. Staff from roads and trails, the sign shop and visitor protection opened Southside Drive for two-way traffic. Northside Drive remained closed and was monitored. Another rockfall occurred that night, and a second large rockslide occurred in the closed area around 3:30 p.m. on December 19th - but did not reach the road. The closure remains in effect until further notice. The valley remains open to all traffic via Southside Drive. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Monday, January 7, 2008 Yosemite NP Boy Seriously Injured In Skiing Accident On Christmas Day, just before closing time, a seven-year-old boy who was downhill skiing in the Eagle Bowl at Badger Pass Ski Area collided with another skier and suffered a fractured femur. The boy was stabilized on the ski slope and transported to the first aid station by members of the Badger Pass ski patrol, Badger Pass rangers, and Wawona rangers. Due to the seriousness of the injury and the length of time it would take to transport him by ambulance, a medevac helicopter was requested. The helicopter landed at the base of the ski area just before dark and flew the boy to Fresno Medical Center, where he underwent surgery the following day. [Mark Dowdle, Wawona Subdistrict Ranger] Tuesday, January 8, 2008 Pacific West Region Major Storm Causes Some Park Closures, Outages A major storm hammered parks across the region last weekend. Stern travel advisories and public information about the storm and its impacts may have helped reduce significant incidents during this widespread event. Recovery continues, as many communities shovel out, attempt to restore utilities, or wait to dry out. Another storm system is expected to bring rain/snow beginning early today. Here's a wrap-up from Pacific West parks: Yosemite - Windy conditions on Friday prevented Badger Pass ski area from opening. Normal operations resumed on Saturday. Localized power outages occurred in the Mather District, including the Hodgdon and Crane Flat housing areas. Rain fell at the lower elevations, turning to snow Saturday night. Snow accumulations varied from six inches in Yosemite Valley, to over 30 inches at Crane Flat, to nearly four feet in Tuolumne Meadows. There were no significant incidents. [Karen Newton, PWRO, with reports from Charles Cuvelier (YOSE), Craig Ackerman (ORCA), Ron Martin (LAVO), Nancy Wizner (REDW), and Colin Smith (PORE)] Friday, January 18, 2008 Yosemite NP Children Rescued From Car In Merced River Bottom A car left Highway 140 and ended up on the Merced River bottom just after noon on December 31st. The driver was reportedly attempting to pass several cars on a wet and sandy bend in the road when the accident occurred. The vehicle came to rest on rocks, with its tires in shallow water. A park roads employee who was traveling home reported the accident. Two adults in the vehicle were able to get out, but two children with serious injuries had to be removed by emergency responders. Firefighter Bernie Spielman put ICS into effect while Ruth Middlecamp provided initial medical care. Units were called in from Yosemite Valley and Mariposa County to provide EMS and traffic control, and three air ambulances were brought in. One child suffered head fractures and the other had a punctured lung. The California Highway Patrol is investigating. [Bernie Spielman] Wednesday, February 6, 2008 Yosemite NP Searchers Find Three Missing Snowboarders The park began a search for three missing snowboarders on Monday afternoon after they failed to meet their ride near the community of Yosemite West, close to the park's western boundary. Their planned route was reportedly from a point just south of the Yosemite West junction on the Wawona Road to that community. A search was begun and continued until midnight, then resumed on the following morning. More than 65 SAR personnel from the park and Mariposa County were committed to the operation, which was also supported by aircraft. They were spotted from a helicopter early yesterday afternoon near the South Fork of the Merced River. All three were able to walk to the helicopter on their own. Medical assessments had yet to be conducted at the time of the report. [Adrienne Freeman, Park Ranger] Friday, March 7, 2008 Yosemite National Park Boy Scout Falls To Death On February 16th, two Boy Scouts were hiking with their troop from Modesto, California, on the Yosemite Falls Trail, approximately 300 yards above Columbia Point. The two boys left the trail and attempted to take what they believed was a short cut. Both boys fell due to the steep terrain. One of them was able to self-arrest after a drop of approximately 10 feet, but saw that his companion continued over the edge and fell about 300 feet. The victim was located by rangers at the bottom of the cliff in an area just west of the Munginella climbing route. Advanced life support measures were employed for approximately 15 minutes before the boy was pronounced dead. A preliminary finding of the investigation into the incident by investigators and the medical examiner has ruled the death as accidental. (Jeff Sullivan, Supervisory Special Agent] Tuesday, April 22, 2008 Yosemite NP El Portal Market Burns Down The El Portal Market, one of El Portal's oldest buildings, burned to the ground yesterday in a blaze which was reported by local residents at approximately 5 a.m. Units from El Portal, Wawona and Yosemite Valley and from DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc. and Mariposa County responded to the fire. The market has been closed for renovations since late March. The El Portal Market, built around 1934, originally served park visitors travelling to Yosemite by railroad. The market was operated between 1966 and March of this year under the general partnership of Vaughn, Vaughn, and Carter. The current operator was scheduled to open the market in late spring, when renovations were completed. The market has served El Portal residents and park visitors since the mid-1930's as both a general merchandise store and a community meeting place. Yosemite park managers are meeting to consider options for replacing the building. The cause of the fire is currently under investigation. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, April 23, 2008 Yosemite NP Rangers Respond To Fatal Air Crash Just Outside Park On the evening of Friday, April 18th, the California Office of Emergency Services contacted park personnel and advised that the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center was receiving an aircraft ELT (emergency locator transmitter) signal that appeared to be coming from within the park. Yosemite SAR personnel immediately put a contract helicopter that was already in the park on standby, then began making preparations to commit it to a search effort. While doing so, the wreckage was sighted on the ground from a civilian airplane. Ranger/paramedics Keith Lober and Matt Stark were picked up from the Yosemite Valley LZ and flown to the accident site. They determined that the downed plane's two occupants had evidently been killed immediately upon impact. The plane's location was found to be just outside the park's jurisdiction, to the incident was turned over to the Tuolumne County Sheriff's Office. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Manager] Tuesday, April 29, 2008 Yosemite NP Cause Of El Portal Fire Determined As Electrical The El Portal Market was completely destroyed by fire on Monday, April 21st. The results of the Mariposa County Fire investigation were released last Friday and revealed that the cause of the fire was electrical (for a PDF copy of the ten-page report, click on the link below). Hazardous waste material evaluation of the burn site will begin on May 5th and is expected to take at least a week for results. Clean up of the burn site will commence after the hazardous waste evaluation is completed. Superintendent Michael Tollefson announced on Thursday that the store operation will be moved to the El Portal Motor Inn (currently known as the special park uses office) for the duration of the concessionaire's six year contract. The park plans to have the building ready to open as a store in nine months time. No decision has been made yet regarding the option of opening up the back road ("Rail Road") from the park firehouse to the motor inn. The subject will be discussed at upcoming El Portal town planning advisory committee meetings. The park staff who currently work in the special park uses office will be moved into temporary office space in the near future. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] HYPERLINK "http://www.nps.gov/yose/parkmgmt/upload/El%20Portal%20Market%20Fire%20Report%20pages%201-10.pdf" Friday, May 09, 2008 Yosemite National Park (CA) School Bus Collision Causes Minor To Moderate Injuries Two school busses headed toward Yosemite Valley from the Yellow Middle School in Newman, California, collided yesterday in a rear end collision. The accident occurred at about 10:55 a.m. about a mile north of the Big Oak Flat/El Portal Road intersection along the Big Oak Flat Road. There were a total of 40 children on the two busses. Early reports indicate that the injuries were minor to moderate. Children were taken by ambulance to the John C. Fremont Hospital in Mariposa, California. The cause of the collision is under investigation. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, May 9, 2008 Yosemite NP School Bus Collision Causes Minor To Moderate Injuries Two school busses headed toward Yosemite Valley from the Yellow Middle School in Newman, California, collided yesterday in a rear end collision. The accident occurred at about 10:55 a.m. about a mile north of the Big Oak Flat/El Portal Road intersection along the Big Oak Flat Road. There were a total of 40 children on the two busses. Early reports indicate that the injuries were minor to moderate. Children were taken by ambulance to the John C. Fremont Hospital in Mariposa, California. The cause of the collision is under investigation. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, May 21, 2008 Yosemite NP Seriously Injured Climber Rescued From El Capitan Climbers M.C., 26, and T.M., 20, were attempting to climb the Nose on El Capitan in a single day on May 15th when M.C. took a 30-foot leader fall on pitch 25 and suffered a closed head injury. T.M. fixed the climbing rope to an anchor, ascended to his partner, and found that he was hanging upside down, suffering from changes in consciousness, and bleeding profusely from the back of his head. Since he had neither a cell phone nor a radio with him, T.M. used his headlamp to signal a party that was below in El Capitan meadow. Rangers employed a loud speaker to contact him. Between the loud speaker and the headlamp, they were able to determine that he was asking for a rescue. On the morning of May 16th, a technical rescue team and park helicopter were in the El Cap meadow preparing for the operation when a spotter in the meadow saw a person climbing from a ledge where M.C. was believed to be located. The park helicopter flew up to the spot, where they saw T.M. wave off the rescue. Two YOSAR team members were sent to the top of El Capitan to contact T.M. and determine the reason for canceling the rescue. T.M. reached the YOSAR team members around 4:30 p.m. He said that M.C.'s condition had deteriorated over the course of the day and that he needed immediate medical care. M.C. was able to ascend fix ropes and was still moving towards the top-out point. When he reached the El Cap tree, he collapsed. A medical team was flown to the El Cap landing zone and moved down to M.C.'s location, where they provided medical care. M.C. was placed in a litter while a park helicopter was prepped for a short-haul extraction. Ranger/parkmedic Rob Lewis was flown to M.C.'s location and the pair were short-hauled to the El Capitan meadow, where M.C. was transferred to an air ambulance and flown to Memorial Hospital. Doctors determined that M.C. had sustained a fractured skull, subdural hematoma and a cerebral bleed. He was in the hospital's ICU at the time of the report and was in stable condition. [Matt Stark, Valley Area Ranger/IC] Wednesday, June 11, 2008 Yosemite National Park (CA) Search In Progress For Missing Hiker A search is underway for E.G.-B., a 22-year-old Honduran native who has been missing since last Sunday afternoon. for E.G.-B. is described as being about 5'8" tall and was last seen wearing blue jeans, a blue t-shirt and black shoes. He speaks Spanish and broken English. Approximately 100 searchers from Yosemite National Park and Mono, Tuolumne, Marin, Santa Clara, and Sierra Madre Counties, including dog teams and aerial spotters, are participating in the search. Anyone who was in the area of Sentinel Dome, Washburn Point, or Glacier Point after 2 p.m. on June 8th or on the Illilouette, Panorama, or Pohono Trails is asked to please call the park at 209-372-0311 and advise on whether they saw for E.G.-B. or not. Any information, even from those who did not see him, will help park staff focus the search area. Media calls should be directed to public information officer Adrienne Freeman at 209-372-0480. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, June 11, 2008 Yosemite NP Search In Progress For Missing Hiker A search is underway for E.G.-B., a 22-year-old Honduran native who has been missing since last Sunday afternoon. E.G.-B. is described as being about 5'8" tall and was last seen wearing blue jeans, a blue t-shirt and black shoes. He speaks Spanish and broken English. Approximately 100 searchers from Yosemite National Park and Mono, Tuolumne, Marin, Santa Clara, and Sierra Madre Counties, including dog teams and aerial spotters, are participating in the search. Anyone who was in the area of Sentinel Dome, Washburn Point, or Glacier Point after 2 p.m. on June 8th or on the Illilouette, Panorama, or Pohono Trails is asked to please call the park at 209-372-0311 and advise on whether they saw E.G.-B. or not. Any information, even from those who did not see him, will help park staff focus the search area. Media calls should be directed to public information officer Adrienne Freeman at 209-372-0480. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Information Officer] Thursday, June 12, 2008 Yosemite National Park (CA) Search Continues For Missing Hiker Park staff yesterday continued the search for E.G.-B. E.G.-B., a native of Honduras, is 22 years old and stands 5'8". He speaks Spanish and some English. Reports describing E.G.-B.'s clothing have varied, but may include jeans or khaki pants, varying tee shirt colors, and black shoes. He's believed to be carrying a Bible. Reports indicate that he was last seen at Washburn Point on June 8th. Approximately 125 searchers from Yosemite National Park, the California Conservation Corps, and Mono, Marin, Santa Clara, Ventura, Fresno, Contra Costa, Santa Barbara and Sierra Madre Counties, as well as the Bay Area Mountain Rescue Unit and China Lake Search and Rescue, including dog teams and aerial spotters, are participating in the search. Anyone who was in the area of Sentinel Dome, Washburn Point, or Glacier Point or on the Pohono, Panorama, Illilouette, or Four Mile Trails after 2 p.m. on June 8th — and those areas only — is asked to please call the park at 209-372-0311, whether they saw E.G.-B. or not. Any information, even from those who did not see him, will help park staff focus the search area. Media calls should be directed to public information officer Adrienne Freeman at 209-372-0480. [Submitted by Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Officer] Thursday, June 12, 2008 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker Found By Searchers The massive search for E.G.-B. came to a successful conclusion yesterday afternoon when he was found alive and okay south and east of Washburn Point, where he was last seen on June 8th. Almost 200 searchers from Yosemite National Park, the California Conservation Corps, and Mono, Tuolumne, San Mateo, Marin, Santa Clara, Ventura, Fresno, Contra Costa, Santa Barbara and Sierra Madre Counties, as well as the Bay Area Mountain Rescue Unit and China Lake Search and Rescue, participated in the search. [Adrienne Freeman, PIO] Monday, July 7, 2008 Yosemite NP Couple Sentenced For Multi-State Check Fraud Road Trip Between July 17 and 20, 2006, Texas residents C.H. and L.H. passed 16 personal checks from their joint account totaling over $3,500 at various facilities operated by the park's concessioner, Delaware North Corporation Parks and Resorts at Yosemite (DNC). A few weeks later, DNC notified the park of the bad checks, which had all been returned because the account had been closed by the bank months earlier. Criminal complaints were eventually filed; when C.H. and L.H. did not respond to summonses, arrest warrants were issued in July of 2007 by the U.S. magistrate in Yosemite. C.H. and L.H. were arrested in Texas by U.S. marshals early that fall. The federal court in Texas ordered L.H. detained because of her extensive criminal history, and she was transported by the marshals to Fresno, California, for further court proceedings. C.H. was released after his initial court appearance in Texas with an order to appear before the magistrate in Yosemite. His case was eventually combined with L.H.'s in Fresno. The investigation revealed that the couple had also passed other checks from the same account at Crater Lake, Umpqua National Forest, Craters of the Moon, Yellowstone, Grand Teton, and many other businesses in California, Oregon, Idaho, Wyoming and Texas. There were 48 fraudulent checks passed totaling over $8,000. In April of 2008, C.H. and L.H. pled guilty in Fresno under the terms of plea agreements to one misdemeanor count each of theft (18 USC 661). On June 27th, L.H. was sentenced to 12 months in prison followed by 12 months supervised release. C.H. was sentenced to 4 months home/electronic confinement followed by 12 months probation. They were also ordered to pay restitution to all the victims. Rangers and special agents in Yosemite, Yellowstone and Grand Teton contributed to the investigation. [Dan Horner, Special Agent] Tuesday, July 22, 2008 Yosemite NP Park Tour Tram Burns Park dispatch was notified of a tour tram fire near the Tunnel View overlook on Highway 41 on the morning of Saturday, June 14th. Protection rangers, firefighters and EMS personnel were dispatched to the location and found a tram tour tractor engulfed in flame. The flames continued toward the rear of the tractor's cab and an attached propane tank. The tank started to vent, then ignited, causing a 20-foot vertical flame to issue from it. The fire was suppressed with the help of a Delaware North Corporation structural engine and a contract helicopter. The 60 passengers on the tram were all safely evacuated and there were no injuries. [Michael Siler, Valley Assistant Shift Supervisor] Monday, August 11, 2008 Yosemite NP Rangers Deal With Multiple Incidents Yosemite rangers were kept busy during July and early August as they supported Madera County in a large scale search and rescue operation and at the same time dealt with a structural fire, a significant climber fall, a suicide, and a visit from Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger. They also participated fully in the suppression of the Telegraph Fire and in managing day-to-day operations in the park: Rescue - On July 18th, rangers conducted a high angle rescue operation for an injured climber on the 18th pitch of the Nose Route of El Capitan. E.R., a Yosemite search and rescue staff member, was climbing recreationally when he hit the face of the rock while attempting a pendulum procedure. E.R. was short-hauled off of El Capitan and flown to an area hospital. Wildland Fire - The Telegraph Fire, which threatened 2,000 homes in the Mariposa area (including those of many park employees), began on July 25th in the Merced River Canyon. Yosemite National Park participated as a cooperating agency and provided resources for the suppression effort, including Crew 7, Yosemite helitack, a dozer, division supervisors, security specialists, technical specialists, resource advisors, and others. Yosemite's helicopter was also twice utilized for short-haul operations for injuries incurred during the firefighting effort. SAR - During the Telegraph Fire, Yosemite rangers also supported the Madera County Sheriff's Office in their search for 67-year-old J.A., who disappeared in the Iron Lakes area of the Sierra National Forest on July 28th. Participating in the search effort were rangers and search and rescue staff, including ground searchers and dog handlers. A park helicopter was also used in the operation. Structural Fire - A structural fire near the kitchen area of the Yosemite Lodge caused significant damage to the roof and attic of the cafeteria building around 6 p.m. on August 2nd. NPS engines from Yosemite Valley and El Portal responded together with an engine from DNC Parks and Resorts in Yosemite, Inc., the park's major concessioner. After fighting the fire for approximately four hours, firefighters were able to confine the blaze to the attic and mechanical rooms. The cause of the fire has yet to be determined. Suicide - Rangers dealt with a high-profile suicide on July 29th when a 27-year-old man jumped to his death from Half Dome. This was the second suicide this summer; the first, a 36-year-old man, occurred on June 13th and stemmed from a jump from El Capitan. [Adrienne Freeman, Park Ranger] Friday, August 15, 2008 Yosemite NP Marijuana Cultivation/Distribution Conviction And Sentencing On July 9, 2005, Tuolumne subdistrict rangers stopped a car travelling east on Highway 120 for speeding. A passenger in the vehicle, R.A., a resident of Fair Oaks, California, was a long-time suspect in multiple marijuana cultivation cases in the Yosemite area. A consent search led to the discovery of a marijuana pipe in the center console of the car. A subsequent search of the car led to the discovery of 226 marijuana starter plants in R.A.'s backpack. During an interview, R.A. admitted that his intent was to grow the marijuana in an isolated location on Forest Service lands to the east of Mammoth Lakes. He further stated that selling marijuana was his means of making a living. After a prolonged series of court proceedings, R.A. pled guilty on August 11th to one count of 21 USC 841(a)(1), possession of a controlled substance with the intent to distribute. He was sentenced to 48 months custody and 12 months supervised probation. [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Friday, September 5, 2008 Yosemite NP Injured Hiker's Life Saved Through Prompt Action On the afternoon of Sunday, August 31st, rangers received a report that a man had taken a significant fall off the Upper Yosemite Falls trail. Helicopter 551 was ordered for a rappel and/or short-haul mission, while rangers and SAR site personnel blitzed up the trail. A second 911 caller reported that the man was still alive but had sustained multiple injuries. Rangers Jack Hoeflich and Keith Lober rappelled onto the trail and were joined by ranger Rob Lewis, who had blitzed up the trail in record time. The three rangers reached the man, who was found in the inner gorge, and determined that his injuries were life-threatening. A park visitor was on scene with him and had clearly helped prevent his death by providing aid, keeping him calm, and helping rescuers reach him. Short-haul operations commenced, with Hoeflich attending the victim through the flight to Ahwahnee Meadow. At the meadow, medical care was provided by a doctor, nurses, paramedics and park medics. The patient was transferred to an air ambulance and was in flight to the hospital two hours and 15 minutes from the first 911 call. The extraordinary teamwork, talent and professionalism of the rangers, SAR site personnel, fire personnel, clinic staff and the heroic bystander saved the man's life. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger/Acting Operations Chief] Monday, September 15, 2008 Yosemite NP Motorcyclist Killed In Accident Near Wawona Tunnel On Wednesday, September 10th, Valley District rangers responded to a report that the body of a motorcyclist had been found over the embankment on the south side of the Wawona tunnel on Highway 41. The operator, a 48-year-old man from Long Beach, was pronounced dead at the scene. Investigation revealed that he'd died on the night of September 8th when his motorcycle left the roadway at a high rate of speed and collided with several trees. [Leslie Reynolds, Valley District Ranger] Monday, October 6, 2008 Yosemite NP Park Staff Assist In Fossett Aircraft Crash Recovery Operation On October 1st, a hiker contacted the Mono County Sheriff's Department and showed officers a pilot's license and about $1,000 in cash that he'd found scattered on the ground while hiking in the Inyo National Forest near Devils Post Pile NM. The license belonged to Steve Fossett, the noted American businessman and adventurer who disappeared just over a year ago while flying a Bellanca Super Decathalon airplane from a private airstrip just over the border in Nevada. The discovery sparked resurgence in the search for Fossett, who had intended on taking only a short flight in the Decathalon and had not filed any flight plan. A huge search had been conducted for him, but no trace of his aircraft was found and the search was eventually suspended. Yosemite was asked to provide mutual aid assistance in the search for the plane, and ranger Matt Stark located the crash site from the park's Helicopter 551 around 6 p.m. The landing zone providing access to the accident site was in alpine terrain at over 10,200 feet, limiting the type of helicopter that could safely operate there. On October 2nd and 3rd, the National Park Service again supplied Helicopter 551 and personnel for the recovery operation. Park staff helped the Madera County Sheriff's Department with the recovery of Fossett's remains and assisted the NTSB investigator. They also helped Inyo National Forest personnel with the removal and cleanup of the accident site, which is in a designated wilderness. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Manager] Thursday, October 9, 2008 Yosemite NP Major Rockfall Destroys Cabins, Injures Several Visitors A rockfall occurred near Curry Village in eastern Yosemite Valley around 7 a.m. yesterday morning. Park officials estimated the rockfall volume at approximately 1,800 cubic yards and determined that it released near the halfway point up the granite face above Curry Village. Three visitors received minor injuries during the incident. All three were treated and released. The rockfall destroyed an estimated seven visitor cabins, two hard sided, and three tent cabins. At least three other cabins received partial damage in the incident. Curry Village visitors were evacuated immediately. Media calls can be directed to 209-372-0248. Public information can be obtained by calling Yosemite National Park at 209-372-0356. Information for visitors with reservations at Curry Village can call DNC Parks and Resorts in Yosemite, Inc. at 801-559-5000. [Adrienne Freeman, Public Affairs Specialist] Thursday, October 16, 2008 Yosemite NP Poacher Arrested At Tree Stand Setup Within Park Rangers from the Mather, Valley and Wawona districts arrested P.B., 62, of Merced California, on October 4th for hunting within the park's boundaries (16 USC 60). The investigation began when a California Department of Fish and Game warden advised the park of possible poaching violations occurring on the boundary surrounding the Wawona subdistrict. Based on this information, Yosemite special agents and rangers searched for and found a tree stand 60 meters inside the park. A surveillance operation was begun, but proved fruitless on the first two weekends it was conducted. On the third weekend, P.B. entered the park and climbed into his stand with his rifle. Rangers hailed P.B. and took him into custody without incident. P.B. told them that his stand had been at that location for three years and that he'd killed a deer from it in 2007. [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Tuesday, November 18, 2008 Yosemite NP Stranded Hiker Rescued From Park's High Country On November 10th, rangers learned that a solo backcountry hiker was overdue from a hike to an unknown location somewhere within the park. S.F. had begun what he'd planned to be a five day trip in perfect weather on October 28th. Over the next three days, S.F. hiked more than 20 miles into the heart of the park's wilderness. He set up camp at an elevation of 9,700 feet near Red Devil Lake as snow began falling on the evening of October 30th. This was the first significant storm of the developing winter season and it continued for three days, blanketing the High Sierra under nearly two feet of snow. The snow obscured the trail S.F. had been following, effectively trapping him at that location. He spent the next twelve days hunkered down in his tent, hoping to be rescued and rationing his remaining two days of food. Since S.F. had not told anyone of his plans, though, the rescue was long in coming. It was only after a list of missed commitments and appointments began to accumulate (including a missed plane flight home on November 9th), that questions regarding his whereabouts began to arise. Amazingly, searchers spotted the missing hiker and his camp from the air on their very first pass over the area and soon contacted a very happy S.F., who was in remarkably good shape for someone who'd had almost no food for 12 days. S.F. made some initial bad decisions, particularly in his failure to leave a detailed route plan with someone who could report him overdue on an agreed-upon date, but made better decisions when the storm hit. He'd attempted to hike out, but didn't go far before he realized that it was too difficult in deep snow and that he'd likely get into more trouble. So he stayed in his tent, rationed his food, stomped out an "SOS" in the snow, used his pot as a shovel to keep a clear area around the tent, and above all kept a positive attitude. [Keith Lober, Emergency Services Coordinator] Thursday, January 8, 2008 Yosemite NP Guilty Plea Entered In Abusive Sexual Contact Case In May, 2007, Wawona District rangers took an initial report concerning acts of sexual abuse against children committed by N.C., then 76, who had been a maintenance worker at Camp Wawona, a Seventh Day Adventist church camp on private property within park boundaries. The abuse begin in 1995 when the victim was four years old and continued for four years. Agents investigated and three months later filed a criminal complaint charging N.C. on 15 counts of abusive sexual conduct (18 USC 2244(a)(5)). N.C. was arrested and indicted by a federal grand jury in Fresno on 18 counts of abusive sexual contact. He was ordered detained under supervised house arrest with electronic monitoring. Trial was originally set for last July; following several continuances, N.C. pled guilty on December 22nd to one count of abusive sexual contact with a minor under age 12. He was remanded to custody pending sentencing on February 27th. The maximum possible sentence he faces is life in prison. For a copy of the original incident report, click on the link below. [Dan Horner, Special Agent (Retired), PWR] HYPERLINK "http://classicinside.nps.gov/headline.cfm?type=Incidents&id=3443" Thursday, February 5, 2009 Yosemite NP Man Pleads Guilty To Poaching In Park Rangers from the Wawona, Valley and Mather Districts were staking out an illegal tree stand inside the park's boundary last October 4th when a hunter armed with a rifle climbed into the stand. The rangers watched the man - later identified as P.B., 62, of Merced, California - for another hour, then took him into custody without incident. On Tuesday, February 3rd, P.B. pled guilty to one count of hunting within the park (16 USC 60) and one count of possession of a weapon (36 CFR 2.4(a)(1)(i)). P.B. was sentenced to 36 months of unsupervised probation, ordered to pay a $5,000 fine , and required to forfeit his rifle, deer stand, rifle case, rifle scope and hunting knife. P.B. received credit for three days of time served and agreed to stay out of the park for the duration of his probation. [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Thursday, February 26, 2009 Yosemite NP Climber Rescued After Being Injured In Avalanche A 38-year-old Korean climber was swept downhill in an avalanche while climbing on Half Dome on Monday afternoon. The climber, an experienced mountaineer, was climbing with six other people when the avalanche hit. Language barriers, unsettled weather, and challenging terrain added to the complexity of the rescue. Although rescuers were able to contact him after the accident, continued avalanche activity made it unsafe for rescuers to enter the area. A California Highway Patrol helicopter lowered park medics to the climber's location the next day; he was then lifted out and flown to a waiting helicopter. After a medical assessment in the park, he was flown to a Central Valley hospital for treatment. [Adrienne Freeman] Monday, March 16, 2009 Yosemite NP Man Commits Suicide By Going Over Yosemite Falls On the afternoon of Monday, March 9th, rangers received a call from a man threatening to commit suicide from the top of Yosemite Falls, which falls 2500 feet to the valley floor below. A ground team was immediately dispatched up the steep trail to try to negotiate with the man, who claimed to be armed. Winter conditions, snow, ice, and steep terrain added to the complexity of the operation. A California Highway Patrol helicopter and Tuolumne County SWAT team members were also dispatched to assist with the incident. Rangers found D.Z. on a rock outcropping in the narrow, snowy gorge on the edge of Upper Yosemite Fall. D.Z. said that he had taken a large dose of medications, possibly including anti-anxiety and seizure drugs. According to the rangers, D.Z. appeared to be impaired when they reached him. Negotiations continued until just after 7:30 p.m., when D.Z. entered the frigid water and was carried over the edge. Recovery efforts have been unsuccessful but are continuing as conditions permit. Ranger Jeff Webb is the incident commander. [Adrienne Freeman, Outreach and Education, Protection Division] Wednesday, May 6, 2009 Yosemite NP Man Sentenced For Abusive Sexual Contact With Child In May 2007, Yosemite rangers received a report of past acts of sexual abuse against a child committed by N.C., then 76. N.C. had been a maintenance worker at Camp Wawona, a Seventh Day Adventist church camp that is on private property within the park, when the alleged abuse occurred. Special agent Daniel Horner was assigned as case agent. His investigation revealed that the sexual abuse of this particular victim began in 1995, when the victim was four years old, and continued for four years. Horner's investigation further revealed other alleged incidents of sexual contact with different children. After a three-month-long investigation, Horner filed a criminal complaint charging N.C. with 15 counts of abusive sexual conduct (18 USC 2244(a)(5)). N.C. was arrested and indicted by a federal grand jury in Fresno on 18 counts of abusive sexual contact and ordered detained under supervised house arrest with electronic monitoring. Last December, N.C. pled guilty to one count of abusive sexual contact with a minor under age 12. He was remanded to custody pending sentencing. On April 17th, he was sentenced to three years of incarceration, followed by five years of supervised release. [April Lee, Special Agent] Wednesday, May 20, 2009 Yosemite NP Search In Progress For Woman Who Fell Into River Rangers are seeking assistance in locating a missing woman who was last seen below the Vernal Fall footbridge at 3:30 p.m. on Monday, May 18th. K.L., 31, was last seen when she fell into the Merced River below the footbridge. She is described as 6' tall, weighing 150 pounds, with light brown hair and brown eyes. She was last seen wearing a maroon rain jacket, dark blue pants, light green button shirt, lightweight hiking boots, a light blue backpack, and a dragonfly necklace. Anyone with information on her should contact park investigators at 209-372-0614 or park dispatch at 209-379-1992. [Kari Cobb, Scott Gediman] Wednesday, June 10, 2009 Yosemite NP Memorial Day Brings Crowds, Multiple Incidents Rangers dealt with big crowds and numerous incidents over the Memorial Day weekend. There was heavy traffic throughout the park on all three days. Lines at entrance stations throughout the park began forming as early as 7 a.m. and continued until late in the afternoon. Complicating operations was a phone outage throughout much of the Mather District due to lightening and thunderstorm activity earlier in the week. Significant incidents included: Firefighters actively suppressed the Cottonwood Fire while monitoring other lightening-caused fires in the park. There were five incidents that required the use of air ambulances, including the medevac of a 60-year-old woman with loss of consciousness at Olmsted Point on May 23rd. She suffered a facture of her cervical spine in a ground-level fall. Tuolumne rangers responded to a motorcycle crash on May 24th in which the operator suffered a lower leg fracture and dislocated shoulder. The park's dispatch center received 1,539 telephone calls during the holiday weekend, while rangers dealt with 568 incidents, 242 vehicle stops, 15 medical assistance calls, and 16 motor vehicle accidents. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Wednesday, June 10, 2009 Yosemite NP Bicyclist Killed In Crash With Car Yosemite Valley rangers responded to a report of a motor vehicle crash involving a bicyclist on the afternoon of May 29th. S.M.K., a 52-year-old South Korean citizen, was riding a mountain bike eastbound on South Side Drive, a two-lane, one-way road, when the accident occurred. Accident investigators believe that S.M.K. was attempting to cross from the south side of the road to a pullout on the north side of the road when he collided with an oncoming vehicle. Witnesses estimated the speed of the vehicle to be about 30 mph, and said that S.M.K. was thrown up on the hood, then thrown forward to the ground when the vehicle stopped. S.M.K. was treated on scene by ranger/medics and was transported by ambulance to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. He was then flown to Doctors Medical Center in Modesto, where he died from a severe head injury. S.M.K. was not wearing a helmet. [Jack Hoeflich, Shift Supervisor] Wednesday, June 10, 2009 Yosemite NP Visitor Rescued From Cables On Half Dome On the afternoon of Saturday, June 6th, G.B., 35, slipped while descending the Half Dome cables and slid approximately 150 feet down the east face, coming to rest on a small ledge. Multiple 911 calls were received from hikers in the area who reported the accident and advised that G.B. was unresponsive. A visitor scrambled out to G.B. and stayed with her until rescuers arrived. At the time of the incident, Half Dome was socked in with clouds, with snow flurries on the summit and mist on the cables and sub-dome. Four teams were dispatched to the scene, including rangers from Little Yosemite Valley, a hasty medical team up the slabs from Mirror Lake, and a support team up the John Muir Trail. There was a narrow opening in the cloud cover just before 7 p.m. and Yosemite's contract helicopter, H-551, was able to land on the sub-dome and insert two rescuers. The rescuers scrambled up to G.B. and packaged her in a KED (Kendrick extrication device) and litter. H-551 then made two attempts to short-haul her from the site, but poor visibility caused those missions to be aborted. A final attempt to retrieve her was made after 8 p.m. and was successful. She was short-hauled to Awahnee Meadow, then transferred to a waiting air ambulance and transported to Doctor's Medical Center in Modesto. [Charles Cuvelier, Deputy Chief Ranger] Thursday, June 11, 2009 Yosemite NP Numerous Citations Issued In Surprise Tour Bus Inspection The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, in conjunction with the California Highway Patrol and the National Park Service, held a surprise inspection for all commercial for-hire multiple passenger tour buses in the park yesterday. The purpose of these unannounced inspections was to ensure visitor safety by assuring safe operation of tour buses in the park. Twenty-four buses were inspected - nine were found to be safe and were released with no citation, but the remaining 15 bus operators were cited for unsafe operation and two buses were taken out of service. Roadside inspections adhere to the guidelines of the North American standard for bus safety. There are five levels of inspections, including a vehicle component, a driver component, or a combination of both. Inspections are designed to determine if buses are in compliance with federal motor carrier safety regulations. About seven percent of the parks visitors - around 250,000 per year out of an annual visitation of approximately 3.5 million - arrive on tour buses. The large majority of tour bus passengers are international visitors from countries such as Japan, Korea, Germany, and England. These surprise inspections will continue today. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, June 15, 2009 Yosemite NP Visitor Falls To Death From Half Dome Cables Park dispatch received several 911 calls this past Saturday afternoon reporting that a man had fallen from the cables on Half Dome. M.K., 40, of San Ramon, California, had gone to the top of Half Dome and was descending. Daytime weather conditions mirrored those of the last several weeks, with clouds developing at midday and afternoon showers. At the time of the 911 calls, visitors on the summit reported being caught in a hail storm and unable to descend. The park helicopter transported two rangers to the scene of the fatality, and they quickly determined that M.K. had died in the fall. A team of five rangers was flown to Half Dome to begin the evacuation of 41 visitors from the summit and cables. Many of them had been unable to descend due to the accident and/or exposure to the cold and wet elements which they had experienced for nearly two hours. The evacuation was completed by dusk on Saturday evening, but it wasn't until 2 a.m. before all visitors had returned to the trailhead. An investigation is underway. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Monday, June 15, 2009 Yosemite NP Surprise Tour Bus Inspection Concludes With More Violations The previously reported surprise two-day commercial tour bus inspection in the park concluded last Thursday. The operation, conducted by park staff in conjunction with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and the California Highway Patrol, uncovered numerous violations. A total of 55 buses were inspected. On Wednesday, officers and rangers inspected 24 buses and cited 15 for unsafe operation. Another 31 buses were inspected on Thursday, with 14 cited for violations. Of the 55 buses, five were taken out of service for problems with emergency windows, a non-functioning lever, logbooks that had not been kept, a non-functional tire, and non-operational emergency exits. These five were from Coach America, Franciscan Lines, Incredible Adventures, Meow Group and Bangee Fleet. Only the buses and drivers were taken out of service - not the companies. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Wednesday, June 17, 2009 Yosemite NP Body Of Missing Concession Employee Found The body of C.H., 23, of Gainesville, Florida, was found by searchers on Monday. C.H., who had been reported missing and had not been seen since Sunday morning, was found by rangers at 1 p.m. It appears that he fell from an unnamed cliff face above Mirror Lake in eastern Yosemite Valley. The exact cause of death and other details remain under investigation. C.H. was an employee of DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc., the park's primary concessionaire. He was in training in Yosemite Valley and was slated to work at White Wolf. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Friday, June 19, 2009 Yosemite NP Ranger Saves Lives Of Two Visitors Ranger Dan Abbe was flagged down by park visitors south of the tunnel on Wawona Road while on his way to work in Yosemite Valley on Tuesday, May 26th. They told him that there was a truck over the side of the road and on fire, and that there were people still inside. Abbe found a full-sized pickup with an upright trailer behind it resting on its side about 30 feet below the road. Fire burned in the engine compartment as he worked to extricate the two occupants. He was finally able to get them out and escorted them downhill and away from the truck and trailer. They told him that the pickup was filled with 70 gallons of gas, that they had an extra 50-gallon gas container onboard, and that the trailer had two full propane tanks. Abbe moved them further away from the vehicle, then returned to the road. At the point, the passenger compartment filled with smoke, and crackling noises issued from the pickup; with minutes, both track and trailer were fully engulfed in flames and the fire had spread to the vegetation around it. The fire was suppressed and Abbe and the visitors were taken to the park medical clinic, where they were treated for smoke inhalation and released. The truck and trailer were a total loss. The visitors credited Abbe with saving their lives and will be coming back to the park in the near future to present him with a plaque to show their appreciation. [Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, July 10, 2009 Yosemite NP Three Rescues In Mather District In Six Days Rangers and rescuers in the park's Mather District were involved in three significant rescue operations during the first week of July: July 1 - Dispatch received a cell phone call reporting that a climber had fallen on the standard Southwest Face route on Cathedral Peak. The climber, a 29-year-old woman, sustained multiple traumatic injuries and was in and out of consciousness. She'd fallen 30 to 40 feet to a large ledge while attempting a 5.7 bypass of the chimney section that most routes funnel into. Her partner was about 90 feet below. A rescue mission was immediately launched by a helitack crew in the park's contract helicopter. Hasty and climbing teams also headed toward the scene of the accident. Aerial recon confirmed that another climber was with the woman on a large fourth class ledge three pitches from the base of the peak. A park medic was inserted onto the ledge via short haul with a litter and medical and packaging gear. The climber was packaged and short hauled off the ledge with the medic to the catch team in Tuolumne Meadows. The patient was then put inside the helicopter, flown to Crane Flat helibase, and immediately transferred to a PMI medical helicopter with flight nurses. The elapsed time from the launching of the park helicopter to the transfer of the woman to the PMI helicopter was an astounding 40 minutes. A second technical operation was conducted by the Tuolumne Meadows SAR team to help lower the patient's partner and the climbers who assisted her. Ranger Scott Jacobs was the IC. July 4 - Park dispatch received a 911 call concerning an injured hiker at the 12,500-foot elevation of Mount Dana. She reportedly suffered a ground level fall while hiking through talus; she suffered a contusion to her head and was complaining of headache, nausea and dizziness. Yosemite's contract helicopter and helitack crew picked up two rescuers from Yosemite Valley and flew to the scene. The pilot was able to land the helicopter about a third of a mile from the injured hiker. A park medic determined that she could walk to the helicopter. She was flown to Tuolumne Meadows and transferred to an ambulance, then transferred again to Mono County paramedics and taken to the Mammoth Lakes Hospital. Ranger Jason Ramsdell was the IC. July 6 - Dispatch received a phone call from Vogelsang High Sierra Camp regarding a 52-year-old hiker who slid approximately 50 feet down a steep snow field into talus on the face of Vogelsang Peak, suffering traumatic injuries to a shoulder, hand, and foot. Yosemite's contract helicopter, helitack crew and park medic Jack Hoeflich flew to Tuolumne Meadows to pick up a second medic, Jason Ramsdell, then assess the scene. The hiker was lying at 11,000 feet between two steep snow fields. The rescue team and IC agreed the safest and fastest rescue would be via short haul. The two park medics were short hauled to the man's location on a 250 foot line. The medics provided medical care and packaged him for short haul extraction. They were flown to a catch team at Vogelsang High Sierra Camp, where the man was placed inside the helicopter. The helicopter then flew to the Crane Flat helibase, placed in an ambulance, and taken to Yosemite Medical Clinic. Ranger Scott Jacobs was the IC. [Sally Sprouse, Acting Mather District Ranger] Tuesday, July 21, 2009 Yosemite NP Rangers Rescue Climber Perched On Tiny Ledge Park dispatch received a cell phone call from climber D.S. around 10 a.m. on Wednesday, July 15th, in which D.S. reported that he'd become ledged-out while scrambling on a dome near Merced Lake and that he'd need assistance getting off the ledge. He said that he wasn't in any immediate danger, but that he was unable to ascend or descend from his location. Upon flying past, rescue personnel were shocked to discover that D.S. had downplayed his predicament. They found that he was standing on minuscule ledge, clinging to the rock on a nearly vertical wall approximately 800 feet above the valley floor. D.S.'s position was deemed to be too tenuous to try to retrieve him directly by short haul. The concern was that the buffeting winds from the aircraft might dislodge D.S. from his stance before he could be made secure. The pilot, Richard Shatto, and the two spotters, Jeff Pirog and Boots Davenport, had a difficult time maintaining a steady hover with the aircraft due to gusting winds. Ranger Keith Lober was short-hauled into a location 50 feet above D.S.'s perch where he power drilled three anchor bolts. Ranger Eric Gabriel was then short-hauled to the anchor station. Lober lowered Gabriel down to D.S., who was then secured in a "screamer suit;" he and Gabriel were then short-hauled off the face. Cell phone coverage in Yosemite backcountry is generally nonexistent. D.S. was incredibly lucky, as the location where he became stuck was just high enough for the cell signal to peek over the surrounding rock faces and hit the Sentinel Dome repeater, the only repeater in that area of remote wilderness. Incidentally, D.S. had sustained and recovered from two short falls just before deciding to stop and request help. [Keith Lober, Emergency Medical Services Program Manager] Thursday, July 23, 2009 Yosemite NP Rangers Deal With Two Multiple Injury Accidents Within Five Days Mather District rangers dealt with two serious accidents that injured a total of 15 people this past week. On July 15th, the driver of a passenger van carrying eight people fell asleep on the Tioga Road east of Yosemite Creek. The van went over the edge, rolling completely at least once on a talus slope before hitting a tree that stopped its descent. The impact with the tree prevented the vehicle from rolling several hundred feet further down the embankment. Nine Mather rangers assisted at the accident scene, along with Tuolumne SAR volunteers and ambulance staff from Yosemite Valley and El Portal. Four park ambulances transported the van's occupants to area medical facilities for treatment of injuries that included a clavicle fracture, lower leg fracture, and various back and neck problems. Scott Jacobs was the incident commander. On July 19th, nine Mather rangers responded to a head-on collision between two SUV's, also on the Tioga Road. Six people sustained injuries, including lack of sensation below the waist, back and neck trauma, and chest pain. Rangers were joined by SAR rescuers from Tuolumne Meadows and Yosemite Valley. Three victims were flown to medical facilities in the Central Valley, while the three less injured parties were transported to Sonora and the Yosemite Medical Clinic. The investigation to determine the cause of the accident is ongoing. Kathryn Andrews served as incident commander. [Sally Sprouse, Acting Mather District Ranger] Monday, July 27, 2009 Yosemite NP Three Arrested For Multiple Auto Burglaries On the afternoon of Thursday, July 23rd, a park visitor reported that someone had broken into her vehicle and that a purse was missing. A short time later, a visitor at the Arch Rock entrance station reported seeing a man in a silver-colored Chevrolet Impala throw a purse out the car's window. The driver avoided the entrance station kiosk by traveling through the employee-only lane and left the park. Shortly thereafter, a park employee found and turned in a purse at the entrance station. A responding ranger was flagged down and told about the two auto burglaries and the missing purses. One of those turned out to be the one turned in at Arch Rock. It was missing more than $1,000 in cash. The dispatch center for the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office was notified and two deputies stopped the Impala on Highway 140. They detained the three occupants until rangers arrived. The rangers took all three into custody, charging each with four counts of theft (one felony and three Class A misdemeanors) and one count of possession of stolen property (a felony). In all, four vehicles were burglarized and over $2,100 in cash was taken. The trio who were arrested had $2,160 in cash in their possession. Evidence in the vehicle also linked them to recent auto burglaries in the Central Valley. [Jack Hoeflich, Case Agent] Tuesday, July 28, 2009 Yosemite NP Two Visitors Nearly Drown At Emerald Pool Park dispatch received numerous 911 calls reporting a near drowning at Emerald Pool along the Merced River early on the afternoon of July 20th. This area can only be reached via a steep, approximately two-mile hike from the Valley floor. The park fire/rescue helicopter was unavailable due to an out-of-park assignment. Fortunately, UC Merced wilderness leadership intern Andres Estrada happened to be on foot patrol in the area and provided the incident commander with an initial size-up within about 20 minutes. A 53-year-old man had attempted to swim across the swift and cold waters of the pool and had become unresponsive. Bystanders pulled him from the water and are credited with saving his life. The man reportedly suffered a two minute loss of consciousness and was revived via chest compressions and rescue breaths. Ranger/park medic Matt Stark was immediately dispatched from the Valley to render assistance and arrived on scene in just under an hour. While Stark was caring for and evacuating the man, a second near-drowning incident occurred at the pool. Litter teams ultimately carried both individuals out to the Valley. Ropes were used to belay the teams through about 200 feet of steep terrain along the trail. The first victim was flown via Air Med to Modesto for advanced medical care that evening; the second victim was cared for at Yosemite Medical Clinic. Approximately 20 rescuers were involved in the operation. Emerald Pool is closed to swimming and is so designated by signs and an information board notice. Ranger Jeff Webb was the incident commander. [Eric Gabriel, Valley District Ranger] Tuesday, July 28, 2009 Yosemite NP Body Of May Drowning Victim Recovered On July 15th, the body of K.L., a German national, was recovered from the Merced River below Vernal Falls by YOSAR personnel. During a violent thunderstorm and downpour on May 18th, K.L. fell from the Mist Trail into the raging Merced River, which was at peak spring runoff. Witnesses said that she fell off the trail, slid down a steep wet rock wall, then clung to a boulder in the river before being washed downstream by the strong current. On July 14th, YODOGS, a volunteer search dog team group, alerted in one area along the river. Supported by additional searchers, staff were able to locate Lehman's partially submerged body, which was found wedged between a rock and a log in a swift water section of river approximately 150 yards downstream from the point where she was last seen. Two drooping high lines were used in the recovery operation - one for rescue ranger Aaron Smith and one for K.L.'s body. Park forestry personnel using tree climbing equipment established the anchor points for the high lines about 80 feet up cedar trees located on each side of the river. The Mist Trail along the Merced River was closed for approximately 40 minutes during the recovery. Sixteen technical rope rescue personnel were utilized in the operation. Ranger Jack Hoeflich was the incident commander. [Eric Gabriel, Valley District Ranger] Tuesday, August 4, 2009 Yosemite NP Burglary Suspects Arrested And Indicted On the morning of Friday, June 17th, a park visitor staying in Housekeeping Camp reported that her purse and over $1,000 worth of camera gear had been stolen from her car. While cancelling her credit cards, she was told that her credit card had been used to purchase gas at 5:40 a.m. that morning at the El Portal gas station, about 14 miles to the west of Yosemite Valley. Valley District rangers went to the gas station and obtained a security camera photo showing a white male gassing up a silver Ford Mustang at the same time the victim's card was being used. Later that day, another guest at Housekeeping Camp reported that his cabin had been broken into and that a pack containing an iPod, another MP-3 player and flashlights had been stolen. That evening, when responding to a report of suspicious persons, Valley District rangers stopped two white male cousins. The cousins, who were driving a silver Ford Mustang, told the rangers that they didn't have a place to stay. A Carroll search of the Mustang ended with the rangers locating most of the stolen property. Upon being interviewed, the cousins admitted to stealing from the car, fraudulently using the credit card, and breaking into the cabin with the intent to steal. The two were indicted on July 30th on three felony counts apiece, burglary (California Penal Code 459), theft in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States (18 USC 661), and possessing or receiving stolen property in the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the United States (18 USC 662). [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Tuesday, August 18, 2009 Yosemite NP Woman Succumbs To Injuries Suffered In Fall A hiker made a 911 call to park dispatch from the summit of Cloud's Rest (9,926 feet) around noon last Friday and reported that a 53-year-old woman had taken a tumbling fall from the summit and ended up on a ledge about 80 feet below, adding that other visitors had scrambled down to her location and reported that she was breathing but suffering from a severe head injury and unresponsive. Clifford Ashley, a wilderness patrol ranger, was in the area; he arrived on scene shortly thereafter, scrambled down to her, and began treatment. Yosemite's contract helicopter was launched and ranger/medics Jeff Webb and Matt Stark heli-rappeled to the ledge. They found that the woman - later identified as M.B. of North Hollywood, California - was shocky and extremely unstable. She was packaged and short-hauled with Stark to Ahwahnee Meadow, then taken to the Yosemite Medical Clinic to be stabilized before transport to a hospital. M.B. died of her injuries while at the clinic. [Jack Hoeflich, Incident Commander] Tuesday, August 18, 2009 Yosemite NP Poaching Suspects Charged Criminal complaints against K.N. and brothers C.G. and Ch.G. were signed on Wednesday, August 5th, charging them with multiple counts of poaching, violations of the Lacey Act, aiding and abetting the commission of a crime, and many Title 36 CFR violations. The signing of these complaints marked the culmination of a year-long investigation which entailed the issuance of multiple search warrants and close cooperation between wardens from the California Department of Fish and Game, rangers from the Tuolumne Meadows Subdistrict and special agents from across the Pacific West Region. Over the past four years, the G.s and K.N. have poached multiple trophy-sized deer from inside Yosemite National Park. State charges are also pending. [Steve Yu, Special Agent] Wednesday, August 19, 2009 Yosemite NP Fisherman Dies In Fall K.R., 62, left his home after work to fish in the park on August 17th. When he failed to return by the following morning, he was reported overdue to park dispatch. Rangers found his vehicle in a pullout near Windy Point and began searching for him. They soon found his body and determined that he'd died from injuries suffered in a fall. Windy Point is a designated pullout along the side of Highway 140 just west of the Arch Rock entrance station. Access to the river from the pullout is through steep and rocky terrain. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, August 24, 2009 Yosemite NP Wawona Hotel Evacuated In Hazmat Incident The park received a report of an unidentified odor at the Wawona Hotel just before noon on August 18th. Firefighters and rangers responded to the hotel to determine the cause, extent, and identity of the odor emitting from a second story room above the main lobby. The found seven people complaining of respiratory difficulties and throat irritation, two of whom reported that they'd become nauseated and vomited. Ultimately, a dozen people were treated at the scene and released. Fire units established command and declared a potential hazmat incident. Initial efforts were focused on medical treatment, evacuation, securing the perimeter and denying further entry. Patients were isolated and decontaminated in the process. Structural firefighters utilizing full PPE and a gas detector entered the hotel, searched for additional victims, and attempted to find the source of the irritant. No additional victims were discovered and a source could not be identified. After consultation with the Mariposa County health officer, a Class A hazmat team was ordered from the Merced County Fire Department through the California Emergency Management Agency. Team members were also unable to identify any type of health hazard. The hotel was reopened to the public around 7:30 p.m. after further consultation with the county health officer and hazmat team leader. Further investigation by rangers revealed that the irritant was bear repellent. The investigation continues. In all, six different agencies responded to the incident, providing an excellent exercise for the California mutual aid system. [Deron Mills, Deputy Fire Chief - Operations] Tuesday, August 25, 2009 Yosemite NP Major Marijuana Garden Eradicated Rangers and NPS special agents, with assistance from Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, eradicated 4,735 marijuana plants valued at nearly $19 million from within the park last week. Items removed from the area included nearly 400 pounds of fertilizer, 3,000 feet of irrigation hose, and 200 pounds of human trash. Two suspects were observed in the area but fled. No arrests were made in the operation. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Thursday, August 27, 2009 Yosemite NP Small Rock Falls Lead To Precautionary Closure Of Ahwahnee Hotel Several moderately small rock falls occurred in Yosemite Valley from early yesterday morning through early yesterday afternoon. They came from the Royal Arches area directly above the Ahwahnee Hotel. The largest rock that fell is estimated to be 350 cubic meters. There were no injuries and only minor damage to property - three vehicles sustained minor to moderate damage due to flying rock. No debris reached the Ahwahnee Hotel. The hotel is at full occupancy and there were approximately 60 to 70 guests as of midday yesterday. As a precaution, the guests were asked to leave the hotel and gather on the lawn behind the Ahwahnee. As a further precaution, the Ahwahnee Hotel was closed yesterday evening and will remain closed at least through noon today. The area around the hotel will also remain closed and will be monitored throughout upcoming days. Guests at the Ahwahnee are being accommodated at other lodging facilities in the park and in surrounding communities. Visitors with upcoming reservations at the Ahwahnee should call DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc. Central Reservations at 801-559-5000. Rock falls are natural occurrences that have shaped and continue to shape Yosemite Valley. The natural processes that contribute to rock falls are part of the dynamics of nature. Though impossible to predict or control, ongoing scientific analysis is being conducted to further understand this natural phenomenon. [Scott Gediman, Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officers] Friday, August 28, 2009 Yosemite NP Ahwahnee Hotel To Reopen Following Rock Falls After several small rock falls occurred in Yosemite Valley directly above the Ahwahnee Hotel on Wednesday, the hotel was temporarily closed for precautionary measures. The rock falls came from the Royal Arches, a rock formation directly above the hotel. Several small rocks landed in the parking lot causing minor damage to three vehicles. No structural damage or injuries were reported. A geologic assessment of the area was conducted yesterday, after which a decision was made to reopen the Ahwahnee at 4:00 p.m. this afternoon - provided there are no further rock falls. Visitors with reservations at the Ahwahnee tonight should call DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc. Central Reservations at 801-559-5000. [Scott Gediman, Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officers] Monday, September 14, 2009 Yosemite NP Hiker Rescued From Illilouette Canyon On Saturday, September 5th, the Yosemite Emergency Communications Center received a cell phone call from a park visitor hiking in the Illilouette Canyon east of Glacier Point. The visitor reported that a 43-year-old man had fallen while hiking along Illilouette Creek, hit his head on river rocks, and lost consciousness for a period of time. Wawona rangers responded via the Panorama Trail and located the man above Illilouette Falls. Park ranger/paramedic Heidi Schlichting provided ALS care, then requested an evacuation via the park's contract helicopter. Park ranger/medic Matt Stark heli-rappelled to their location and packaged the man for helicopter short-haul to Yosemite Valley. Ranger Chad Andrews was incident commander. [Mark Dowdle, Wawona Subdistrict Ranger] Monday, September 28, 2009 Yosemite NP Music Fest Near Hetch Hetchy Results In Many Drug Arrests In Park Over the six-day period from September 17th to September 22nd, there was a significant increase in drug-related arrests throughout the park. A majority of these were related to the Symbiosis Gathering music festival that occurred on lands adjacent to the park near the Hetch Hetchy entrance. A shift in the park's existing staffing levels on the days during which the event occurred resulted in 23 misdemeanor arrests for possession of controlled substances, including hallucinogenic mushrooms, amphetamines, LSD, cocaine, ecstasy, opiates, hydrocodone, nitrous oxide and large amounts of marijuana. One incident in which a driver failed to pay for or show proof of entrance into the park led rangers on a slow speed pursuit through the park and down a rugged dirt road. When the driver finally stopped but refused to follow rangers' instructions, she was taken into custody after a taser deployment. A vehicle search revealed hallucinogenic mushrooms, marijuana and also, ironically, a valid entrance pass. Though the festival ended officially at noon on Monday, September 21st, many participants were still in the area early last week and generating cases within the park. [Sally Sprouse, Mather District Ranger] Monday, September 28, 2009 Yosemite NP Suicide Victim Found On Summit Of Half Dome Park dispatch received a 911 call from a hiker who found a man's body on the summit of Half Dome early on the morning of Saturday, September 19th. The hiker said that the man had no pulse, was not breathing, and was cold to the touch. He also said that the victim was bleeding from his head and ears and that there was a large pool of blood around him - plus a handgun and bullet casing. Valley rangers flew to the summit in the park's contract helicopter and recovered the body of the 32-year-old man. Suicide is presumed. [Jack Hoeflich, Valley Shift IC] Tuesday, September 29, 2009 Yosemite NP Rangers Assist In Response To Fatal Fall On September 20th, the Mono County Sheriff's Department's search and rescue coordinator asked for mutual aid assistance for a seriously injured and unconscious man who'd fallen 300 feet down an ice field on the north side of Matterhorn Peak. The northern aspect of Matterhorn Peak lies in the Hoover Wilderness, just outside the park's boundary. The park's contract helicopter and helicopter rescue team were committed to the incident. Rangers Chris Bellino, Jeff Webb, and Matt Stark were picked up by the helicopter at Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley. The helicopter did not have either short-haul or heli-rappel capability on this particular day, which meant that the rescue climbers had to be dropped off 1000 feet below the man's location. Stark and Webb climbed the 1000 feet just as night was falling. Upon arriving, Stark determined that he'd succumbed to his injuries, presumably right after the fall. Park personnel bivouacked at the 10,800-foot elevation and assisted the Mono County Sheriff's Department with the extrication of the man's body the following morning. [Keith Lober, Emergency Medical Services Program Manager] Thursday, February 11, 2010 Yosemite NP Ailing Visitor Rescued From Ostrander Lake On Sunday, February 7th, rangers at the Badger Pass Ranger Station received a radio transmission from the Ostrander Ski Hut reporting that a park visitor staying at the hut was in respiratory distress from pulmonary edema. The hut keeper reported that the 48-year-old man had attempted to ski back to Badger Pass that morning but was forced to return to Ostrander Lake due to his medical condition. The Ostrander Lake area had received several feet of new snow over the previous 48 hours in addition to over eight feet of new snow that had fallen in a number of winter storms over the last two weeks. As access to the ski hut was delayed due to the difficult trail conditions, a helicopter hoist operation was launched at the same time as a ground rescue team departed for Ostrander Lake from Badger Pass. After several attempts to take off from Fresno, a rescue mission by a California Highway Patrol hoist-capable helicopter was cancelled due to fog and low clouds. A second helicopter capable of landing on snow was ordered from Columbia, and was able to land in Yosemite Valley to pick up ranger/medic Jeff Webb. This second helicopter was unable to fly to Ostrander Lake, though, due to low cloud cover. Meanwhile, the ground team reached the ski hut. Ranger/medics Chad Andrews and Keith Lober provided medical care, and, with the assistance of Yosemite SAR team members, Badger Pass ski patrol personnel, and several park visitors staying at Ostrander, began extricating the patient in an over-snow rescue litter. Additional SAR team members arrived from Badger Pass to help complete the nine-hour-long rescue mission. The principles of operational leadership played a significant role in the decision-making process throughout the incident. [Mark Dowdle, Wawona Subdistrict Ranger] Thursday, March 25, 2010 Yosemite NP Injured Teenage Hiker Rescued From Park Trail On the afternoon of March 22nd, the Yosemite Emergency Dispatch Center received a call regarding a collapsed hiker on the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail. The hiker, a 17-year-old student from Upland, California, was on a hiking trip with the Yosemite Institute and was with a group of approximately eight students, with several adult chaperones and instructors. This hike is a regular part of the curriculum experienced by the students at the Yosemite Institute, a week-long residential environmental education program. The hiker collapsed near the summit of the trail, a strenuous three-and-a-half mile hike that begins in Yosemite Valley. Two rangers were dispatched to the scene to assist the hiker. A California Highway Patrol helicopter then assisted in extricating the injured teenager. He was then airlifted to the Children's Hospital in Madera, California. The cause of the hiker's collapse is unknown. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, April 14, 2010 Yosemite NP Concession Employee Pleads Guilty To Misappropriating Funds On April 6th, B.D., a former employee of the Delaware North Company, the park's primary concessionaire, plead guilty to misappropriating over $14,000 from that company in magistrate's court in Yosemite. Through an investigation conducted by ranger Shawn Cave, the government was able to prove that B.D. engaged in a scheme to embezzle funds through the fraudulent use of gift certificates while employed as a manager from 2006 through 2009. Using his position as a manager, B.D. obtained Delaware North Company gift certificates, intended to be used in guest services or as an incentive to his employees, and redeemed them for personal items and cash. Over the course of four years, B.D. misappropriated $14,975. In accordance with a plea agreement reached between B.D. and the government, the magistrate judge ordered B.D. to serve 60 days in custody and pay full restitution to the Delaware North Company. [Ed Dunlavey, Yosemite Law Enforcement Office] Tuesday, May 25, 2010 Yosemite NP Rock Climber Injured In Accident On El Capitan Park dispatch received a call on the evening of May 20th regarding a climber who had fallen on a popular climbing route on El Capitan. The climber, a 48-year-old man from France, fell approximately 65 feet, sustained head and chest injuries, and was unconscious. A second party on the climbing route was able to provide basic emergency medical assistance until rangers arrived. The injured climber and his partner were on a popular climbing route on El Capitan called the Salathe Wall. This is one of the most famous and popular technical rock climbs in the world. In its entirety, the climbing route spans 3,500 feet in length. The accidental fall occurred on a prominent feature on the route known as the El Cap Spire, located about 1,600 feet above Yosemite Valley. Two rangers were airlifted to the location of the injured climber around 7 a.m. the next morning, and a team of twelve search and rescue personnel was airlifted to the summit of El Capitan to provide further assistance. Once rangers secured the climber, a California Highway Patrol helicopter assisted in hoisting him off the climbing route. He was then airlifted to Doctors Medical Center of Modesto. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb] Wednesday, June 2, 2010 Yosemite NP Boiler Firebox Explodes At Historic Wawona Hotel Park dispatch received a smoke alarm activation signal from the Wawona Hotel Annex late on the morning of May 26th. Engine 2 from Wawona was paged and arrived on scene shortly thereafter. Upon arrival, the incident commander found that the fire alarm was sounding with no smoke showing. The IC was approached by hotel concession staff, who informed him that there had been an explosion in the Annex boiler room and that the guest rooms had not been completely evacuated at that time. An initial size-up investigation confirmed smoke present in the basement and damage to the boiler and chimney, but that no flame was visible. The IC requested additional resources for possible fire extension while the engine company began a building search to confirm complete evacuation, advanced hose lines and began a search for fire extension. An additional page was made for NPS resources, including Valley Engine 3, El Portal Engine 1, the chief fire officer, the fire marshal, and Ambulance 4 from Wawona. Mutual aid response was initiated with Mariposa County Engine 33 from the neighboring community of Fish Camp and Sierra Paramedic 12 Ambulance was dispatched from Bass Lake. After completing a thorough search of the building, the IC cancelled responding fire and EMS resources, remaining on scene for fire watch. Investigation by the chief officer and fire marshal confirmed that an explosion had occurred. The explosion in the fuel-oil-fired boiler occurred after a burner flameout. Fuel oil vapor had built up in the combustion chamber and when exposed to a hot surface rapidly vaporized and ignited. The force of the firebox explosion had broken three bolts off the boiler door, causing the 100+ pound door to completely separate from the furnace and land several feet away - where a hotel employee had walked just seconds before. The force of the explosion also lifted the approximately 40 pound chimney cap over 50 feet into the air, landing on a pedestrian walkway. No injuries were reported. The loss of the boiler has impacted the operation of the Wawona Hotel and consequently the visitor experience. [Don Coffman, Park Fire Marshal] Monday, June 28, 2010 Yosemite NP Surprise Tour Bus Inspections Conducted The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, California Highway Patrol, and the park held joint surprise inspections of all commercial, for-hire multiple passenger tour buses in Yosemite between June 9th and June 20th. The purpose of these unannounced inspections was to ensure visitor safety through safe operation of tour buses in an attempt to reduce chances of crashes, injuries, and fatalities involving tour buses bringing passengers to the park. Roadside inspections adhere to the guidelines of the North American standard for bus safety. There are five levels of inspections, including a vehicle component, a driver component, or a combination of both. Inspections are designed to determine if buses are in compliance with federal regulations. Violations may result in fines or taking a bus out of service immediately. Over a period of five days of inspections, rangers, officers and inspectors examined 153 commercial buses. The results - 47 buses were found to be safe and were released with no citation, 55 minor "fix-it" tickets were written, 35 written citations and 27 verbal warnings were issued for mechanical deficiencies, 22 buses were placed out of service for mechanical deficiencies, and ten bus drivers were ordered out of service for logbook violations. The park receives approximately 3.5 million visitors per year, with approximately 250,000 arriving via tour buses. The large majority of tour bus passengers are international visitors, many of who come to Yosemite in conjunction with visits to other parts of California. It is a primary concern that these visitors are safe during their travels in the park. Further, the extensive travels of international visitors throughout the state affords the cooperating agencies the opportunity to work together to promote bus safety. Additional surprise inspections will continue throughout the year. [Kari Cobb, Scott Gediman] Tuesday, July 13, 2010 Yosemite NP Climber Killed In Fall From Eichorn Pinnacle On the afternoon of July 9th, rangers received a report that a climber had fallen approximately 400 to 500 feet from Eichorn Pinnacle on Cathedral Peak in the Tuolumne Meadows Subdistrict. Rangers responded by helicopter and quickly located the climber, identified as C.C., 31. C.C. had fallen approximately 300 feet and sustained fatal injuries. Her body was removed from the scene via short-haul by a park contract helicopter. Investigators determined that C.C., along with a small group of other climbers, had been free soloing, and that she had slipped and been unable to recover while descending. C.C. was a respected member of the Yosemite climbing community, a PhD student at Stanford University, past co-president of the Stanford Alpine Club, and an instructor with the Stanford Outdoor Education Program. [Kevin Killian, Mather District Ranger] Thursday, July 15, 2010 Yosemite NP Man Rescued From River At Top Of Cascading Waterfalls On the afternoon of July 6th, Wawona rangers responded to a report of a man stranded on a rock in a small pool among cascading waterfalls in Chilnualna Creek. Incredibly, the 21-year-old man sustained no injuries after falling into the creek and being swept over a 10- to 15-foot-high waterfall into a small turbulent pool. He was able to climb up onto a small rock in the middle of the pool, but had no way to reach the shore and another waterfall below him. A short-haul rescue was attempted, but determined to be too hazardous. Rescuers were able to rappel to him, then ascended with him approximately 30 vertical feet back to the top of a rock ledge on the shore. Had the man continued over the next waterfall, the fall would have likely been fatal. Investigation of the incident revealed that he was one of a group of ten young men who had been climbing around the waterfalls and that they had attempted multiple creek crossings, one of which took him into the swift moving water. They persisted even though they knew the water was high from runoff. All ten were issued citations for creating a hazardous condition and one citation was issued for possession of a controlled substance. [Chad Andrews, Park Ranger] Wednesday, July 21, 2010 Yosemite NP Hiker Falls To Death From Park Cliff Park dispatch received a 911 call from a hiker at Columbia Point last Friday, reporting a stranded hiker on a cliff band above the Upper Yosemite Fall trail. Rangers spotted the man moving around on a tree-covered ledge. Using a loudspeaker, they told him to sit in a safe location and wait for the rescue team to reach him. He retreated from the ledge into the trees. A technical team climbed to his location, but was unable to find the man or make voice contact with him. They found the area to be extremely hazardous, with debris-covered ledges separated by steep cliff faces and gullies. The areas was searched until darkness without success. The next morning, a woman contacted the park and reported that her 61-year-old father had been missing since Friday afternoon and that he might have been hiking in the Yosemite Falls area. The park helicopter reconnoitered the area. The man's body was found near the base of one of the cliffs in late morning. A technical team climbed to the location and confirmed that he was dead. The body was extricated via long line and taken to Ahwahnee Meadow. [Ed Dunlavey, Law Enforcement Office] Friday, August 13, 2010 Yosemite NP Firefighters Knock Down Blaze in Tecoya Apartments On the evening of August 11th, dispatch received a 911 report of a structural fire at the Tecoya Apartments in Yosemite Valley. Engine 7 (operated by concessioner Delaware North Corporation) from Yosemite Valley was paged and soon arrived on scene. The company officer saw smoke issuing from the front door and window at the south end of the building. Initial attack was conducted by four firefighters who were able to knock down the blaze with only minimal usage of water and damage to the apartment. The fire was confined to the kitchen and living room, where there was almost a total loss of personal belongings. Only minor smoke damage was found in the remainder of the building and personal belongings were salvaged. One occupant suffered from minor smoke inhalation. NPS chief fire officers, firefighters and rangers from other areas of the park also responded to assist in the suppression effort. The fire was caused by the ignition of splattered grease from a pan of donuts that were being deep-fried on the stove. The building contains six apartments and is 3666 square feet in size. Damage was limited to approximately 450 square feet. The estimated current replacement value for the building is $1,501,296 and the fire damage is estimated at $75,000. [Deron Mills, Deputy Fire Chief - Operations] Thursday, August 12, 2010 Yosemite NP Seriously Injured Teen Extricated From Under Bridalveil Falls Park dispatch received a 911 call from a visitor at Bridalveil Falls on the afternoon of August 5th, reporting that a 16-year-old boy had fallen 30 to 40 feet and was unconscious. A number of visitors had seen him scrambling on the large boulders below the falls, then slip off the face of one of them and out of their view. Rangers, Medic 3 ambulance and a SAR carryout team responded. An air ambulance was also requested based on the visitor report that the boy was unconscious. Rangers found that the boy, who was at the edge of one of the pools directly under the 640-foot waterfall, was gravely injured. The first park medics to arrive in the area immediately called for a short-haul extraction, based on the terrain and seriousness of the boy's injuries. Helicopter 551 with pilot Richard Shatto and a spotter were flown to the scene. Shatto positioned the helicopter in the spray of the giant waterfall, then slowly lowered medic Keith Lober, dangling from the 150-foot short-haul line, down to the site. SAR personnel helped Lober hookup the teenager, who was already packaged in a litter. He was flown out just a bit more than an hour after the initial call for help. The boy was flown to the trauma center at Memorial Hospital in Modesto, where he was treated for his life-threatening injuries. The IC was ranger Chris Bellino. [Ed Dunlavey] Friday, August 27, 2010 Yosemite NP Marijuana Plantation Raided, Two Arrested With information obtained from a joint investigation with the Forest Service and the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, Yosemite National Park rangers raided a large marijuana cultivation site in El Portal early on the morning of August 24th and seized 3,657 plants. The site was on land in both Yosemite National Park and the Sierra National Forest. The park worked with Mariposa County Sheriff's Office deputies and detectives, an officer from Mariposa County Probation, and park rangers from Point Reyes National Seashore. The total estimated worth of the seized marijuana is $14.6 million. Two Mexican nationals, both in the United States illegally, were taken into custody while working the cultivation site during the raid. One of the men was armed with a loaded .45 caliber pistol concealed under his clothing. Both were wearing camouflage clothing at the time of their arrest. The marijuana plants growing in the site ranged in size from one plot of young, one-foot-tall plants, to a mature plot that was in the process of being harvested, with plants ranging from five- to ten-feet tall. In addition to seizing the 3,657 plants, several pounds of processed marijuana ready to be moved out of the site were also confiscated. The growing site suffered extensive resource damage, including damage to the native vegetation and landscape. Hose lines, fertilizers, trash and human waste were found throughout the area. The operation concluded safely with only a few minor injuries to officers. Both suspects are currently in custody awaiting charges. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, August 30, 2010 Yosemite NP Seriously Injured Climber Rescued From El Capitan Park dispatch received a report of an injured climber on a climbing route known as The Nose on El Capitan on the evening of Tuesday, August 24th. He was a 47-year-old Korean national, part of a four-person Korean climbing team. Rangers were unable to communicate with the climbers due to a language barrier, so little information was available at the outset. It was eventually determined that he'd dislodged a large rock just below the Camp 4 bivy site, that he was in stable condition, and that he was unable to climb further. A helicopter short-haul mission was planned to extricate him from the rock face, but had to be cancelled due to the shear vertical wall at the climbing party's location. A small technical rescue team was sent to the top of El Capitan to lower an attendant to him, but that operation had to be suspended due to darkness. A plan was formulated by IC Shannon Kupersmith to send supplemental personnel first thing the following morning to support the lowering operation. On Wednesday, additional personnel were flown to the summit of El Capitan for the technical lowering operation. Prior to the start of the mission a spotter in El Capitan Meadow was able to communicate with the climbing party and determine that the man might be paralyzed in his lower extremities. Two medics who reached the scene stabilized the climber and packaged him in a litter. An alternate plan to immediately evacuate him from the wall using the "bean bag/short-haul" technique was employed. This technique involves sending a line from the hovering helicopter to the attendant/medic. The attendant/medic then retrieves a tag line attached to the short-haul line from the helicopter while the helicopter maintains a safe rotor distance from the vertical rock face. One attendant then attached himself and the climber to the short-haul line, which was followed by immediate release from the wall anchor. He was then flown to El Capitan meadow and medevaced to a hospital. The remaining members of the climbing team were unable to lower themselves off the route due to their lack of experience and also had to be rescued. Two additional lowering operations were conducted to evacuate the Korean climbers off El Capitan's 3,000-foot face. These operations were conducted on the hottest day of the summer to date, with the temperature over 100 degrees. [Dov Bock, Emergency Services Assistant Program Manager] Wednesday, September 15, 2010 Yosemite NP Lost Backpacker Found After Multi-Day Search On Saturday, September 4th, a group of backpackers from southern California began a backpacking trip in the Tuolumne Meadows area. The group's plan was to hike for three days and come out of the backcountry on Tuesday, September 7th. All members of the group were experienced backpackers. M.A., a member of the group, decided to stay in the backcountry for another night because he wanted to take a day hike to Grand Mountain. He planned to finish his trip on Wednesday. When M.A. did not rejoin the rest of the group on the 8th, his fellow hikers contacted park dispatch. A hasty search was initiated that afternoon, but Yosemite rangers were unable to locate M.A.. On Thursday, the park launched a more extensive search, concentrating on the area in which M.A. intended to hike. During this time, M.A. realized that he had lost the trail and began hiking towards what he believed to be a ridge near Halfmoon Meadow. After 11 hours of hiking, M.A. hiked further into the backcountry towards the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne along the Cathedral Creek Drainage, an extremely rugged area of the park. M.A. realized he was lost and began self-survival procedures by rationing his food and water supply. After observing a helicopter over the area he was in, he realized that rangers were searching for him. He placed a green tarp on the ground with large white rocks spelling out "SOS". He also lit a fire to alert rangers of his location. During midday on Saturday, September 11th, rangers spotted the "SOS" message from the helicopter. It landed and picked up M.A. and flew him to Tuolumne Meadows. He was found to be unhurt and in good shape. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, September 22, 2010 Yosemite NP Injured Climber Rescued From El Capitan On Saturday, September 18th, a 42-year-old Spanish climber fell and sustained serious leg and chest injuries while speed climbing up the Nose on El Capitan. The climber and his partner were training for a "Nose in a Day" attempt when the accident occurred. He was seconding the pendulum traverse between the Sickle Ledge and Dolt Tower on the seventh pitch when he lost control, swung for approximately 50 feet, and hit the wall. Though injured and hanging in his harness, he was able to call 911 for help while his partner rappelled down to him. With the assistance of a park helicopter, rangers Chris Bellino and Keith Lober were short-hauled onto the wall, where they found the two climbers hanging in a steep section approximately 80 feet below their anchor. The rangers provided emergency medical care and extricated the injured climber by short haul to El Capitan Meadow, where an air ambulance was waiting to transport him to Memorial Medical Center in Modesto. This was the third El Capitan rescue this year in which helicopter short haul played an integral role in the success of the mission. The rescue team delivered the injured climber to the awaiting air ambulance in just less than three hours from the time of the first 911 call. [Scott Jacobs, Park Ranger/Incident Commander] Monday, October 4, 2010 Yosemite NP Surprise Bus Inspection Held In Park Yosemite National Park, in conjunction with the California Highway Patrol, held a surprise inspection of all commercial for hire multiple passenger tour buses on Friday, September 24th. The purpose of this unannounced inspection was to ensure visitor safety through safe operation of tour buses. The goal of these unannounced inspections is to reduce chances of crashes, injuries, and fatalities involving tour buses bringing passengers into the park. Roadside inspections adhere to the guidelines of the North American Standard for bus safety. There are five levels of inspections, including a vehicle component, a driver component, or a combination of both. Inspections are designed to determine if buses are in compliance with federal motor carrier safety regulations. Violations may result in fines or taking a bus out of service immediately. Yosemite receives approximately four million visitors per year, with approximately 300,000 of these people arriving on tour buses. The large majority of tour bus passengers are international visitors from countries such as Japan, Korea, Germany, and England. Many of these visitors come to Yosemite in conjunction with visiting other parts of California. It is a primary concern of the NPS that these visitors are safe during their travels in the park. Further, the extensive travels of international visitors throughout the state affords the opportunity for cooperating agencies to work together to promote bus safety. Yosemite National Park and the CHP strive to ensure visitor safety and appreciate the mutual support of the other agencies involved in these surprise bus inspections. On the day of inspection, rangers and CHP officers examined 30 commercial buses. Out of the 30 inspections conducted, 18 buses were found to be safe, with no violations, and were released without citation. A total of 12 minor "fix-it" tickets were written. Of those 12, three were for logbook failures. Another two buses were taken temporarily out of service for logbook violations. No buses were taken out of service for mechanical deficiencies. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, October 12, 2010 Yosemite NP Rangers Join Unified Command In Successful SAR On October 6th, the park's search and rescue office received a request from the Mono County Sheriff's Office for assistance in a search for an overdue backpacker. T.A., 70, of Truckee, California, was on a five-night, one-way hike from the Virginia Lakes trailhead to Saddlebag Lake. He was due out at noon on October 6th but failed to arrive. The Sierra Nevada mountain range experienced a severe multi-day storm on October 3rd that brought winter conditions and road closures to the high country, heightening the urgency of the search for this solo traveler. Much of the T.A.'s intended route was in the park, but the point last seen and the entry and exit points were located in Mono County, creating a unified command opportunity. Yosemite rangers arrived at the unified command post on the evening of October 6th to fill command staff positions. Mono County Search and Rescue had undertaken a hasty search that evening with three field teams, but with no success - the returning field teams reported very difficult conditions with cold temperatures and drifts of snow up to two feet deep. The next morning, the search was expanded with more command staff positions, seven field teams, two dog teams, and two helicopters. During team insertions, observers in the park's helicopter noticed tracks leading away from two circles stamped in the snow and an arrow pointing towards the southwest and Virginia Canyon. Field teams and the helicopters were shifted to that area. Shortly thereafter, T.A. was found by a field team near Summit Lake inside the park. He was 26 hours overdue at that point and moving slowly toward the Virginia Lakes trailhead. He was tired and cold, but otherwise in good condition. He was extracted by helicopter, flown to Tuolumne Meadows, and reunited with his wife. This search was the third major search in the Tuolumne Subdistrict since the beginning of September. Unified incident commanders were Yosemite ranger Jason Ramsdell and Pete DeGeorge of the Mono County Sheriff's Office. [Kevin Killian, Mather District Ranger] Monday, October 25, 2010 Yosemite NP Poachers Receive Record Penalties In Federal Court In August of 2008, California Department of Fish and Game wardens received an anonymous report about suspected poaching activity in the Virginia Canyon area of the park. Based on this tip, the NPS and Fish and Game opened a joint investigation. As the investigation progressed, C.G., his 14-year old son, his brother Ch.G., and K.N. were identified as suspects. On August 28, 2008, a warden and a Yosemite ranger were on a stakeout at Yosemite's boundary at Summit Lake and stopped the four suspects at 5:30 a.m. as they were sneaking out of the park. The G.s and K.N. claimed they were on a week-long backpacking trip, but did not have the appropriate equipment. As a result of this conversation with the foursome, rangers and wardens later returned to the area several times to search for evidence of poaching. On September 13, 2008, a warden and a ranger, aided by the warden's search dog, found several items of evidence positively linking the G.s and K.N. to the original report. These items included their hunting licenses and deer tags, bows and arrows, digital memory cards, GPS units, backpacks, bags of rotten deer meat, three sets of deer antlers and a kill site. All of these items were located inside the park, an area of exclusive federal jurisdiction. A federal search warrant was executed on the electronic media found in the field. The evidence secured as a result of this search warrant led to the execution of a federal search warrant at C.G.'s residence on January 11, 2009. More evidence was seized, including computers and the heads of two deer killed in Yosemite in 2005 and 2007. Over the years, the G.s had killed five trophy deer in the park. Wardens began several other investigations on C.G. based on evidence seized from his computers and GPS units that suggested a number of other poaching offenses. On October 14, 2009, while under investigation for hunting within Yosemite, C.G. was cited for hunting with his son within the boundaries of Lake Perris State Park. During the summer of 2010, he was cited twice by the California Department of Fish and Game for two independent fishing and boating violations. C.G. was also falsely reporting his poached deer to the California Bowmen Hunter's Association as legitimate kills and had several of his poached deer listed as records. On September 1, 2009, K.N. was charged with six counts in federal court; C.G. and Ch.G. were both charged with 17 counts. State charges were also filed separately. This past May, the men pleaded as follows: K.N. pled guilty to hunting in Yosemite and possession of a weapon in the park. He was sentenced to a $7,500 fine, 24 months of unsupervised probation and forfeiture of all of his hunting equipment seized in the field. He also agreed to stay outside of the park for the duration of his probation. Ch.G. pled guilty to 14 of 17 federal counts, including three counts of hunting within Yosemite, three counts of violating the Lacey Act and three counts of possession of a weapon within Yosemite. C.G. pled guilty to nine of 17 counts, including three counts of hunting within the park, three counts of violating the Lacey Act and three counts of possession of a weapon within Yosemite. C.G., Ch.G., K.N. also received sentences from a judge in Mono County, including up to 60 days in jail, between two and ten years' hunting license revocation, three years probation, a $1,000 fine, and up to 200 hours community service. On October 19th, C.G. and Ch.G. were sentenced in federal court: Ch.G.'s sentence included five years of supervised probation, 250 hours of community service, and 45 days of house arrest. He is also prohibited from hunting within the United States for five years, is not allowed to be in the presence of anyone hunting, and is not allowed to possess a bow and arrow. C.G.'s sentence included five years of supervised probation and a $52,368 fine. He is also prohibited from hunting within the United States for five years, prohibited from being in the presence of other hunters, and is not allowed to possess a bow and arrow. He is not allowed in Yosemite for the duration of his probation. This multiagency investigation and convictions represents the most severe civil and criminal penalties ever associated with illegal hunting in the history of Yosemite National Park. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb] Wednesday, December 15, 2010 Yosemite NP Three Climbers Rescued From El Capitan Three rock climbers were rescued from the wall of El Capitan on Monday afternoon, culminating a two-day rescue operation. S.L., 24, W.M., 25, and R.M., 23, were lowered down the 7,563-foot-high granite monolith after spending the night on the wall. Walker and Rio were not injured; S.L. sustained moderate injuries. Rangers were assisted in the technical rescue effort by an Army National Guard Chinook helicopter from Stockton, California, a California Highway Patrol helicopter from Auburn, California, and a private helicopter from Columbia, California. At 11 a.m. on Sunday morning, park dispatch received a call from S.L. asking for assistance. While climbing, a rock weighing about 200 pounds dislodged and struck her. At first, the trio attempted to finish the climb, but S.L.'s injuries lead her to again call dispatch around 2:30 p.m. and solicit assistance. With daylight dwindling, rangers were not able to bring in a helicopter or launch a rescue and the three climbers were forced to spend the night on the wall. On Monday morning, the park contacted the law enforcement division of the California Emergency Management Agency and asked for assistance in the rescue effort. They in turn contacted the Army National Guard, who dispatched a Chinook helicopter to Yosemite Valley to assist in the rescue efforts. The military helicopter transported rescue personnel to the top of El Capitan, where rangers Matt Stark and Chris Bellino were lowered to the injured climbers. The group was then lowered to the base of El Capitan. A CHP helicopter short-hauled S.L. to El Capitan Meadow, where she was transported out of Yosemite Valley. Completing the rescue mission on Monday was critical due to deteriorating weather conditions, including fog covering Yosemite Valley and impending snowfall at the higher elevations. Over 30 Yosemite rangers, Yosemite Search and Rescue team members and others assisted in this complex technical rescue, putting their lives at risk to rescue the climbers. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, January 3, 2011 Yosemite NP Rockfall Temporarily Closes Highway 140 A large rock fell onto Highway 140/El Portal Road late on the morning of December 30th, blocking all traffic from entering or exiting the park on that route and closing the road. Both Highways 120 and 41 into and out of the park remained open. The rock, which fell approximately a half mile east of Yosemite View Lodge in El Portal, just inside the park's boundary, was estimated to be from 10 to 15 feet high, six feet wide, and four feet deep. There were no injuries and no damage to property. The road was cleared and reopened the following day. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, March 22, 2011 Yosemite NP All Roads Into Park Temporarily Closed Due To Storm All roads leading into Yosemite National Park are temporarily closed due to snow, ice, mudslides, fallen trees and downed power lines. Over a 24-hour period ending yesterday morning, a winter storm dropped over three-and-a-half feet of snow in areas of the park, including Yosemite Valley, Wawona, and Crane Flat. Approximately nine inches had fallen at that time in El Portal. Highways 41 (Wawona Road), 120 (Big Oak Flat Road), and 140 (El Portal Road) into the park were closed due to snowy and icy conditions, and Caltrans had also closed Highway 140 outside of the park boundary between El Portal and Mid Pines due to mud slides, rockfall, downed power lines, and fallen trees. The Badger Pass Road and the Hetch Hetchy Road were also closed. Assessment of all roads in Yosemite was to occur throughout Monday. For 24-hour information for roads within Yosemite National Park please call 209-372-0200. For updates on conditions for roads outside of Yosemite, please call Caltrans at 1-800-427-7623. For information about reservations and accommodations, please call (801) 559-4884. [Victoria Mates, Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb] Wednesday, March 23, 2011 Yosemite NP Major Winter Storm Slams Park A winter storm dropped several feet of snow - two to six feet, depending on location and elevation - on the park this past weekend, with nine inches of snow in El Portal. The strong storm system, which moved out of the area on Monday, caused power outages throughout the park and road closures, downed trees and landslides outside the park. The widespread nature of the problem has caused the park to take various contingency measures to protect park resources and provide for visitor safety. Here's a status report prepared on Tuesday morning: Numerous trees are down along Highway 41 outside the park and within the Wawona community, resulting in a loss of power. The main power transmission line in the Merced River Canyon (Highway 140) is down, resulting in the loss of electric service to El Portal and Yosemite Valley. Pacific Gas and Electric is assessing the damage and beginning repairs to the line. They have estimated power will remain out for several days. Landslides along highway 140 have forced the closure of the road outside the park by CalTrans. They have indicated it will take several days to clear the road. The California Highway Patrol and the park are working cooperatively to provide escorted convoy of essential personnel to support basic park infrastructure. Highway 140 within the park has an administrative lane open, with ongoing activities to clear downed trees and widen the roadway. Highway 120 within the park is open to administrative traffic, with ongoing efforts to widen the road by removing snow. Highway 120 was utilized to support a voluntary evacuation of the park, including 350 students associated with Yosemite Institute, 46 persons who had been stranded at Badger Pass for two days, guests at lodging outside the park in Yosemite West and El Portal wanting to depart, and guests at campgrounds and lodging within the park. Generators are being operated by the park and concessionaire to protect infrastructure. Three warming locations have been identified for residents who do not have heat due to the power outage. Two community meetings were planned for yesterday. These widespread impacts have resulted in the establishment of forward incident command posts to support evacuations, operations, and interagency communications. Those posts and their managers are at Wawona (Eric Scott), Mather (Eric Yount), El Portal (Bernie Spielman), and the Valley (Matt Stark). These forward command posts are under the direction of the chief ranger and superintendent. The park's roads crew, under the leadership and direction of Lou Summerfield, has been a critical asset throughout the storm along with the utilities/high voltage staff. Incident priorities yesterday were as follows: Maintain the Highway 120 access, with a goal of getting two lanes open for administrative traffic only Conduct community meetings Extract visitors out of Glacier Point and Bridalveil Keep power up and running at the El Portal wastewater treatment plant Keep El Portal complex power up and running Maintain dispatch operations and backup power Continue liaison activities with PG&E, AT&T, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, and the California Highway Patrol Conduct a storm damage assessment and develop a report Provide information through the employee hotline (209-379-1186) Monitor the emerging weather forecast, which currently includes a winter storm watch for late Tuesday through late Wednesday, with possible heavy snow and a 4,000 foot elevation snow level Assure safety mitigation through the safety officer and messaging about use of extension cords, generators, and exposure to carbon monoxide Conduct hazard tree abatement Support the transfer of stranded visitors who arrive by way of YARTS and need assistance leaving the park Restore generator service to Yosemite Medical Clinic For additional information, contact Charles Cuvelier at 209-372-0216. [Charles Cuvelier, Chief Ranger] Thursday, March 24, 2011 Yosemite NP Headway Made In Recovering From Major Storm Yosemite continues to recover from this past weekend's winter storm and is bracing for the arrival of yet another storm. The following is an update on current park conditions: Power outages remain throughout the park with the potential for power restoration by Saturday. Pacific Gas & Electric is working on the main transmission line to El Portal and Yosemite Valley as well as the line that services Wawona. Tree clearing continues along secondary roads and in residential communities. CalTrans has been able to clear highways that access the park and reopened Highways 41 and 140 on Tuesday evening. Highway 120 is open as well. Rangers assisted stranded visitors at Glacier Point and Bridal Veil. Park roads are clear, but restricted to administrative traffic. Generator service has been restored to the Yosemite Medical Clinic. Generators are being operated by the park and concessionaire to protect infrastructure. Three warming locations have been identified for residents who do not have heat due to the power outage. Schools within Yosemite remain closed. Restoration of bus service is planned for Wednesday. The community of Yosemite West has lost its water. Mariposa County is working to restore water service. The park and Mariposa County are working together on a plan for the clearing and disposal of downed and stressed trees in the El Portal community. Two community meetings were held on Tuesday, providing current road, weather, power, and available services information. Also participating with park staff were Dan Jensen, president of Delaware North Parks & Resorts Yosemite, Inc., Doug Binneweis, Mariposa County sheriff, Jim Wilson, Mariposa County fire chief, and Aaron Rosander, superintendent of the Mariposa Unified School District. The park is assessing current storm damage and monitoring the forecasted weather. The National Weather Service has issued a winter storm warning that will be in effect until 5 a.m. on Friday - a series of storms are entering the area that may produce heavy snowfall. Incident priorities yesterday were as follows: Continue distribution of information to internal and external sources-communities, employees, media Keep generator power up and running at the El Portal wastewater treatment plant Keep El Portal complex generator power up and running Maintain dispatch operations and backup power Continue liaison activities with PG&E, AT&T, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, and the California Highway Patrol Conduct storm damage assessments and develop package Provide information through the employee hotline (209-379-1186) Monitor the emerging weather forecast, which currently includes a winter storm watch for Wednesday thorough early Friday, with possible heavy snow and a 4,000 foot elevation snow level Being planning for reopening the park and restoration of services based upon current and available information. Assure safety mitigation through the safety officer and messaging about use of extension cords, generators, and exposure to carbon monoxide Conduct hazard tree abatement Support park administrative functions Establish an employee information location at the Comfort Inn in Mariposa for Wednesday and Thursday between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. so that employees can get information and connect to email and network files via VPN. [Charles Cuvelier, Chief Ranger] Friday, March 25, 2011 Yosemite NP Park Begins Phased Reopening Storm recovery operations continue at Yosemite and incremental reopening are set to occur through the weekend. A winter storm warning for significant snow remains in effect through this morning. Here's yesterday's status report: Yosemite was open to local traffic on Wednesday to allow residents an opportunity to meet basic needs. The park will begin to transition to opening for day use and overnight reservation, then to opening with limited services, followed by restoration of all services. The projected time line is 72 hours contingent upon weather, roads, and restoration of power. The first in a series of winter storms moved through the area Wednesday with snow fall returning to El Portal. Approximately two inches of snow was reported at El Portal with 14 inches at the 6,500 feet elevation. Wednesday's forecast called for a second storm to produce heavy snowfall and breezy conditions. A winter storm warning remains in effect. Highways 140, 41, and 120 outside the park remain open. Within the park, Highway 140/El Portal Road is open, Highway 120/Big Oak Flat road is open, and Highway 41/Wawona Road is temporary closed while rotary plows widen the road. The latter was to reopen late yesterday. Pacific Gas & Electric is continuing work to restore electrical service. Progress has been limited due to snow showers throughout the area yesterday and remaining in the forecast through tomorrow. Restoration of power is projected for Saturday for Yosemite Valley, undetermined for Wawona, and one week for the Hodgdon area. Hetch Hetchy has restored electrical services. AT&T is working to restore phone service to El Portal by replacing damaged lines. Tree clearing continues along secondary roads and within residential communities. Generators are being operated by the park and concessionaire to protect infrastructure. Three warming locations have been identified for residents who do not have heat due to the power outage. Non-essential employees remain on administrative leave as heat and power is lacking at many work locations. Personnel are supporting core operations, including basic administrative/contracting needs associated with the winter storm, payroll/finance, and operations. Employees are encouraged to telecommute, but many are without power at their homes as this storm has had widespread impacts. The park is anticipating a full restoration of services and all employees returning to work on Monday. Mariposa County declared a local emergency and activated its emergency operations center. Ed Dunlavey is serving as the park liaison with Mariposa County. Schools within Yosemite Valley reopened yesterday and El Portal will reopen today, all supported by generator power. Bus service resumed on Wednesday. Media interest remains very high. Incident priorities yesterday were as follows: Continue distribution of information to internal and external sources-communities, employees, media Keep generator power up and running at the El Portal wastewater treatment plant Keep El Portal complex generator power up and running Maintain dispatch operations and backup power Continue liaison activities with PG&E, AT&T, the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, and the California Highway Patrol Conduct a storm damage assessment and develop package Provide information through the employee hotline (209-379-1186) Monitor the emerging weather forecast which currently includes a winter storm warning through early Friday Implement plans for the reopening of the park and the restoration of services based upon current and available information. Assure safety mitigation through the safety officer and messaging about use of extension cords, generators, and exposure to carbon monoxide Maintain an employee information location at the Comfort Inn in Mariposa. [Charles Cuvelier, Chief Ranger] Monday, March 28, 2011 Yosemite NP Power Restored To Park Electrical power was restored to Yosemite on Saturday. The park had been without electrical power since Sunday, March 20th, after a severe winter storm affected the area. The winter storm dropped several feet of new snow on Yosemite over the last week, causing snowy and icy conditions on the roadways, downed trees on the roadways, landslides, and damage to the electrical power lines throughout the park and surrounding communities. All roads into Yosemite are open, including park entrances on Highways 120, 140, and 41. All park services were fully operating by this past weekend except for the Yosemite Valley campgrounds, which will open back up to the public today. Bus service to Yosemite via the Highway 140 corridor on the Yosemite Area Regional Transportation System resumed its normal schedule yesterday - current schedules can be found at HYPERLINK "http://www.yarts.com/". For 24-hour road conditions in Yosemite, please call 209-372-0200. Road conditions outside of the park can be found by calling 1-800-427-7623. [Scott Gediman, Kari Cobb] Tuesday, April 5, 2011 Yosemite NP Life Saved During Severe Winter Storm A winter storm that began on the night of Friday, March 18th, continued into the following week, dropping heavy snow throughout the park. By the following Monday morning, the Wawona District and nearby community of Fish Camp had received between two and three feet of snow. Highway 41, the only road leading into the park's South Entrance, was closed and impassible due to power line and tree failures outside of the park, leaving Fish Camp residents and guests at the Tenaya Lodge stranded. Around 11 a.m., dispatch received a 911 call from the Tenaya Lodge, reporting that a 61-year-old man was experiencing chest pain. Because county responders could not get to the hotel, ranger/paramedic Heidi Schlichting responded from Wawona. She reached the man about 15 minutes later, along with a Cal Fire paramedic from Fish Camp, Mark Spencer. An assessment of the patient revealed that he had a history of heart problems and that, due to the nature of his symptoms, he was likely having another cardiac event. Immediate transport was warranted, but weather conditions made this an extremely difficult option. An air evacuation was accordingly ordered. A CHP helicopter flew to the area, but was unable to find an adequate landing zone due to the terrain and inclement weather. While the helicopter was circling, Schlichting and Spencer began transporting the patient in her patrol car, hoping to somehow meet up with an ambulance. Pushing through over two feet of snow and maneuvering around stuck motorists, Schlichting drove until she encountered a tree across the road. Using hand and chain saws to clear trees and debris, she slowly made her way down the road, while still maintaining patient care, which included administration of emergency cardiac medications. She was assisted by NPS forestry tech Brian Mattos and NPS fire personnel Taro Pusina and Eric Neiswanger, whose sawyer expertise was invaluable in clearing approximately fifteen trees in very difficult conditions. It took about an hour-and-a-half for the party to travel approximately two miles, where they encountered power lines down across the road, making it impossible to continue. While waiting for a PG&E utilities crew to reach them to clear the lines, they began devising a plan to extricate the patient over the snow. A Madera County Search and Rescue snow cat arrived on the opposite side of the downed lines and assisted with transporting the man to a waiting ambulance. It took four hours to reach the ambulance. The man was then transported by ambulance to Oakhurst and flown to St. Agnes Hospital in Fresno, where he subsequently underwent triple bypass surgery. Dispatchers Ansley Rothell and Nancy Bissmeyer played a key role in maintaining communications and coordinating efforts of all involved personnel. Without the efforts and coordination between the involved agencies, including the NPS, Cal Fire MMU, Sierra National Forest, Mariposa County, Madera County, CHP, and CAL Trans, the man would likely not have survived. [Eric Scott, Wawona District Ranger] Tuesday, April 26, 2011 Yosemite NP Rangers Confront And Arrest Armed Driver A Valley shift seasonal ranger stopped a 1989 Jeep Cherokee at the Four Mile Trail trailhead on South Side Drive for a minor traffic violation on the afternoon of April 13th. The ranger contacted the three occupants and identified the driver, a 57-year-old man from Fresno. He was returning to the driver's side window after checking the license with dispatch when he saw that the driver was now holding a revolver on his lap. He immediately drew his weapon, retreated to his patrol car for cover, and radioed for backup. Several rangers and a special agent responded and conducted a high-risk stop, removing the driver and the two women with him without further incident. The man was arrested on several felony and misdemeanor charges, including the unlawful possession of a handgun by a convicted felon and possession of methamphetamine. One of the women was also arrested on multiple charges. Due to the decisive and quick actions of the ranger staff, this potentially violent contact was resolved without incident. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, May 17, 2011 Yosemite NP Three Die In Separate Incidents On Same Day Yosemite rangers responded to three unrelated fatalities on Friday, May 13th: K.B., 60, of Austin, Texas, was hiking on the Mist Trail to Vernal Fall late that morning when he slipped off the trail and slid down a slab into the Merced River, currently swollen with spring runoff. He was swept downstream several hundred feet and lodged, partially submerged, in the middle of the channel. K.B. showed no signs of life. His body was recovered on Saturday via a high line rigged across the river by rangers. This was a highly technical and dangerous rescue operation. The Mist Trail, the most popular in the park, was closed during the incident, but has since reopened. During the above incident, park dispatch received a report of an unresponsive adult male on the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail. Witnesses said that J.D. of Berkeley, California, was running down the trail and suffered a head injury. Rangers administered life support but he was pronounced dead at the scene. He was evacuated via a wheeled litter. A resident of Yosemite West, a small community adjacent to the park, died in his sleep due to medical complications. No further details are available. Scott Jacobs and Jack Hoeflich served as incident commanders for the first two incidents. [Scott Gediman, Assistant Superintendent for Public & Legislative Affairs] Thursday, June 16, 2011 Yosemite NP Rangers Rescue Three Men And A Dog Rangers have successfully undertaken a variety of search and operations since last Thursday, ranging from a complex, high-angle rescue on El Capitan to the rescue of a family pet. On Sunday, dispatch received a call for help from 26-year-old M.S. of Evergreen, Colorado, who reported a leg injury due to a lead fall while rope soloing on El Capitan. M.S. was stranded at the top of the 23rd pitch of the Muir Wall climbing route, approximately 900 feet below the summit. Early Monday morning, a search and rescue team was transported by helicopter from Crane Flat to the summit of El Capitan. They lowered a rescuer to M.S. and then raised both to the summit. M.S. was then transported to Crane Flat by helicopter and later transported by ground ambulance to John C. Fremont Hospital in Mariposa. Last Thursday afternoon, an eleven-year-old black Labrador named "S." escaped its leash and chased a squirrel over the stone wall at the popular Tunnel View lookout, falling down a steep embankment leading to an area of extreme exposure typical to Yosemite. Park custodian Greg Warren was at Tunnel View at the time of the incident. He radioed for help and attempted unsuccessfully to find the dog. Responding rangers were also unable to locate "S." and were left to assume the worst. On Saturday, though, resource manager Ryan Leahy was in a wooded area below the lookout and heard the dog whimpering from below the rim. Leahy and ranger Matt Stark rappelled approximately 100 feet to the dog. They found that it was uninjured, but trapped on a small exposed ledge. Warren, members of the park bear management team, and several rangers performed a quick rope raise and brought the dog safely back to the rim. On Saturday, rangers dealt with two incidents in which people were injured in recreational activities. In the first, a snowboarder suffered a fractured femur while snowboarding in the Inyo National Forest just east of Mount Dana. Ranger Chris Bellino was lowered to his location via helicopter and the injured man was evacuated to a local hospital. In the second, a 64-year-old man suffered serious injuries in a hang glider accident in Leidig Meadow; he was flown out of the park by helicopter. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, June 17, 2011 Yosemite NP Two Rescued From Talus Slope Near Sentinel Rock On the evening of June 14th, park dispatch received a call from J.G.B. reporting that his 19-year-old son, J.T.B. (who goes by T.), had suffered injuries in a fall on Sentinel Rock in Yosemite Valley. The family was visiting the park from Kansas at the time. J.G.B. also reported that a second son, age 16, was stranded on the same talus slope. Although uninjured, he too was unable to descend on his own. Rangers later determined that all three B.s were scrambling on a talus slope below Sentinel Fall when J.T.B. slipped and fell on loose rock. He was unable to regain his footing and fell 50 feet down the slope, sustaining injures to his back and neck and a possible pelvic fracture. J.T.B. attempted to descend the slope after his fall, but realized he was too injured to move. At the same time, his brother became stuck on a cliff edge just above the talus slope and was unable to descend. Ranger Jarred Mitrea was dispatched and arrived on the scene around 8:30 p.m. He began providing basic medical treatment to J.T.B. and was soon joined by ranger Jack Hoeflich and a Yosemite SAR team member. Rescue crews were able to rappel to the 16-year-old and remove him from the cliff face shortly after nightfall. Mitrea and Hoeflich decided that it would be unsafe for J.T.B. and rescue crews to descend the slope with him, though, and it was too dark to fly him out by helicopter. The rangers stayed the night on the talus slope with J.T.B. Around 6 a.m., he was extricated by helicopter short haul and flown to Memorial Medical Center in Modesto, California. The IC for this incident was ranger Ed Visnovske. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, June 20, 2011 Yosemite NP Search In Progress For Missing Hiker A search is currently underway for G.P., 30, of Hawthorne, California, who was last seen hiking on Upper Yosemite Fall Trail last Friday with a group of people from his church. Around 9 p.m. that evening, a member of the group called park dispatch and reported that G.P. was missing. The park is asking that anyone who was in the area of the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail with possible information on G.P. call the search command post at 209-372-0311 or 209-372-0252. G.P. is 5' 10" tall, weighs 240 pounds, and has dark brown hair, blue eyes, and a stocky build. He was last seen wearing gray sweatpants with white stripes, a black t-shirt that says "D&B" across the chest or a black tank top, and gray/blue running shoes. He was carrying a blue cloth bag and had very little food and water. Supporting park staff in the search have been personnel from Mariposa, Mono, Fresno and Marin Counties. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, June 21, 2011 Yosemite NP Rangers Rescue Injured Climber Who Fell Sixty Feet A visitor called park dispatch last Wednesday morning and reported that he'd seen a climber fall while ascending El Capitan. Rangers found that Japanese climber Y.N., 31, who was lead climber on an ascent of the Zodiac route, had fallen about 60 feet when a piece of protective gear fell out. When Y.N. hit the ground, he sustained injuries to his back and pelvis. Y.N. was short-hauled via the park's helicopter along with ranger Jeff Webb to El Capitan Meadow. He was then flown to Modesto Memorial Medical Center, where he was trated and released later that day. The IC was ranger Aaron Smith. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, June 22, 2011 Yosemite NP Major Search For Missing Hiker Scaled Back The search continues for missing hiker G.P., who was last seen at the top of Yosemite Falls on Friday, June 17th, but has been scaled back due to the steep and rugged terrain and lack of any clues. Although the area has been thoroughly searched, no sign of G.P. has yet been found. G.P. began hiking the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail on June 17th with a group of 20 people from his church. They dispersed at the top of the waterfall and later regrouped to hike back to Yosemite Valley. G.P. did not rejoin them, though, and a missing persons report was filed later that night. Searchers immediately began looking for him and a full-scale operation was launched the next day. Over 100 search and rescue personnel, two helicopters (one each from Yosemite and Sequoia/Kings Canyon), dog teams, and 14 California County SAR teams participated. The search area included 70 square miles of rugged terrain ranging in elevation from 4,000 feet above sea level to 8,000 feet above sea level. The change in search strategy was made yesterday after a review of risks to SAR personnel and consideration of the lack of clues as to G.P.'s whereabouts. Park SAR teams will remain in the Yosemite Falls area, though, and will continue ground search efforts. The park is asking anyone in the area of the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail who may have information on George G.P. to please call the Yosemite Emergency Communication Center at 209-379-1992. G.P. is 5' 10" tall, weighs 240 pounds, and has dark brown hair, blue eyes, and a stocky build. He was last seen wearing gray sweatpants with white stripes, a black t-shirt that says "D&B" across the chest or a black tank top, and gray/blue running shoes. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, June 24, 2011 Yosemite NP Surprise Bus Inspection Held In Park Yosemite held a two-day-long surprise bus inspection in the park on June 8th and 9th. This was done in support of Operation Road Check and organized as a multi-agency task force with the California Highway Patrol, San Francisco Police Department, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and the California Public Utility Commission. A total of 56 buses were inspected. The inspections involved mechanical and safety inspections, checks of driver's qualifications, and checks of the company's authority to transport passengers. Of the 56 vehicles inspected, 23 were released with no violations. Operators of another 28 were issued minor violation notices for repairs, and 24 violation notices were issued to companies and bus drivers. Five buses were placed out of service for mechanical deficiencies, five drivers were ordered out of service for driver's logbook violations and driving without the proper classification, and two buses were ordered out of service for not having California authority to transport passengers. Operation Road Check is a national program that is considered to be the largest targeted enforcement program on commercial vehicles in the world. As part of the program, approximately 14 trucks or buses are inspected, on average, every minute from Canada to Mexico during a 72-hour period in early June. Since 1988, over one million trucks and buses have been inspected. The program has provided educational literature and numerous safety events to educate people about the importance of safe commercial vehicle operations and roadside inspection programs. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Thursday, July 21, 2011 Yosemite NP Three Visitors Swept Over Vernal Fall Three visitors are presumed dead after plunging over Vernal Fall on Tuesday afternoon. H.D., 22, N.Y., 27, and R.B., 21, all from California, came to the park for a day trip with a group of family and friends. They were seen entering the water above Vernal Fall, approximately 25 feet from the precipice. Witnesses reported to park officials that several people urged them to step back from the river, since it was flowing swiftly and was extremely cold. The area is signed as a dangerous area, and the group had crossed a metal guardrail placed there to keep visitors away from the dangerous, fast-moving water. The park is still seeing the effects of a huge winter snowpack and a cool spring and summer. The Merced River, which feeds the 317-foot-high Vernal Fall, is still running at spring conditions with significant water levels, producing a swift, dangerous current. The hike up the Mist Trail to Vernal Fall is one of the most popular hikes in the park, with upwards of 1,500 people per day ascending the trail to the top of Vernal Fall. There have been six water-related deaths in the park this year, including this incident. Two hikers drowned in the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir on June 29th and a hiker slipped and fell into the Merced River on the Mist Trail on May 13th. The Mist Trail was closed after the incident to facilitate search and rescue operations, but has since reopened. Search efforts are continuing, consisting primarily of combing each side of the Merced River looking for the victims. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Tuesday, August 2, 2011 Yosemite NP Hiker Falls 600 Feet From Half Dome H.L., 26, was descending from the summit of Half Dome last Sunday when she fell 600 feet to her death from the Half Dome cables. A severe lightning, thunder, and rainstorm was present in the area for several hours that morning and afternoon. This type of weather can make for hazardous trail conditions and the granite slopes of Half Dome become very slick. The cause of the fall is currently under investigation. The last hiker who died on Half Dome was M.K., from San Ramon, California, on June 13, 2009. On June 16, 2007, H.N., slipped to his death on the cables. Two other Half Dome fatalities involved women who were hiking on the dome when the cables were down. These were J.B., who died on April 21, 2007, and E.S., who died on November 8, 2006. Half Dome trip planning and safety information is available through the Yosemite National Park webpage at HYPERLINK "http://www.nps.gov/yose/planyourvisit/halfdome.htm". [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Monday, August 8, 2011 Yosemite NP Body Of One Of Three Swept Over Vernal Fall Recovered Searchers have recovered the body of H.D., 22, one of three people who were swept over the 317-foot-high Vernal Fall in mid-July. His body was found in the Merced River about 240 feet from the base of the fall on Friday afternoon. Recovery operations took approximately four-and-a-half hours to complete and required technical rigging and swiftwater trained personnel. H.D. and two others - N.Y., 27, and R.B., 21 - were seen being swept over the waterfall on July 19th. The area where the three were swept away is signed as a dangerous area, and the trio had crossed a metal guardrail placed there to keep visitors away from the fast moving water. River water levels in Yosemite continue to remain higher and colder than usual for this time of the year. Rangers and SAR personnel are continuing recovery efforts in the Merced River below Vernal Fall for any signs of N.Y. and R.B.. The Mist Trail, leading to the top of Vernal Fall, will intermittently and temporarily be closed until N.Y. and R.B. are recovered. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Friday, August 26, 2011 Yosemite NP Man Dies In Fall From Half Dome Park dispatch received a report of a person falling off the face of Half Dome around 6:30 p.m. on August 2nd. Due to the late hour, rangers were unable to begin a search until morning, when his body was spotted from a helicopter. Rangers extricated the body from the base of Half Dome. The man has been identified as R.L., 23, of Los Gatos, California. His death appears to have been, but an investigation is being conducted. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Tuesday, September 13, 2011 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker's Body Found In Tent By Searchers Tuolumne rangers received a report on September 2nd that G.H., 69, of Olympia, Washington, was overdue from his solo hiking trip on the High Sierra Camp loop. G.H. had made arrangements to meet his daughter for dinner after his trip on September 1st and had not been at the scheduled engagement. His rental car was soon located at a nearby trailhead, and an investigation revealed that G.H. had last been seen at Vogelsang High Sierra Camp on either August 29th or 30th when he ate a meal there. Camp records showed that he had not arrived at Merced Lake as planned on the 30th. Since relatives indicated that G.H. intended to climb Vogelsang Peak and possibly other nearby peaks, an air and ground search was begun. At that point, G.H. had not been seen for several days, and the search area was extensive. Four other agencies assisted the NPS in the effort, which included 65 search personnel and a multi-disciplinary incident command team assembled from within Yosemite. On the afternoon of September 3rd, a dog team found G.H.'s body in his tent off trail near Fletcher Lake. An investigation is underway but preliminary evidence indicates that he died of natural causes. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Monday, September 19, 2011 Yosemite NP Crisis Negotiator Successfully Intervenes In Suicide Attempt Park dispatch received a call on the evening of September 9th from a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, regarding an at-risk student. The 31-year-old man had been in cell phone contact with UC Berkeley Health Services throughout the afternoon and had reported that he was on top of a mountain and intended to kill himself. He did not provide a specific location, but, based on conversations in the past, the professor presumed that the student was on top of Half Dome. Rangers stationed in Little Yosemite Valley were directed to the top of Half Dome to attempt to locate the man. Special Response Team members, including ranger and crisis negotiator Rob Lewis, were also dispatched. While responders were en route, a hiker stopped one of the rangers to let him know about a friend of his who was threatening suicide on top of Half Dome. A telephone interview was conducted with the hiker, and Lewis used the information obtained to conduct a crisis negotiation with the man via text message. After a lengthy text message exchange, he called 911, said that he was okay, and asked for help. By this time rangers were arriving on the summit of Half Dome and they were able to secure and hold him while waiting for additional responders to assist in getting him safely down the cables. The man was escorted out of the backcountry, transported to an area medical facility, and held for evaluation. Statements he made during the hike out indicate that Lewis' text messages had caused him to change his mind about jumping. After interviewing the man, a doctor at the medical facility said that he was surprised that he hadn't jumped. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Thursday, September 29, 2011 Yosemite NP Austrian Climber Rescued From El Capitan Yosemite rangers made a complex, high-angle helicopter rescue of an Austrian climber on El Capitan on the afternoon of Monday, September 26th. The climber and his partner were ascending El Capitan on The Nose Route, a popular and difficult climbing route on the 7,569-foot-high granite monolith in Yosemite Valley. After two days of climbing, they were approximately 1,000 feet below the summit. In mid-afternoon, the lead climber fell, losing his thumb when a secondary rope wrapped around the appendage and severed it. The thumb fell about 80 feet and landed on a two-foot by one-foot ledge, where his partner was able to retrieve it. The climbers then called the park for assistance. Just before 4 p.m., the park's contract helicopter, piloted by Richard Shatto and carrying helitack crew members Jeff Pirog and Eric Small and rangers Jeff Webb and Dave Pope, flew from Yosemite Valley to assess the situation. Although the weather was favorable, impending darkness was an issue and Eric Gabriel, district ranger for Yosemite Valley and IC for the incident, made the decision to attempt to extract the climber via short haul. Gabriel, who had consulted with the park's medical clinic, knew of the short window of time in which the thumb could successfully be reattached and felt the complex mission was worth pursuing. The helicopter hovered near the climbers and Webb and Pope were successfully short-hauled to the injured climber, who was flown back to El Capitan Meadow. He was then transferred to another air medical helicopter to be flown out of the park. Webb remained with the partner overnight and was raised approximately 1,000 feet to the summit the following day using traditional rock-rescue techniques. Later that evening, the injured climber underwent surgery at the California Pacific Medical Center's Davies Campus in San Francisco, where his thumb was successfully reattached. "This was an incredibly technical and complex rescue mission with a lot of inherent risk," said Gabriel. "However, knowing that the thumb could be reattached, coupled with the confidence I have in my team, I made the decision to attempt this rescue. I was relieved and thrilled that this ended successfully and we were able to make a positive difference in this person's life." [Scott Gediman, Assistant Superintendent for Public & Legislative Affairs, and Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, December 6, 2011 Yosemite NP Body of Missing Man Recovered The body of N.Y., 27, one of three hikers swept over Vernal Fall last July, was found in the Merced River approximately 100 yards below the Vernal Fall footbridge last Tuesday. N.Y. has been missing since July 19th, when he, H.D., 22, and R.B., 21, were seen being swept over the 317-foot-high waterfall. H.D.'s body was found on August 5th approximately 240 feet below the waterfall. Another body was found in the same general area as N.Y.'s last Saturday. Positive identification has not been made, but is expected within the next several days. The park will issue a news release when the body is positively identified. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb] Thursday, December 8, 2011 Yosemite NP Body Of Third Waterfall Victim Found A body found in the Merced River last Saturday about 120 yards below the Vernal Fall footbridge has been positively identified as that of 21-year-old R.B., who was swept over the 317-foot-high waterfall last July 19th along with H.D., 22, and N.Y., 27. H.D.'s body was found on August 5th and N.Y.'s was recovered on November 29th. The three victims were visiting the park with family and friends when they entered the water above Vernal Fall, approximately 25 feet from the precipice. Witnesses reported that several people urged them to step back from the river, since it was flowing swiftly and was extremely cold. The area is signed as a dangerous area, and the trio had crossed a metal guardrail placed there to keep visitors away from the dangerous, fast-moving water. Park staff and personnel from several other agencies had been searching for the bodies since July. Fluctuating water levels in the Merced River, changing weather conditions, and treacherous terrain contributed to a difficult and challenging search. However, with low water levels in the Merced River and dry weather, rangers were able to access areas within the river corridor that were previously impossible to search. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb] Monday, January 23, 2012 Yosemite NP DNC Employee, Past Seasonal Ranger Killed By Falling Tree R.H., an employee of Delaware North Companies and a former seasonal protection ranger for the park, died last Saturday when a tree landed on his tent cabin in North Pines Campground during a storm. The park has released the following statement: "With intense sadness, we share with our employees and partners the news regarding the death of R.H. during Saturday's winter storm event. R.H. was employed by DNC and worked this past summer for the Yosemite Protection Division at Little Yosemite Valley, where he was involved in many Half Dome emergency responses. Although the investigation is ongoing, initial information is that Saturday's storm and associated thunderstorm with winds resulted in a tree failing in North Pines Campground adjacent to the stables. The tree landed on the tent cabin in the stable complex occupied by R.H. causing traumatic injuries. He was to work at Badger Pass Ski Area this winter. Coworkers describe R.H. as a strong, soft spoken, stoic ranger. His focus was that of public service and he had the character and qualities to pursue that dream. Emblematic of this was an encounter during the summer of 2011 intervening to save a life. R.H. hiked four miles from Little Yosemite Valley to the sub-dome and then ascended the cables to the summit of Half Dome at dusk. There he and a fellow ranger met an individual who rangers had identified as suicidal but willing to seek assistance. He then was a participant in the descent and escort team during nightfall to safely bring the person out of the backcountry without further incident. R.H. attended the seasonal ranger training center in Silva, North Carolina, in the fall of 2010. He had completed two seasons at the Devils Postpile and one season at the Grand Canyon as a trail crew worker. R.H. brought a diverse background of outdoor experiences, including working as a deckhand for a summer on a fishing boat in Alaska, hiking 1,200 miles of the Appalachian trail, and working as a veterinary assistant, a farm manager, horse caretaker, just to name a few. R.H. had a love of wild places and had determined to dedicate himself to protecting them. R.H. was planning on returning to work in Yosemite National Park as a backcountry ranger in Little Yosemite Valley and was excited to attend Yosemite's Mounted Horse Patrol School. We extend our condolences to the R.H. family, friends, and co-workers here in Yosemite and in his home town. R.H. is from Chapel Hill, North Carolina, and would have turned 28 this month. We also extend our appreciation to the staff who responded to this tragic incident." [Charles Cuvelier, Chief Ranger] Tuesday, January 24, 2012 Yosemite NP Rockfall Closes Big Oak Flat Road Due to a large rockfall that occurred late on Sunday evening, the Big Oak Flat Road (the continuation of Highway 120) is closed in Yosemite National Park. The road is closed between the Foresta Junction on Highway 120 (Big Oak Flat Road) and the Highway 120/140 (El Portal Road) Junction. It will remain closed indefinitely. The National Park Service, along with the Federal Highways Administration, is assessing the damage and working on a plan to repair the road. Yosemite National Park remains open, and Yosemite Valley is accessible via Highways 140 and 41. [Public Affairs] Monday, January 30, 2012 Yosemite NP Big Oak Flat Road Reopens Big Oak Flat Road, the continuation of Highway 120 within the park, reopened on Saturday morning. The park's roads and trails crew worked throughout the week to clear the road of debris and rocks after a large rockfall occurred late on the evening of January 22nd. Temporary road closures will be in place this week to allow the park unrestricted access to repave the road. Exact days and times have not been established. Visitors are asked to call 209-372-0200 for 24-hour updated road and weather information. [Scott Gediman, Assistant Superintendent for Public & Legislative Affairs] Tuesday, May 22, 2012 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker Found By Searchers The three-day search for a 22-year-old college student lost in the park came to a successful conclusion yesterday afternoon when he was found in good condition about five miles from the point where he'd last been seen. J.P.C.F., 22, a college student at the University of California at Santa Cruz, was last seen near Kibbie Lake in the Hetch Hetchy area of the park this past Saturday. J.P.C.F. was on a backpacking trip with a group of fellow students from UCSC. The students began their hike at Cherry Lake on Friday and set up camp near Kibbie Lake that evening. Late on Saturday morning, group members noticed that J.P.C.F. was not present during a headcount. When the group reassembled approximately an hour later after a short day hike, he was still unaccounted for. Approximately 50 people began searching for him, including search and rescue teams from Yosemite National Park Search and Rescue, Contra Costa County, Marin County, Monterey County, and the Bay Area Mountain Rescue Unit. The park's helicopter and a California Highway Patrol helicopter assisted ground teams in the search, as did search dog teams. He was spotted from the park's contract helicopter yesterday afternoon near Edith Lake, approximately five miles east of Kibbie Lake, the point where he was last seen. Rangers soon contacted him and found him to be unharmed and in good health. HYPERLINK "http://www.nps.gov/yose/loader.cfm?csModule=security/getfile&pageID=518370" [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Specialist] Monday, July 2, 2012 Yosemite NP Rescuers Heli-Rappel To Injured Woman Near Glacier Point On Monday, June 18th, Yosemite National Park Search and Rescue responded to a report of a 63-year-old woman with a compound ankle fracture about a mile-and-a-half down the Panorama Trail near Glacier Point. Due to limited staffing, the severity of the injury, and the time it would take to reach her, the team decided to insert one paramedic and one park medic via heli-rappel to the woman's location. Shortly after receiving the call, Helicopter 551 departed Yosemite Valley. The helicopter was rigged for the rappel operation and two rescuers were lowered to a point about 30 yards from the woman's location. Rescuers were also assisted on scene by two EMT's. They immediately began treating the patient and preparing for a short haul extraction back to Yosemite Valley. The woman was then flown to an ambulance in Yosemite Valley and transported to Fresno, California, for further care. This incident marks the first use of live helicopter rappel since the new NPS helicopter rappel operations plan was put into effect. The program has been at a standstill since 2010, when a rappeller was tragically killed during a live rappel. The new program utilizes a combination of the HYPERLINK "http://www.petzl.com/en/pro/self-braking-descenders/rig" Petzl RIG descent device and nylon HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernmantle" kernmantle static rope to deliver search and rescue and fire personnel to incidents where access is limited or time is critical. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Tuesday, July 3, 2012 Yosemite NP Park Hosts Interagency Commercial Bus Inspections On June 14th and 15th, Yosemite held a surprise two-day joint agency bus inspection that focused on commercial tour buses operating within park boundaries. The bus inspections were completed jointly by rangers, inspectors from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, representatives from the California Public Utilities Commission Enforcement Division, and law enforcement officers from the California Highway Patrol, San Francisco Police Department and Modesto Police Department. A total of 65 buses were inspected. Thirty-two buses were found to have no violations; the remaining 33 were found to have a total of 73 violations, ranging from mechanical deficiencies to a variety of driver-related violations. Three drivers were placed out of service for driver's license and logbook violations and four buses were placed out of service for serious mechanical deficiencies, including three with defective brakes. Two buses were found to have cracked brake rotors on their drive wheels and one bus was discovered to have oil on its alternator, which could cause an engine fire. The park has been hosting these surprise bus inspections twice each year for over ten years. Yosemite's program has gained national recognition and is emulated by other agencies and parks around the country. Through the efforts of dedicated NPS managers, staff, and partner agency team members, hundreds of buses have been thoroughly inspected and thousands of safety-related violations have been discovered and corrected, further enhancing the safety of the traveling public on federally managed lands. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Friday, August 3, 2012 Yosemite NP Cardiac Victim Revived With AED On July 26th, dispatch received several 911 calls regarding an 80-year-old visitor who had collapsed and was unresponsive at the Sentinel Dome trailhead along the Glacier Point Road. As rangers responded to the scene, other visitors with medical training began performing CPR. The bystanders continued CPR for approximately 20 minutes until rangers arrived with an AED. Interpretive ranger and trained emergency medical technician Dick Ewart used the AED and delivered two shocks as advised during the CPR cycle. After the second shock, the man's heart rhythm was converted from ventricular fibrillation to a perfusing rhythm. Ranger paramedics Heidi Schlichting and Ben Grodjesk arrived on scene approximately 20 minutes later and began ALS treatment. The man was taken by park ambulance to the nearest helicopter landing zone and then flown by Mercy Air to a hospital in Fresno. He is currently sedated but stable, and is making good progress in his recovery. [Kevin Killian, Deputy Chief Ranger] Friday, August 17, 2012 Yosemite NP Boy Drowns In Merced River, Search Underway For Second Boy A ten-year-old boy was pronounced dead and a six-year-old boy remains missing following an incident near the Vernal Fall Footbridge on Thursday. Members of a family group from southern California were in the Merced River near the Vernal Fall Footbridge yesterday afternoon around 3:00 p.m. They had begun their hike at the Happy Isles Trailhead and had hiked approximately one mile when they stopped at the footbridge. They were in the river when the two boys were swept away by the current. The ten-year-old was pulled from the Merced about 150 yards downriver; CPR was begun by a park visitor and continued by rangers. Their efforts proved unsuccessful, though, and the boy was pronounced dead. A search was begun for the six-year-old and continue at this time. The Mist Trail remains open during search and rescue operations. Portions of the trail may close throughout the day to accommodate search and rescue operations. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, August 20, 2012 Yosemite NP Search For Missing Boy Continues Rangers continue to search for a six-year-old boy who disappeared in the Merced River last week. The boy was with an extended family that had hiked to the Vernal Fall footbridge last Wednesday. He and his ten-year-old brother were swept into the river near the footbridge at 3 p.m. A visitor pulled the older boy from the river about 150 yards below the bridge; although the visitor and rangers attempted to resuscitate him, their efforts proved unavailing. At the same time, an intensive search was begun for the younger boy. The search area is in and around the Merced River from the Vernal Fall footbridge to Happy Isles. This mile-long stretch of river is characterized by large boulders, chutes, and small waterfalls. Although the river level is low, the current in sections of the river is deceptively swift. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, August 24, 2012 Yosemite NP Body Of Missing Boy Found The body of J.A., a six-year-old boy who was swept into the Merced River on Wednesday, August 15th, was recovered yesterday. J.A. was wading in the Merced River with his ten-year-old brother, A."A."A., near the Vernal Fall Footbridge when they were swept downstream. A.A. was pulled from the river by a park visitor shortly after the incident, but resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful. Extensive search efforts for J.A. have been ongoing since last Wednesday. Rangers located his body approximately 50 yards downstream from the Vernal Fall Footbridge. Fluctuating water levels in the Merced River, changing weather conditions, and treacherous terrain contributed to a difficult and challenging search. However, with receding water levels and dry weather over the last few days, rangers were again able to access areas within the river corridor that were previously difficult to search. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, October 9, 2012 Yosemite NP Search Underway For Missing Concession Employee A search is currently underway for 23-year-old J.R.G., an employee of DNC Parks and Resorts at Yosemite, Inc., who did not show up for work at the Wawona Hotel as scheduled on Saturday morning. This was to be Jessica's first day working at the hotel. Rangers checked at her park residence Saturday morning and found that she was not there. They determined that she'd last been seen walking east along Forest Drive near the stables in Wawona at approximately 11:30 a.m. that morning, and that she had just come from an orientation meeting with her supervisor at the Wawona Hotel. She was dressed in her work uniform, a dark green polo shirt with the DNC logo on it, black slacks and black Rockies work loafers. She was also wearing her dark green DNC jacket, which has the DNC logo on the left side of the chest. J.R.G. is a Hispanic female; she is 5' 3" tall, weighs approximately 170 pounds, and has shoulder length black hair and brown eyes. J.R.G. is fit and hikes regularly. She is described as being shy and reserved around strangers. She was in possession of her cell phone and personal ID. Search and rescue teams include six dog teams, the park helicopter, rangers on horseback and 23 rangers on foot. The search area includes the South Fork of the Merced River and in and around the Wawona area. The park is asking for assistance with any information on J.R.G.'s whereabouts. Please call the Wawona Ranger Station at 209-375-9520, or Yosemite Dispatch at 209-379-1992, if you have any information on her. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Office] Wednesday, October 10, 2012 Yosemite NP Missing Concession Employee Found J.G., an employee of DNC Parks & Resorts at Yosemite, Inc., has been found alive in the South Fork Drainage of the Merced River. J.G. was reported missing when she did not show up for work at the Wawona Hotel on Sunday, October 7th. She was found early yesterday afternoon by a member of the Yosemite National Park Search and Rescue Team less than two miles up the drainage, which is located in the southern portion of the park. Approximately 50 people were involved in the search and rescue operation yesterday, including six dog teams, 15 ground searchers, a ranger on horseback, the park helicopter, and other personnel. Yosemite National Park extends its sincere thanks to the Tuolumne County Sheriff's Office, Madera County Sheriff's Office, Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, Fresno County Sheriff's Office, YoDogs (volunteers with search and rescue dogs) and the Marin County Sheriff's Office for their assistance in the search. [Scott Gediman and Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Office] Wednesday, October 24, 2012 Yosemite NP Climber Rescued From El Capitan Rangers and search and rescue personnel completed a high angle, high risk rescue on El Capitan on Monday, October 22nd. Two rock climbers from Canada began ascending a climbing route known as the Muir Wall on Monday, October 14th. They were scheduled to reach the top of the climb on the night of Sunday, October 21st, just before a large snowstorm was predicted to bring several inches of snow to the area. The lead climber, a 24-year-old man from Ontario, reached the summit just before midnight on Sunday night; the second climber, a 40-year-old man from British Columbia, was forced to spend the night approximately 230 feet below the summit due to impending bad weather and a stuck climbing rope. Around 2 a.m. Monday morning, he attempted to deploy a rain fly over his HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portaledge" portaledge to provide shelter from the rain and snow, but in so doing slipped out of the portaledge and fell approximately 15 feet down the face of the rock. He was able to ascend his rope and secure himself back to the portaledge, but was unable to properly erect the rain fly. During the night, the area received approximately four to six inches of snow with nighttime temperatures in the 20s. Rangers were notified of the possible hypothermic climber midday on Monday. Due to unfavorable weather, the park could not secure a helicopter to assist in the rescue and instead employed ground teams to respond. Rangers Aaron Smith and Ben Doyle and SAR crew member Matt Othmer immediately hiked to the summit of El Capitan to rescue the climber. Snow, wind, and ice slowed rescue attempts and they reached the summit at approximately 4:00 p.m. The team rigged anchors and lowered Smith approximately 230 feet to the climber. Smith found the climber to be suffering from exhaustion and mild hypothermia. He attached ropes to the climber and then ascended them back to the summit. Using a mechanical advantage pulley system, the team then hoisted the climber to the summit. After warming him, the team descended back to Yosemite Valley via hiking and rappelling and reached the Valley floor at approximately 10:00 p.m. The climber was transported to a local hospital and is in good condition. [Public Affairs Office] Friday, December 21, 2012 Yosemite NP Search In Progress For Missing Plane And Pilot A single-engine plane being flown by pilot N.W. was flying from Santa Barbara to the Mammoth Lakes Airport on the east side of the Sierra Nevada on Monday, December 17th, when it disappeared from radar near the North Dome area of the park. There were no passengers onboard. N.W. was reported missing by his family that evening after failing to arrive in Mammoth as planned. Search efforts were begun the next morning. Poor weather and lack of visibility hindered the air search; efforts to locate the plane via beacon receivers were unsuccessful. Several aircraft were able to search the area during daylight hours on Wednesday and Thursday, but no sign of the plane was found. Efforts to locate it are being impeded by a foot of fresh snow at higher elevations, with a winter storm forecast for Friday that will bring heavy snow and strong winds to the search area. It covers about 600 square miles in a rugged section of the park that is inaccessible by vehicle at this time of the year. Approximately 60 people are assisting with the air search, including search and rescue teams from the park, the California Highway Patrol, and the Civil Air Patrol. [Public Affairs Office] Friday, December 28, 2012 Yosemite NP Search For Missing Plane Suspended The search for a missing plane in the park and adjacent areas (originally reported in the December 21st edition) has been suspended. The single-engine plane was last detected via radar on the afternoon on Monday, December 17th, over the North Dome area of the park. Search efforts throughout the week have failed to yield clues or evidence regarding the plane's location. Over five feet of new snow have accumulated at the higher elevations of the park, including the search area. Strong winds have also created extremely hazardous conditions. Approximately 60 people assisted in the air search, including search and rescue teams from the park, California Highway Patrol, and Civil Air Patrol. Search teams flew approximately 8,000 linear miles over the search area. The plane was being flown by pilot Nicol Wilson, who is from the Santa Barbara area. There were no passengers onboard. He was reported missing by his family on the evening of December 17th after failing to arrive in Mammoth Lakes as planned. The park will resume search efforts in the spring, when weather and snow conditions permit. [Public Affairs Office] Thursday, February 21, 2013 Yosemite NP Former Employee Pleads Guilty To Theft Of Government Funds M.A.W., 61, of Midpines, pleaded guilty on February 4th to theft of government property from the park. The case was investigated by Investigative Services Branch special agents and prosecuted by assistant U.S. attorneys from the Eastern District of California. According to documents filed in the case, M.A.W. was employed by Yosemite National Park between October 2008 and June 2009. During that time, she charged $32,820 in personal expenses to government credit cards that had been issued to her for making official government purchases. M.A.W.'s sentencing hearing will be held on April 15th. She faces a maximum sentence of ten years in prison and a $250,000 fine. [United States Attorney's Office, Eastern District of California] Monday, May 6, 2013 Yosemite NP Injured Hiker Extricated From Top Of Lower Yosemite Fall On the afternoon of Saturday, April 27th, the park communication center received a transfer call from an injured hiker from the California Highway Patrol. F.C. reported that he was at the base of a waterfall in between some boulders and that he was badly injured and couldn't walk. F.C. couldn't identify his location, say how he'd become injured, or advise the location of the group he was with. Rangers were dispatched to the bases of Lower Yosemite, Bridalveil, Nevada and Cascade Falls to search for F.C. and other rangers were placed on standby to search other park waterfalls if necessary. Rangers found F.C.' hiking group within about an hour and learned that they'd hiked the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail and that F.C. had become separated from the group along the trail between the bottom of Upper Yosemite Fall and top of Lower Yosemite Fall. Hasty teams were sent up the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail and to Sunnyside Bench (on the opposite side of the river) to search for F.C.. A helicopter was ordered as a search platform and for a possible hoist mission. California Highway Patrol helicopter H-20 from Auburn, California, arrived around 5 p.m. and began an air reconnaissance of the area. The crew spotted F.C. on a ledge near the top of Lower Yosemite Fall after about an hour and successively inserted rangers Aaron Smith and David Pope by hoist to the ledge. The rangers packaged F.C. in a HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kendrick_Extrication_Device" KED and HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stokes_basket" Stokes litter. He was hoisted from the ledge, transferred to a medical helicopter at Ahwahnee Meadow, and flown to Doctor's Medical Center in Modesto. H-20 then hoisted the rangers from the ledge. Yosemite Valley District Ranger Jack Hoeflich served as the incident commander. [Jack Hoeflich, District Ranger] Tuesday, May 7, 2013 Yosemite NP Search Underway For Missing Hiker Rangers are conducting a search for K.S., 73, who has been missing since he set off on a day hike to Vernal Fall early last Sunday morning. K.S., an avid hiker from Edina, Minnesota, was staying at the Ahwahnee Hotel and left a note early Sunday morning informing the hotel staff that he was leaving for the hike early and expected to be back at the hotel by noon. K.S.'s dark colored North Face day pack was found near the guard rails at the top of Vernal Fall late on Sunday by National Park Service personnel. It did not contain his camera. Rangers are conducting the search along the Mist Trail corridor from Happy Isles to the top of Vernal Fall. About 30 people and a dog team are currently involved in the search effort. Visitors are being asked if they saw K.S. during the day on Sunday or Monday and are also being asked to check their photos for any images of the missing hiker. Anyone who saw him or moved his daypack is asked to call 209-372-0432. [Public Affairs Office] Wednesday, May 8, 2013 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker's Body Found And Recovered Rangers recovered the body of missing hiker K.S. near the base of Vernal Fall yesterday. K.S., 73, was fatally injured after falling from a cliff near the top of the waterfall. He had been in the park for several days, staying at the Ahwahnee Hotel and taking day hikes each day. Each morning, K.S. would leave a note with the concierge outlining his daily plan. On Sunday, his note said that he was planning to hike to the top of Vernal Fall via the Mist Trail and return to the hotel around noon. Hotel staff attempted to contact K.S. around 5 p.m. that evening, discovered that he had not returned, and notified the park. Rangers discovered his backpack near the guardrail at the top of Vernal Fall later that evening. A full-scale search and rescue operation was conducted on Monday, including several ground teams, a dog team, and a California Highway Patrol helicopter. The search area was concentrated around the Mist Trail. There was intermittent rain throughout the day, resulting in difficult search conditions. The helicopter's crew and ground team simultaneously spotted K.S.'s body around 6 p.m. that evening. The Mist Trail, closed during the search and rescue operation, has now been reopened. [Public Affairs Office] Tuesday, May 21, 2013 Yosemite NP Climber Killed In Fall On El Capitan M.R., a 38-year-old climber from Montana, fell about 230 feet while climbing the Muir Wall on El Capitan on the morning of Sunday, May 19th. He was about 2,300 feet up the route when he dislodged a large rock that severed his lead rope and caused him to fall 230 feet onto his haul line, which was being used to bring the party's equipment up the route. M.R.'s climbing partner was unable to immediately contact emergency services due to poor cell phone reception and began to yell for help. Several other climbers, along with a Yosemite Search and Rescue (YOSAR) volunteer, reported witnessing the rockfall in the area of M.R. and his partner and notified the Yosemite Emergency Communication Center. Rangers responded to El Capitan Meadow for observation and heard faint cries for help up on the wall, but had difficulty pinpointing the location of the spot where the calls were coming from. M.R.'s partner continued to try to call for help via his cell phone and was eventually able to contact dispatch. Rangers were then able locate the climbing party through a spotting scope and determined that M.R. was hanging motionless from the end of his rope. The park helicopter flew a technical rescue team to the summit of El Capitan around 12:30 p.m. Team members began rigging for a technical lowering of almost 800 feet to M.R.'s location. Rangers Jack Hoeflich and Ed Visnovske were lowered down the cliff face; they were able to reach him shortly thereafter and pronounced him dead upon arrival. They raised M.R. and his partner to the top of El Capitan and then flew both to the valley floor. Scott Jacobs was IC for the incident. [Scott Jacobs, Yosemite Valley Shift Supervisor] Tuesday, June 4, 2013 Yosemite NP Visitor Swept Over Nevada Fall A 19-year-old visitor from Sacramento was swept over the edge of Nevada Fall on Saturday afternoon. A.K., who came to the park with a church group, was seen swimming about 150 feet above the fall when he was swept away by the current. Ground searchers and a California Highway Patrol helicopter were immediately dispatched to the area and began searching for him, but have so far been unsuccessful. The Merced River, which feeds the 594-foot-high waterfall, was flowing at approximately 500 cubic feet per second this past weekend - a very swift and powerful spring flow of water. The water temperature was in the low 50's. Water levels and temperatures are expected to remain relatively the same throughout the week. The Mist Trail, from the footbridge above Emerald Pool to the top of Nevada Fall, is temporarily closed so that ground teams can continue searching the area below the waterfall. Three dog teams and approximately 20 personnel are searching the area for any signs of A.K. [Public Affairs Office] Tuesday, June 4, 2013 Yosemite NP Climber Killed By Falling Rock F.K., 28, of London, England, was climbing on the East Buttress of El Capitan around 2 p.m. on Sunday afternoon when he was struck by a rock that fatally injured him. F.K. and his climbing partner were about 600 feet up the climbing route when a block estimated to measure about one foot by two feet fell about 150 feet and hit F.K. Climbers immediately below him called dispatch by cell phone and reported the incident. Rangers reached him around 4 p.m. and pronounced him dead. [Public Affairs Office] Thursday, June 6, 2013 Yosemite NP Four Visitors Seriously Injured In Two Accidents Five visitors were injured in two accidents that occurred in the park this past Saturday, four of them seriously. On Saturday morning, two motorcyclists ran into each other in a head-on collision near Porcupine Creek Campground on the Tioga Road, causing traumatic injuries to both. One suffered a broken arm and head injuries, including skull fractures and a HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subarachnoid_hemorrhage" subarachnoid bleed, and was flown in the park's helicopter to a local hospital; the other suffered a severely broken foot and was transported to the Yosemite Valley Medical Clinic via ambulance. Both riders were wearing helmets. Later that evening, a vehicle heading west on Big Oak Flat Road near Crane Flat Campground went off the road and down a steep 25 foot embankment and hit a large tree. All three occupants were injured - one suffered a possible detached sternum and thoracic and abdominal injuries and was flown to a local hospital; one suffered abdominal injuries and was taken by ambulance to a local hospital; and one suffered a sprained right knee and was released at the scene. Ambulances from Yosemite Valley, Crane Flat, and Tuolumne County all responded. An investigation into the cause of the accident is underway. [Jack Hoeflich, Valley District Ranger, and Jay Shields, Mather District Ranger] Thursday, June 6, 2013 Yosemite NP Investigation Underway Into Domestic Assault Rangers received a report of a possible assault at the Tamarack Flat Campground at 2:30 a.m. on Sunday, June 2nd. Responding rangers discovered a campsite being shared by several families. All the men in the group had been drinking and were involved in the altercation. One suffered a minor injuries; another left the scene with his family before rangers arrived. Investigation revealed that the man who left the scene was the sole aggressor and that he'd assaulted his wife and two other men at the campsite. They also determined that assailant had left the park with his wife and children and had headed back to Southern California. Rangers are working with law enforcement agencies in Southern California on the investigation. [Jack Hoeflich, Valley District Ranger, and Jay Shields, Mather District Ranger] Monday, June 10, 2013 Yosemite NP Ranger Medics Deliver Baby Dispatch received a call at 2 a.m. on June 5th reporting that a woman was experiencing abdominal pains at a park residence in Wawona in the southern portion of Yosemite. Rangers Heidi Schlichting, Chad Andrews, and Anna Mezera responded to the call. The rangers quickly discovered that the woman had begun to give birth and that a foot was presenting (the baby was in a breech position). Schlichting and Mezera, both paramedics, and Andrews, a park medic, immediately began attending to the woman. The baby was born within 20 minutes, but was having trouble breathing. Schlichting used a bag valve mask to resuscitate the baby; within minutes, the baby's breathing was stronger and core functions were good. Meanwhile, an ambulance from Oakhurst, about 20 minutes south of the park, was dispatched to the scene. Once the ambulance arrived, the mother and the baby were taken to a hospital in Fresno. Schlichting, a ranger for 6 years and a paramedic for 13 years, had delivered one baby previously in her career. "It all went so fast," Schlichting she said. "This is not something that happens very often and it was a great opportunity. I am glad I was able to help." [Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Tuesday, July 9, 2013 Yosemite NP Missing Plane And Pilot Found In High Country A single engine plane that was reported missing over the park last December has been located. The plane, which was largely intact, was spotted by a park visitor near Vogelsang High Sierra Camp on Saturday, July 6th. The Vogelsang area is in the park's rugged high country. Rangers hiked to the location of the plane on Sunday on Sunday and found the remains of N.W., the plane's pilot. He has been positively identified. N.W., who was flying from the Santa Barbara area to the Mammoth Lakes Airport on the east side of the Sierra Nevada, disappeared during a winter storm on December 17th. After extensive searching of the Yosemite high country, the search was suspended for the winter season. The search was resumed this spring and continued for the past several months. The park's helitack crew was greatly assisted by the California Highway Patrol, Civil Air Patrol, California Emergency Services, and YoDogs (canine search and rescue assistance) during the extensive search operation. Rangers will be removing the plane from the backcountry over the next several weeks. [Public Affairs Office] Friday, September 13, 2013 Yosemite NP Climber Rescued From El Capitan Park dispatch received an emergency call from a climber on the 22nd pitch of the Nose Route on El Capitan on the morning of September 10th. The caller reported that a climber from another climbing team, a three-person group from Spain, had fallen 50 feet while leading the Great Roof Pitch (21st pitch) and had been seriously injured. A Yosemite rescue team, including Yosemite helitak, was immediately assembled and flown to the summit of El Capitan via Helicopter 551, the park's contract helicopter. Ranger/medics Ed Visnovske and Chris Bellino were lowered approximately a thousand feet to the injured climber and found that he was in need of medical attention. They also found that he'd landed on his belayer, who'd been injured as well. The lead climber was packaged in a litter and lowered approximately 2,000 feet with Bellino to the base of El Capitan, where he received further medical care. The team at the summit of El Capitan then began lowering the injured belayer, the third member of the climbing team, and Visnovske approximately 2,000 feet to the base of El Capitan. During the rescue operations, a thunderstorm developed, making rescue operations difficult. Because of smoke impacts from the nearby Rim Fire, helicopter operations also could not be carried out after 7 p.m. The rescue team at the summit of El Capitan was therefore forced to bivouac overnight and return to the Valley floor in the morning. [Jack Hoeflich, Yosemite Valley District Ranger and Incident Commander] Wednesday, November 27, 2013 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker Found After Extended Interagency Search Park dispatch received a report of an overdue hiker in the Foresta area around 6:30 p.m. on Saturday, November 23rd. The hiker, a 60-year-old long-time resident of Foresta, a small community along the western portion of the park that can only be accessed via Highway 120 through the park, left her residence early that morning to hike a portion of the Old Coulterville Road, planning to return later that morning. When she failed to show up, her family reported her missing. Immediately upon receiving the call, a small hasty team was sent to the location to conduct an initial search of the area. Search teams discovered the woman's jacket on the side of the trail, but found no other sign of her. Nighttime temperatures over the weekend hovered near freezing, with daytime temperatures remaining in the mid 50's, so a full-scale search was launched the following morning when the hiker still had not returned. Search personnel including Yosemite National Park rangers, several dog teams, a California Highway Patrol helicopter out of Fresno, and search and rescue personnel from the Madera, Fresno, Tuolumne, Kern, Merced, and Mariposa County Sheriff's Offices. Search efforts continued into the morning hours of Monday, November 25th, with approximately 70 people looking for the missing hiker. At approximately 11 a.m. dispatch received a telephone call from a family member who was searching within the search area, reporting that they'd found the woman about a mile and a half from the trailhead. Less than a half an hour later, rangers and park medics Ed Visnovske, David Pope and Aaron Smith and SAR crew member Cheyne Lempe arrived on scene and determined that she should be hoisted from the rocky slope on which she was found and transported to a local hospital. Although the exact cause of the accident remains unclear, her injuries indicate she fell down a cliff, causing her to become immobile. Suspected injuries included a collapsed lung, broken ribs, a contusion to her head, and possible hypothermia. Matt Stark, Mather subdistrict ranger, served as the incident commander. [Matt Stark, Mather Subdistrict Ranger] Wednesday, April 9, 2014 Yosemite NP Large Rockfall Closes Park Trail A rockfall in the Hetch Hetchy area of the park has closed the trail to Rancheria Falls east of Wapama Falls. At approximately 1:30 p.m. on March 31st, a large rockfall occurred from the cliff east of Wapama Falls above the Hetch Hetchy reservoir. No visitors were injured, but the trail was closed just east of the Wapama Creek footbridges for safety purposes and because of boulders preventing access beyond Wapama Falls. Roughly 16,000 tons (5,500 cubic meters) of rock fell from a source about 500 feet (150 meters) above the base of the cliff. Rock debris hit the slope below the cliff, breaking into numerous boulders, crushing trees, and creating a small dust cloud. Boulders completely covered the slope and many more tumbled into the reservoir. A section of the trail about 400 feet long was destroyed in the main impact area. Hikers can still access Wapama Falls starting from O'Shaughnessy Dam. The trail to Rancheria Falls just after Wapama Falls will be closed until further notice. The park is working to reopen the trail at a later date. [David Miyako, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, April 28, 2014 Yosemite NP Rangers Rescue Injured Climber On the morning of Sunday, April 20th, park dispatch received an emergency call from a member of a group getting ready to climb the Regular Route on Upper Cathedral Spire in Yosemite Valley. The caller reported that the lead climber in a party above them had fallen while leading the route's second pitch and that he was unable to move and needed medical attention. A Yosemite rescue team, supported by California Highway Patrol (CHP) helicopter H-40 out of Fresno, was immediately assembled and flown to the location of the injured climber, a 26-year-old man from Palo Alto. Simultaneously, Yosemite climbing ranger Ben Doyle and rescuer Josie Mckee ascended fixed ropes to the injured climber. Rangers David Pope and Jack Hoeflich were lowered to the injured climber via hoist and provided onsite medical attention. He'd fallen approximately 30 feet, hit a ledge, and sustained injuries to his back. He was hoisted to the CHP helicopter and flown to El Capitan Meadow, where he was transferred to a medical helicopter and then flown to memorial hospital in Modesto. The rangers and uninjured climber rappelled back to the valley floor. Supervisory Valley Ranger Chris Bellino served as the incident commander for this rescue. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Monday, May 19, 2014 Yosemite NP Injured Climber Rescued From El Capitan Park dispatch received an emergency call from a climber in a party on the Salathe Route on El Capitan around 1 p.m. on Saturday, May 10th. The climber, who was approximately 1,000 feet up on the route, reported that he was down-climbing when he pulled a large rock from the wall that was approximately the size of a small refrigerator and that it fell from his location and struck another climber approximately 200 feet below him on the same route. That climber, a 45-year-old Australian man, sustained injuries to his lower extremities and was unable to move. The lead climber from the other party who pulled the block loose sustained minor injuries to his ankle. Rangers David Pope and Aaron Smith arrived on scene via fixed ropes on the route about two hours later. The injured climber, located on a feature known as the Heart Ledges, received medical attention, was packaged in a litter, and was lowered to Yosemite Valley with Pope as the litter attendant. Smith, along with Cheyne Lempe, Everett Phillips, and Bud Miller from Yosemite SAR, then assisted the victim's climbing partner to Yosemite Valley via rappel. Once on the ground, the injured climber was transported via ground ambulance to a local hospital for medical treatment. The victim's partner sustained no injuries during the incident. The climber who pulled the rock loose was able to self-extricate. Supervisory Valley Ranger Chris Bellino served as the incident commander for this rescue. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Thursday, June 5, 2014 Yosemite NP Visitor Survives Plunge Into Yosemite Falls Around noon on Wednesday, May 28th, park dispatch received an emergency call from a group of backpackers who reported that one of their number had fallen into the Middle Cascade of Yosemite Falls. The victim, a 22-year-old man from Union City, California, was on a backpacking trip with three of his friends. When they stopped on their return trip at the Middle Cascade at the base of Upper Yosemite Fall, he fell into the water while reaching for his sunglasses. He was swept several hundred feet through the 675-foot-high Middle Cascade into an eddy in a pool of water, where he was able to climb onto a large boulder in the middle of the cascade. Immediately upon receiving the call, a Yosemite search and rescue team was dispatched to the location of the incident along the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail. At the same time, the park's contract helicopter was ordered out for a reconnaissance flight. With members of the initial ground team acting as spotters from the edge of the gorge, the helicopter inserted Ranger Ed Visnovske via short haul to the man's location. He was found to be slightly hypothermic, but otherwise uninjured. Visnovske and the man were then short hauled to Yosemite Valley, where the man declined medical treatment. Yosemite Valley District Ranger Jack Hoeflich was IC for this rescue. Click on the link below for a video of the rescue. Note that it takes a while before the short-haul rescue gets underway. HYPERLINK "https://docs.google.com/a/contractor.nps.gov/file/d/0B7WHSnk88oevNm9pZWxJVkwtQVk/edit" [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, June 27, 2014 Yosemite NP Injured Climber Rescued From Sentinel Rock On Tuesday, June 17th, dispatch received a 911 call from an injured rock climber at the base of the Chounard-Herbert climbing route on Sentinel Rock in Yosemite Valley. The climber, a 30-year-old man from Bend, Oregon, said that he'd taken a 35-foot fall on the first pitch of the route, that he'd suffered injuries to his lower extremities, and that he was unable to self-rescue. A ground response team consisting of Yosemite Search and Rescue team members Everett Phillips, Matt Othmer, Ken Kreis, and Buck Yedor was dispatched to the scene. The park's contract helicopter was also ordered for a reconnaissance flight and potential short haul mission. Following a reconnaissance flight, the helicopter lowered rangers Jack Hoeflich and David Pope and their extrication equipment via short haul to a ledge approximately 250 feet below the injured climber. Hoeflich climbed to the man and fixed ropes for Pope and additional ground responders. The team, including Hoeflich, Pope and SAR personnel, packaged the injured man in a litter and lowered him with Pope back to the insertion ledge. The helicopter returned and short-hauled Pope and the man to the Ahwahnee Meadow in Yosemite Valley, where he was taken to Yosemite Valley Medical Clinic. The remaining team members descended to the valley via the climber's approach. The mission was complicated by the steepness of the north face of Sentinel Rock, gusty winds, high rockfall potential, and the relative position of the sun and cliff face, which caused the helicopter to be in direct sunlight while the short haulers were in the shadow of the cliff. Ranger David Hahn was the incident commander for this rescue. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, September 3, 2014 Yosemite NP Fraud Indictment Returned Against Former Lodge Employee Following a two-year-long investigation by the Investigative Services Branch, a federal grand jury returned a six-count indictment on August 28th against J.W., 34, former resident of Yosemite, California, charging him with wire fraud, aggravated identity theft, and taking property from Yosemite Lodge. Between October 2011 and December 2012, J.W., who was then assistant manager at Yosemite Lodge, reversed hotel charges on existing and fabricated reservations. He then directed the hotel to credit his and his wife's personal accounts rather than the account of the person whose name appeared on the reservation. In total, J.W. manipulated approximately 50 reservations. He stole and embezzled and defrauded the hotel out of over $87,000 in funds to which he was not entitled. [Investigative Services Branch] Monday, September 8, 2014 - REVISED Yosemite NP Visitors Evacuated By Helicopter Due To Fire A wildfire that started early yesterday afternoon east of Half Dome quickly grew to 700 acres and forced the helicopter evacuation of about 100 hikers from the top of Half Dome, Little Yosemite Valley and surrounding trails. There were no reported injuries or structures affected by the wildfire. The cause of the fire is still under investigation. Throughout the afternoon, seven helicopters, an airplane, and ground crews worked to extinguish the fire. The area, which is at an elevation of about 7,000 feet, features rugged terrain. Ground access requires a several mile hike to the area affected by the fire. Yosemite National Park firefighters are working with fire crews from Cal Fire, Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Parks, Mariposa County Fire, California Highway Patrol, and U.S. Forest Service. There are over 100 firefighters dedicated to the fire, with more resources en route. Yosemite National Park remains open and all facilities within Yosemite Valley. Trails near the Half Dome area, the Little Yosemite Valley area (a backcountry camping area near Half Dome), Merced Lake and Sunrise High Sierra Camps, Clouds Rest, and Echo Valley remain closed due to fire activity. All roads leading into Yosemite remain open as well. Visitors are urged to check the park's website to get updated information in the smoke impacts to Yosemite National Park. Updated information can be found at HYPERLINK "http://www.nps.gov/yose" www.nps.gov/yose. [Kari Cobb, Public Affairs Officer] Friday, October 24, 2014 Office Of Communications Investigation Underway Into Vandalism At Multiple Parks The National Park Service is investigating reports of vandalism - acrylic painting on rocks - in at least ten national parks in Arizona, California, Colorado, Oregon, and Utah. Details are not yet available because the case is under investigation, but the vandalism is believed to have occurred in the following parks (asterisks indicate that confirmation is pending at a particular area) - Grand Canyon*, Yosemite, Death Valley, Sequoia-Kings Canyon*, Joshua Tree*, Rocky Mountain*, Crater Lake, Bryce Canyon*, Zion and Canyonlands. Said a Washington Office spokesperson: "There are forums for artistic expression in national parks because national parks inspire artistic creativity. These images are outside that forum and outside the law." The link below is to a representative media report on the investigation. HYPERLINK "http://gazette.com/vandalism-investigated-at-10-national-parks-including-rocky-mountain-national-park/article/1540003" Thursday, October 30, 2014 Office of Communications Suspect Identified In Vandalism At Eight National Parks A 21-year-old New York State woman, C.N., has been identified as the primary suspect in recent vandalism cases that affect eight national parks in the western United States. National Park Service investigators have confirmed that images were painted on rocks and boulders in Yosemite National Park, Death Valley National Park, and Joshua Tree National Park, all in California; Rocky Mountain National Park and Colorado National Monument, both in Colorado; Crater Lake National Park, in Oregon; Zion National Park and Canyonlands National Park, both in Utah. Investigators continue to collect evidence of the crimes and conduct interviews and are consulting with the U.S. Attorney's Office about potential charges. The image in Rocky Mountain National Park was reported to the park and removed in late September before similar images were found in the other national parks. Ice and snow now cover the image at Crater Lake National Park, and it may not be accessible for assessment and clean up until next summer. An image in Yosemite National Park was removed by an unknown person or persons. If people visiting these parks come upon these images, they should contact the nearest park ranger with information about the image location. Visitors should not attempt to remove the images. The National Park Service was contacted on October 20th about this vandalism case. The investigation began immediately. [Jeffrey Olson] Tuesday, March 24, 2015 Yosemite NP Missing Hiker Found After Extended Search Missing visitor M."M."D., the subject of a multi-day search, was found late yesterday morning in a boulder field east of Lower Yosemite Fall. M.D. was spotted by visitors on the Yosemite Valley Loop Trail. They recognized him from a missing persons flyer that they'd seen. He was found approximately a quarter mile east of the Lower Yosemite Fall trail in a large boulder field below Sunnyside Bench. M.D. sustained multiple injuries and was taken to a local hospital by ambulance. M.D. was reported missing by a group of friends on the night of Saturday, March 21st, after a short hike to Lower Yosemite Fall. Approximately 50 search and rescue crew members had been searching for him since the initial report was received. The park received assistance from the Madera, Tuolumne, Mariposa, and Marin County search and rescue teams and the Auburn office of California Highway Patrol. [Public Affairs Office] Monday, August 17, 2015 Yosemite National Park (CA) Two Killed By Falling Tree Limb A limb from an oak tree fell in Upper Pines Campground in Yosemite Valley around 5 a.m. Friday morning, striking a tent in which two young people were sleeping. Rangers responded to the campground to provide medical assistance, but found that both had died. The names, ages, and places of residence of the victims are not being released. The incident remains under investigation. [Submitted by Scott Gediman, Public Affairs Officer] Wednesday, May 3, 2017 Yosemite NP Woman Killed By Falling Tree In Half Dome Village A woman was struck and killed by a falling tree in Half Dome Village in Yosemite Valley on the morning of Sunday, March 5th. D.R.T.B., 20, from Ceres, California, was in the park working for a company contracted by the park concessioner. The accident occurred during a period of heavy falling snow and high winds. Half Dome Village, formerly Curry Village, is an area that has tent cabins and wooden cabins that are utilized by park visitors and park employees. Source: Public Affairs Office, Yosemite NP. Wednesday, May 10, 2017 Yosemite NP Search In Progress For Missing Hiker Rangers are searching for A.S., who was last seen in Yosemite Valley on the morning of Wednesday, May 3rd. A.S., an active member of the U.S Navy, traveled to Yosemite alone, and arrived in the park on Monday, May 1st. He was staying at Housekeeping Camp and neighbors in the camp told rangers that he would go out for day hikes each day. He would hike alone and return to Housekeeping Camp in the evening. A.S. is 24 years old, 5'6" tall, and weighs 128 pounds. He has black hair, brown eyes, and may have been wearing Aeropostale, Abercrombie, or Hollister brand clothing. He works at the Navy Medical Center in Portsmouth, Virginia. Operations include rangers looking on and around popular hiking trails, searches by YODOGS SAR dogs, and searches by a helicopter from the California Highway Patrol out of Fresno, California. Search efforts have concentrated on popular hiking trails that originate in Yosemite Valley such as the Upper Yosemite Fall Trail and the Mist Trail. About 30 people are currently involved in the search. Source: Press Release, Yosemite NP. Wednesday, June 21, 2017 Yosemite NP El Portal Road Reopens Following Clearance Of Rockfall A major rockfall that occurred around noon on June 12th led to the closure of the El Portal Road and Arch Rock Entrance. The rockfall was reported inside the park boundary about two miles east of the park line in El Portal. There were no reported injuries or damage to traveling vehicles. Park road crews have been working to clear the road and repair damage to it ever since. The road reopened on Sunday, June 18th. Visitors driving through the damaged section of the road are being advised to follow all road signs and drive with caution. The damaged section of road has been repaired with gravel and there may be dirt and debris in the roadway. Source: News Release, Yosemite NP. Wednesday, October 4, 2017 Yosemite National Park El Capitan Rockfalls Kill One, Injures Another On the afternoon of September 28th, a series of seven rockfalls occurred over a four-hour time span from the southeast face of El Capitan. A preliminary estimate for the cumulative volume of all seven rockfalls is about 16,000 cubic feet (450 cubic meters), or about 1,300 tons. The irregular "sheet" of rock that fell is estimated to be 130 feet tall, 65 feet wide, and 3 to10 feet thick. The source point is about 650 feet above the base of El Capitan, or about 1,800 feet above the floor of Yosemite Valley, which is at 4,000 feet in elevation. After the first rockfall, rangers and SAR team members entered the area looking for people at the base of the rockfall. Two people were found, one of whom had been killed and the other injured. The victims, a couple visiting the park from Great Britain, were in the park to rock climb, but were not climbing at the time of the initial rockfall. The woman was flown out of the park with serious injuries. All other people in the area have been accounted for and search efforts have concluded. Rockfalls are a common occurrence in Yosemite Valley. The park records about 80 rockfalls per year, but many more go unreported. The rockfall from El Capitan was similar in size and extent to other rockfalls that have occurred throughout the park. It has been 18 years since the last rockfall-related fatality in Yosemite National Park. In that incident, rock climber Peter Terbush was killed by a rockfall from Glacier Point on June 13, 1999. There have now been 16 fatalities and more than 100 injuries from rockfalls since park records began in 1857. Source: Yosemite NP. Wednesday, February 28, 2018 Yosemite National Park Missing Hiker Found After Multi-Day Search A hiker missing in the park since Tuesday, February 20th, was found by searchers on Friday, February 23rd A.C., who was backpacking alone, was spotted from a National Park Service helicopter around noon last Friday above Wapama Fall in the Hetch Hetchy area. A.C., who sustained minor injuries but was otherwise doing well, was reunited with family members During the last several days, A.C. stayed in his tent and was able to stay hydrated and had an adequate food supply. His preparedness and ability to make good decisions were key to his rescue and good health. Yosemite National Park would like to thank the California Highway Patrol, Bay Area Mountain Rescue, California Office of Emergency Services, Marin County Search and Rescue, Tuolumne County Sheriffs Office, El Dorado County Sheriffs Office, Contra Costa County Search and Rescue, Southern California Winter Ski team, and YoDogs (search dogs). Approximately 60 people participated in the search effort. Source: Yosemite news release. Wednesday, March 14, 2018 Yosemite National Park Follow-up On Rock Fall Fatality An English coroner's court has found that British climber A.F., 32, died while selflessly shielding his wife from a rockfall from El Capitan last September 27th. A.F. was seen running back to the rockfall to protect his wife, L.F., 28, and dived on top of her, saving her life. The two were on a week-long climbing trip to the national park with another British couple. The court quoted from the NPS report on the incident: "L.F. was walking approximately 50 meters behind Andrew when they heard the rocks begin to fall above them. Andrew yelled back to L.F. to run. As she began to run she lost her footing on the uneven terrain, causing her to fall to the ground. While on the ground L.F. began to hear large rocks strike the ground near her. After yelling to L.F. and witnessing her fall to the ground, Andrew ran back to L.F., who was still on the ground. Andrew lay his body on top of L.F., shielding her body from the rocks as they began to fall down on top of them. As the dust settled and the rocks stopped falling, L.F. saw Andrew was now lying beside her. L.F. was partially trapped by rocks on her legs. L.F. was able to successfully free herself and began shouting for help." Said the coroner in her findings: "Andrew was aware that his wife L.F. was in danger and took the loving and selfless act of protecting her from the fall using his own body to shield her from the rocks. In the event Andrew suffered fatal injuries and despite the emergency and rescue services being called it is clear the injuries were immediately unsurvivable." Source: _Shropshire Star_ (UK) news story. Wednesday, April 11, 2018 California Parks Storm Causes Flooding And Closures A "Pineapple Express" Pacific Ocean storm brought heavy rains to the West Coast last weekend, causing significant impacts to several NPS areas: Yosemite NP — Yosemite Valley was closed from Friday until noon on Sunday due to high water. Visitor facilities and concessions have since reopened. Water levels in the Merced River crested at 13.73 feet at Pohono Bridge, which is approximately four feet over flood stage. Park roads were from two to four feet underwater from Saturday afternoon through late Saturday night. Flood waters receded on Sunday morning. Park crews are working to clear water, rocks, and debris from valley roads. For updated 24-hour road and weather conditions for Yosemite National Park, please call 209-372-0200, press 1 and press 1 again. Updated information is also available on the park's website at www.nps.gov/yose. Sources: Yosemite National Park; Marin Independent Journal Wednesday, April 11, 2018 Yosemite National Park YouTube 'Star' Booted Out Of Park A rowdy camping trip that involved pitching tents atop a "Cool Bus" led to YouTube star L.P. getting kicked out of Yosemite National Park. At one point, L.P. and his friends were reportedly sitting inside the tents as the bus was moving. L.P. was cited for the unsafe operation of a motor vehicle and improper food storage before being asked to leave the park following noise complaints by fellow campers. L.P. posted a YouTube video Monday of his Yosemite trip that's received more than three million views. The video starts with L.P. waking up in a tent atop his bus in a Yosemite Valley parking lot. This exchange follows: "So, it was my birthday," L.P. tells a ranger, "and we just wanted to come to Yosemite and we got here at 4 a.m. and this was empty. So we just kind of parked here." "So," the ranger responds, "a couple of issues with that. If everyone who wanted to camp wherever they felt like it did, think of how trashed this place would be." L.P. avoided a ticket in that instance, but later received two others. Before the "YouTube sensation" was booted out of the park, he received an enthusiastic singing of "Happy Birthday" from a crowd of young fans who spotted his bus. L.P.'s YouTube channels have more than 21 million subscribers. Source: Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, June 6, 2018 Yosemite National Park Two Climbers Killed In Fall From El Capitan Two climbers — J.W., 46, of Boulder, Colorado, and T.K., 42, from Palmdale, California — were killed in a fall from the Free Blast route on El Capitan on Saturday, June 2nd. Rangers received numerous 911 calls reporting the incident around 8 a.m. that morning. This investigation is ongoing and no further details are available at this time. Source: Yosemite NP. Wednesday, June 6, 2018 Yosemite National Park Hiker Dies In Fall From Half Dome A hiker fell from the Half Dome cables on the afternoon of Monday, May 21st. He was on the Half Dome cables with another person during a thunderstorm when he slipped and fell. Rangers were notified of the fall. They soon arrived on scene and provided assistance to the second hiker. This was the first fatality on the Half Dome cables since 2011 and first visitor fatality in the park this year. Source: Yosemite NP. Wednesday, July 25, 2018 Yosemite National Park Yosemite Valley, Wawona Closing Today Due To Nearby Fire The 38,000-acre Ferguson Fire, which is burning along a broad swath of the Sequoia National Forest along the park's western border, is having a major impact on the park. Yosemite Valley and Wawona are closing to the public at noon today. These closures include all hotels, campgrounds, and visitor services in Yosemite Valley and Wawona. With the ongoing closure of Highway 140, park visitors can exit the park via Highways 120 and 41. The temporary closure is expected to last until Sunday. The Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias is also closed. Since the fire began on Friday, July 13th, several other park facilities and roads have been closed due to fire impacts and the need to support firefighting operations. These closures include the Glacier Point Road, Bridalveil Creek Campground, the Wawona Campground, the Merced Grove of Giant Sequoias and others. Highways 120 West and East and the Tuolumne Meadows area remain open at this time. Updated 24-hour road and weather conditions can be obtained 209-372-0200 (press 1 and press 1 again) and on the park's website at www.nps.gov/yose. Source: Yosemite National Park. Wednesday, September 5, 2018 Yosemite National Park Body Of Missing Hiker Found The body of a missing hiker was found on the next-to-last weekend of August. On August 11th, S.T., 48, was reported missing. An experienced backpacker, he had last been seen on July 25th at the Bridgeport Ranger Station, ten miles east of Yosemite on Highway 395. S.T., a former Army Ranger, was planning a Yosemite backpacking loop of about 40 miles out of the Twin Lakes area. Points on his itinerary included Robinson Creek, Crown Lake, Matterhorn Canyon, Smedberg Lake, Seavey Pass and Peeler Lake. S.T.'s parents became worried when he did not contact them after his trip was supposed to end, around August 8th or 9th and advised the park. Source: San Jose Mercury News. Wednesday, September 12, 2018 Yosemite National Park Teen Falls To Death While Trying To Take Selfie An 18-year-old hiker died on Wednesday, September 5th, after falling off a cliff at 600-foot-high Nevada Fall. The teen was identified as Israeli national T.F. T.F.'s mother said that he slipped while trying to take a selfie at the edge of the fall. Source: ABC News. Wednesday, October 31, 2018 Yosemite National Park Two Die In Fall From Taft Point The bodies of a man and woman were found below Taft Point on the morning of October 25th. It's believed that they fell from the point, which rises 3,000 feet from the valley floor. Rangers have recovered the bodies, but at present their identities are unknown. It's also unknown when the incident occurred. Taft Point is a remote location known for its spectacular views. Giant fissures in the granite rock drop directly down to the valley floor, and a granite ledge hanging over the valley is a favorite photo spot. A photo of a couple getting engaged at the point went viral in social media last week. Source: San Francisco Chronicle. Wednesday, November 7, 2018 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter: _Yosemite NP_ — The man and woman who fell to their deaths from Taft Point have been identified as V.V., 29, and M."M."M., 30. Rangers determined that they fell about 800 feet. The couple ran a travel blog called "Holidays And HappilyEverAfters" and boasted an Instagram following of more than 17,800 people. Although the cause of their deaths has not been determined, family and friends believe that they were talking a selfie of themselves on the cliff edge. Source: Washington Post. Wednesday, December 5, 2018 National Park System Parks Afflicted By Recent Weather Woes Issues related to severe weather of one type or another have been reported at several areas since the last issue of this newsletter: Yosemite NP — Heavy rains at the end of November led CalTrans to close Route 140 for a couple of days from a point south of Briceburg to El Portal due to the risk of slides in areas burned by last summer's Ferguson Fire. The El Portal Road remained open, though. No significant damage was reported. Source: KFSN TV News. Wednesday, January 9, 2019 National Park System Shutdown Leads To Unprecedented Problems In Many Parks _Fortune_ — The magazine offers a general overview of the problems that the shutdown is causing, with reference to the problems noted above at Joshua Tree NP, the trash and human waste piling up in Yosemite NP due to overused restrooms with few employees to maintain them, and the state of Utah paying to keep five national parks there open. It quotes a resident of Yosemite on the situation there: "It's so heartbreaking. There is more trash and human waste and disregard for the rules than I've seen in my four years living here." Source: Fortune. _Sacramento Bee_ — The paper reports that Yosemite NP has closed the Wawona and Hodgson Meadows campgrounds and the Mariposa Grove of redwoods after finding human feces and urine beside Wawona Road. Also noted: Parts of Sequoia and Kings Canyon NPs have been closed due to overflowing trash and traffic jams; Pinnacles NP has closed its eastern gate because of trash and heavy traffic; and Arches and Canyonlands NPs have been closed because there's nobody to clear snow-covered roads. Source: Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, January 9, 2019 Yosemite NP Man Dies After Fall Into Merced River A man died after suffering a head injury above Nevada Fall on Christmas Day. His body was retrieved from the water in the Silver Apron area — a large, sloping granite area that the Merced River flows over that's located between Vernal Fall and Nevada Fall just east of Yosemite Valley. After receiving a 911 call, rangers were on scene in less than an hour and the man was removed from the water. Medical attention was provided, but he died from his injuries. Source: Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, January 16, 2019 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter: Yosemite NP — The man who died on Christmas Day after falling down a steep river canyon has been identified as J.B.C., 32, a fitness trainer and weightlifter who lived in Los Angeles and worked as a registered nurse at Cedars-Sinai medical center in Los Angeles. He died of head injuries at Emerald Pool, an area along the Merced River between Vernal Fall and Nevada Fall, just off the Mist Trail, a steep but popular hiking area in Yosemite. He evidently slipped and fell down Silver Apron, a photo of which appears in the story. Source: Paul Rogers, The Mercury News. Wednesday, January 23, 2019 Yosemite National Park Two Hikers Rescued From North Dome Crevasse Two English hikers were rescued from a crevasse on the east side of North Dome on January 16th after they became lost in the snow while hiking. The hikers, who were wedged into the crevasse, were spotted from and rescued by the crew of a California Highway Patrol helicopter. The hikers told first responders that they lost the trail in the snow while attempting to descend to Yosemite Valley and got trapped in the crevasse. They couldn't continue downward because of a 2,000-foot vertical drop and also couldn't go back the way they came because of steep, snow-covered ground. They then called 911 from a cellphone. The CHP crew worked with the Yosemite search and rescue team to hoist the men out of the crevasse and get them to safety. They were taken to Ahwahnee Meadow, where park paramedics treated the two cold and wet men. Source: Hope Miller, KCRA News. Wednesday, January 23, 2019 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter: Yosemite NP — Autopsies conducted on V.V., 29, and his wife, M.M., 30, have revealed that both were intoxicated at the time of their 800-foot fall from Taft Point last October. Source: Louis Casiano, Fox News. Wednesday, February 13, 2019 Yosemite NP Winter Storm Causes Serious Damage Park facilities and housing units and the park's ski area were all significantly impacted by the heavy snowfall the park received last week — about 18 to 24 inches between Monday and Wednesday, with more in the high country. Impacts included toppled trees, power outages, temporary road closures, damage to park campgrounds, and the temporary closure of the park's ski area. Approximately 50 guest cabins at Half Dome Village and 50 to 70 concessioner housing units were damaged or destroyed. About 150 concession employees have been affected and arrangements are being made to provide them temporary housing. Closures include visitor services at Half Dome Village, Upper Pines Campground (where trees fell on restrooms), and the Yosemite Ski and Snowboard Area. The park and the park concessioner are working together on completing damage assessments, finding alternative housing for employees, and repairing damage to park facilities. No financial estimate of damage has yet been made. Temporary road closures and delays may be possible over the next several days along Big Oak Flat Road (Highway 120 West), Wawona Road (Highway 41), and El Portal Road (Highway 140) inside the park. Despite all the damage, the park remains open. Source: Gina Clugston, Sierra News Online. Wednesday, February 27, 2019 Yosemite NP Woman Fatally Injured While Hiking On Closed Trail On Sunday, February 24th, X.W., 56, was hiking the park's Mist Trail when she was struck and severely injured by falling rock and ice. She succumbed to her injuries soon thereafter. The Mist Trail follows the Merced River on a steep climb to Vernal Fall and is closed in winter due to icy and hazardous conditions. A gate and sign are placed at the trailhead to stop visitors from entering. X.W. ignored the signs and went around the gate. The incident is currently under investigation. Source: Amy Graff, San Francisco Chronicle. Wednesday, March 20, 2019 Yosemite NP Late Openings Likely Due To Winter Storm Damage The park has announced that there will be late seasonal openings for facilities throughout the park due to the exceptionally heavy snowpack and the extensive damage to many park facilities caused by winter storms. The park received above-average snowfall this past winter. The March 1st snow survey showed that both the Merced and Tuolumne River drainages recorded total snow amounts at 143 percent of normal (the final snow survey of the year will be conducted on April 1st). Several significant storm systems in January and February produced high amounts of snow, which resulted in temporary road closures, rock and debris slides, and falling trees. These storms also caused extensive damage to facilities throughout the park. Damage to facilities includes trees falling on and damaging campground restrooms, compromised utilities systems, damaged or destroyed tent cabins, and falling trees impacting campsites, parking areas, hiking trails, and roads. Although the park will begin plowing the Glacier Point and Tioga Roads in April, neither road will likely be open before Memorial Day. Deep snow along Tioga Road portends a late opening. Several facilities operated by Yosemite Hospitality, the park's primary concessioner, are also expected to open later than usual. Source: Yosemite NP. Wednesday, April 24, 2019 National Park System Weekly Weather Impacts Update The increasing frequency of climate-change-related severe weather closures and incidents in NPS areas has warranted the creation of a weekly — or maybe intermittent — Servicewide summary: Yosemite NP — Hundreds of families who'd planned early spring camping trips in Yosemite have been forced to make other arrangements, as park crews are still repairing the damage from the most destructive winter season in recent memory. It may be weeks before Half Dome Village fully reopens. Two weeks into spring and the winter cleanup continues in several Yosemite Valley campgrounds. Heavy snow toppled trees, damaged bear boxes, shattered picnic tables and pulled campfire rings with concrete footings out of the ground. The story includes a video. Source: George Warren, CBS Sacramento. Wednesday, May 1, 2019 National Park System Weekly Weather Impacts Update The increasing frequency of climate-change-related severe weather closures and incidents in NPS areas has warranted the creation this intermittent Servicewide summary: Yosemite NP — The recovery from last winter's heavy snows continues. Current estimates are that Glacier Point Road will be open by Memorial Day weekend and that Tioga Pass Road/Highway 120 will likely open in time for Fourth of July weekend. Campgrounds near Tuolumne Meadows in Yosemite are not likely to open until late July, even early August, and the season for the High Sierra Camps is at risk from such a small window of time available in a big snow year. Source: Tom Stienstra, San Francisco Chronicle. Wednesday, May 1, 2019 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter: Yosemite NP — A story with additional details about last year's falling death at Nevada Falls has been published in the _Sacramento Bee_. The victim, an 18-year-old Israeli visitor named Tomer Frankfurter, was hiking the Mist Trail with other international visitors he'd met on the park shuttle. He told them that he wanted to mimic photos that visitors commonly take of Telegraph Rock near Rio de Janeiro, then climbed over a cliff near the falls — despite warnings from the others. He soon yelled that he needed help; several people ran to him, grabbed his arms and wrists and attempted to pull him up. His arms became slippery with sweat, though, and his would-be rescuers were unable to hold onto him. Source: Bryant-Jon Anteola, Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, May 22, 2019 National Park System Weekly Weather Impacts Update The increasing frequency of climate-change-related severe weather closures and incidents in NPS areas has warranted the creation this intermittent Servicewide summary: Yosemite NP — Due to incoming winter storm systems, Glacier Point Road was closed to all vehicular traffic last Wednesday and was to remain closed through at least Sunday. The storms were produced by atmospheric rivers that the National Weather Service said would drop from 150 to 200 percent of precipitation normal for the month of May. Plowing this year has been unusually challenging due to the amount of snow that fell on the Sierras this past winter. In late April, the California Department of Transportation released a video with drone footage of its road crews plowing snow just outside the park that shows what a harrowing job it can be. Sources: CNN and the _Huffington Post_. Wednesday, June 26, 2019 National Park System Park Operating Status Summary A summary of recent openings, closures and other changes in the status of parks and their facilities: Yosemite NP — And over in California, Tioga Road reopened to all vehicles, including bicycles, on Friday, June 21st. The Tuolumne Meadows Visitor Center, Wilderness Center, and Tuolumne Meadows Campground remain closed. Opening dates for the 2019 season have not been determined. Source: Sierra News Online. Wednesday, August 7, 2019 Yosemite NP One Killed, Two Injured In Separate Falling Accidents A man died and two others were injured in three separate falls last week at popular tourist stops in the park. Two of the incidents took place at Bridalveil Fall, including one last Wednesday in which 21-year-old L.M. of Romania died. The other occurred on Monday. In both cases, the men hiked to the viewing platform below Bridalveil Fall, then scrambled up the boulder field toward the plunge pool area; in both cases, they slipped off the wet boulders and fell 20 feet to the base of the fall. A third incident occurred Thursday at Lower Yosemite Fall. In that instance, the visitor slipped off a boulder, fell into Yosemite Creek, and became trapped underwater between several rocks. The victim was able to escape with the help of bystanders. Over the last few years, there have been 23 documented incidents at Bridalveil Fall alone in which visitors have slipped and injured themselves. Source: Marilyn Castaneda, Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, September 18, 2019 Yosemite NP Woman Killed In Fall From Half Dome Chains A 29-year-old Arizona woman was killed on September 5th when she fell more than 500 feet while climbing the cable portion of the trail up to the summit of Half Dome. The accident is under investigation; the cause has not yet been determined. Half Dome, which rises nearly 4,800 feet above Yosemite Valley, is one of the most popular hiking destinations in the park, so much so that a permit is needed to hike it during prime season. This is the ninth death to occur on the cables since they were erected in 1919. In May 2018, another hiker died after falling from the cables. In that case, the hiker was out during a thunderstorm, when wet conditions exacerbate the slipperiness of smooth granite. Source: Joshua Tehee, Fresno Bee. Wednesday, December 4, 2019 Yosemite NP Well-Known Climber Rescued After Bad Fall On El Capitan E.H., an elite climber who took a self-described "bad fall" on El Capitan last Sunday, credits "Free Solo" star Alex Honnold and other climbers with her rescue. =, who posted a photo of herself from her hospital bed at Community Regional Medical Center in Fresno, thanked Honnold and other climbers for coming to her aid. The Oscar-winning 2018 documentary "Free Solo" covered Honnold's successful campaign to be the first person to climb El Capitan without a safety rope. The 33-year-old E.H., a five-time U.S. sport climbing champion, free-climbed a route on El Capitan in 2015. She also has climbed Mount Everest as well as peaks in Nepal, China, Morocco and Crimea. Source: Don Sweeney, Sacramento Bee. Wednesday, January 15, 2020 Yosemite NP Park Staff, Visitors Struck By Stomach Illness At least a dozen people in Yosemite have fallen ill with gastrointestinal problems, prompting federal health officials to conduct widespread inspections of the park's food service facilities, including at the Ahwahnee Hotel. The National Park Service and the U.S. Public Health Service confirmed last Thursday that they launched an investigation into the origin of the reported illnesses after Yosemite Valley employees and visitors came forward this month with stomach issues. Federal officials said it was too early to identify the illness, or illnesses, or where it might have come from, but are working with the operator of Yosemite's many restaurants, snack shops and hotels, Philadelphia-based Aramark, to carry out an "extensive clean-up and disinfection" of food service areas in the valley. No dining facilities have been closed. Source: Kurtis Alexander, San Francisco Chronicle. Wednesday, January 22, 2020 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter. Yosemite NP — The park and the Public Health Service are working with Aramark, the operator of Yosemite's many restaurants, snack shops and hotels, to carry out an 'extensive clean-up and disinfection' of food service areas in the valley. No dining facilities have been closed. At least a dozen people were confirmed sick in the outbreak, reported in the last issue of this newsletter. Symptoms reported by most patients match those of norovirus, which is easily spread from person to person via direct contact, contaminated food, or contaminated surfaces and utensils. Symptoms include severe diarrhea, vomiting, nausea and stomach pain. According to an update from CNN last Friday, about 170 people — both visitors and employees — have been sickened. Most of the incidents occurred around the first week of January; the number of reported cases has since declined. Coral Beach, Food Safety News; Faith Karimi, CNN. Wednesday, February 12, 2020 West Coast Parks Winter Storms Hammer Parks Strong storms blowing in from the Pacific Ocean have caused closures and damaged facilities in at least two parks: Yosemite NP — High winds knocked down trees in the Sierra this past Sunday, forcing road closures in the park and contributing to widespread power outages. Wawona Road, a continuation of state Highway 41 from Wawona to Yosemite Valley, and Badger Pass Road were closed due to fallen trees as a result of high winds. In the mountain areas closer to Yosemite, the highest wind speeds reached 76 mph at Cascade Heights near North Fork at 7 a.m. Sunday. It was still blowing 40 to 50 mph there on Sunday afternoon. Drier weather is expected this week, which should help bring down rivers and restore access to isolated areas. Source: Larry Valenzuela, Fresno Bee. Wednesday, April 29, 2020 National Park System Coronavirus Response Update _Return Of The Natives_ — There have been reports from all over the world about animals that are normally rarely seen returning to the now empty streets of cities and other public places — including national parks. Yahoo News recently ran an article on wildlife "reclaiming" Yosemite; CBS News had one in the same vein that reported on the uptick in bear sightings in normally public places in Yosemite (a park biologist says that the bears are having "a party" with humans gone); The Guardian has a great illustrated piece on a pride of eight lions snoozing on a normally busy road in South Africa's Kruger National Park (they like the dry, warm ground); Wednesday, May 13, 2020 National Park System Coronavirus Response Update There was little news in the media on the parks' coronavirus responses last week. Summaries and links to articles on three of them follow: Yosemite NP — An estimated 90 shuttle bus drivers and park transportation workers who were laid off after the park closed to visitors in March are now facing eviction. The group of Yosemite Hospitality workers were told this week layoffs require them to leave Yosemite by May 21st. These are the first reported Yosemite evictions solely because of layoffs caused by the coronavirus pandemic and they come in spite of Governor Gavin Newsom's order calling for a statewide moratorium on evictions through May 31st. Source: Associated Press via Los Angeles Times. Additional information on the pandemic response can be found at these locations: * For articles on the reopening of the parks on a Systemwide basis, see "National Park System" below. * For CPANP actions related to coronavirus and the planned reopenings, see "Coalition Actions" below. * For information on the status of other parks in the system, go to the Service's "Active Alerts In Parks" webpage and use the search engine to find information on a particular site. Wednesday, August 5, 2020 Yosemite NP Hiker Seriously Injured After Off-Trail Travel at Bridalveil Fall On the afternoon of July 21st, the park received a 911 cell phone call from a bystander near the base of Bridalveil Fall. The caller reported that someone had slipped and fallen in the rocks, hit his head, and was unconscious and bleeding from the ear. Emergency responders found the subject, a man in his 60s, off the trail on a boulder next to a branch of Bridalveil Creek. Family members explained that, as a group, they had left the Valley Loop trail and scrambled up the Bridalveil Creek bed. The subject lost his footing and slipped, fell about three feet, hit the left side of his head and his left shoulder, and ended up unconscious, facedown with his head submerged in the creek. Family members pulled him out of the water and he regained consciousness within one to two minutes. Although he did not regain full alertness and orientation, with help from his family who at times "buddy" carried him, he was able to make his way downhill next to the creek. A few minutes' hiking time from the trail, the group descended onto a large boulder with steep drop-offs, which is where the search and rescue team members found them. The initial medical assessment indicated a suspected skull fracture and left clavicle fracture. The man was stabilized, packaged into a litter, and carried out. The litter extraction was risky for the rescue team, who, even wearing approach shoes with sticky rubber soles, were slipping on the polished dry granite. The rescue also included one belay of the litter through technical terrain. The man was transported by ambulance to El Capitan Meadow and transferred to an awaiting air ambulance, which flew him to an area trauma center. For the past decade, hiking and scrambling off-trail is the third leading cause of accidental fatalities in Yosemite (after water-related deaths and climbing fatalities). The area at the base of Bridalveil Fall is particularly treacherous — the falling water has polished the boulders and rocks to a surface as smooth as a granite countertop and the terrain is incredibly steep and has big drop-offs. From 2014 to 2019, 23 off-trail SAR incidents occurred in this area, seven of which were life-threatening, including one person who was paralyzed and another who did not survive his injuries. Most of the area at the base of Bridalveil Fall, including the traditional viewing platform and the treacherous boulder field above it, are closed due to construction. This incident occurred near, but outside of, the closed area. Every day, dozens of visitors are going around or over signed fencing into the closed area and off trail, endangering themselves and the trail crew workers who are actively rebuilding rock walls and trails and who at times are felling trees or operating heavy equipment. Source: Yosemite Search and Rescue (YOSAR). Wednesday, September 30, 2020 Yosemite NP Two Bitten By Rattlesnakes Two visitors were bit by rattlesnakes in separate incidents in late August. On August 26th, a rattlesnake bit a hiker who was fishing barefoot in the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne. The hiker had stepped onto a rock, causing it to shift under his weight, and suddenly a rattlesnake — apparently underneath the rock — bit him on his left foot. His wife went to go get help on her own after they tried hiking together. The husband was ultimately transferred to a park ambulance, where a paramedic treated him for dehydration, nausea and pain. The hiker was eventually flown to a Modesto hospital, where he was given two doses of the anti-venom CroFab. Three days later, a rattlesnake struck a hiker's left knee. One of the hiker's companions said that they were hiking by ankle-high shrubs, when the snake struck with no rattle, hiss, or any other sound. Another hiker with cell service called 911. They opted to apply a tourniquet but were told to remove it after they spoke with a park ranger-paramedic (applying a tourniquet to a limb that has been envenomated blocks blood flow and can lead to tissue damage). He was also later transferred to an air ambulance and received treatment for dehydration, nausea and pain, along with four doses of CroFab. He was hospitalized, but released a few days later. Source: David Oliver, USA Today. Wednesday, December 9, 2020 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter. California Parks — The resurgence of the pandemic in California has directly affected at least three national parks. In support of the California regional stay-at-home order in the San Joaquin Valley region, which went into effect this past Monday, Yosemite National Park is open for day use activities only, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.. Lodging and campgrounds are currently closed. Some services and facilities are limited, and shuttles are not operating. Consistent with the state's regional stay at home order, day use limits will be in place until local conditions change. Click here for the full story. Two areas at Golden Gate NRA have also been closed — Alcatraz Island and Fort Point. Sources: _Sierra Sun Times_; KRON News. Wednesday, January 27, 2021 Yosemite NP Park Closed By Powerful Winter Storm The park was closed last week due to a powerful windstorm that toppled trees and caused millions of dollars in damage to vehicles, homes and park facilities. No injuries were reported as a result of the "Mono" wind event, which swept across the region in east-central California last week and caused widespread power outages. The "high wind event" left "downed trees, debris and damage to park facilities," Yosemite officials tweeted Tuesday. Later that day, the park said it was assessing damage assessments, clearing trees and repairing facilities. Among the trees knocked down were two giant sequoias. Damage to facilities, employee homes and vehicles ran into the millions of dollars, with the park's Wawona community hit hardest. The event was the biggest in terms of wind speed and damage in at least 25 years. The park will remain closed at least until Saturday, January 30th, conditions permitting. When it reopens, it will be open 24 hours per day. Upper Pines Campground will open on February 8th. Yosemite Valley Lodge and The Ahwahnee will open on February 5th. Visitors will be able to enter the park using El Portal Road (Highway 140), Big Oak Flat Road (Highway 120 from the west), and Hetch Hetchy Road. Areas south of Yosemite Valley (including Badger Pass, Wawona, Mariposa Grove, South Entrance, and Wawona Road) will remain closed until further notice. (1). Source: Paul Davidson, _USA Today_. (2). Source: _Sierra Sun Times_. Wednesday, February 3, 2021 National Park System Follow-ups On Previously Reported Incidents Below are short follow-ups on incidents previously reported in this newsletter. Yosemite NP — The park continues to recover from the major wind event that struck the area on January 19th. While most of Yosemite reopened to visitors on Monday, the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias will remain closed as clean up continues from winds that toppled at least 15 mature giant sequoias. Based on size and conditions, officials estimated that the trees that fell, including at least one monarch, were likely 1,000 to 2,000 years old. Despite the losses, none of Mariposa Grove's 15 named sequoias fell. Source: Paul Schlesinger, KTXL. Wednesday, July 14, 2021 Yosemite National Park Hiker's body found J.Y., 64, was found dead in LeConte Falls on June 25. He was reported to be hiking alone from White Wolf to Glen Aulin via the Grand Canyon the Tuolumne. The National Park Service is investigating the incident and asking for any information the public may have. Sources: USA Today, Yosemite National Park Wednesday, July 14, 2021 Yosemite National Park Lightning starts series of small fires 14 fires were ignited by lightning in the park between Monday, June 28 through July 2. The King, Pothole, Fork, and Harden Fires were extinguished due to risks to visitor safety and protection of park resources. A couple are being monitored that are burning in Wilderness areas. Source: Sierra Sun Times, follow-up also from Sierra Sun Times Wednesday, July 28, 2021 Yosemite National Park Hiker found deceased after attempt to hike Mount Clark F.Z. was reported missing on July 17 after he did not return to Yosemite Valley while on a day hike to Mount Clark from Happy Isles via an off-trail route from Bunnell Point. After a search of the area, his body was found on July 20 near the summit. Investigation into the incident is ongoing. Sources: Fresno Bee, CBS SF Bay Area, Press Democrat Wednesday, July 28, 2021 Yosemite National Park Backpacker missing A backpacker has been reported missing after taking a day hike to Red Peak Pass from his camp near Lower Merced Pass Lake on July 25. He has been identified as 72-year-old R.J. The NPS is seeking any information the public may have. Source: Your Central Valley Wednesday, August 11, 2021 Yosemite National Park Lightning storms cause multiple fires On July 30 and 31, lightning caused 10 small wildfires along Tioga Rd from White Wolf Campground southwest to Crane Flat, now collectively known as the Mather Complex. The fires range in size from 1/10th to 1/4 of an acre. Lightning on July 31 also started the Mono Fire, located near Ostrander Lake, and the Tiltill Fire, located near Tiltill Valley, north of Hetch Hechy. All are being suppressed using a "confine and contain" strategy, except the Tiltill Fire, which is at 1,610 acres and 45% contained as of August 10, and is being fully suppressed. There is currently a trail closure between Lake Vernon and Tiltill Valley. There are no current threats to infrastructure. Source: Sierra Sun Times (8/2), Sierra Sun Times (8/3), InciWeb (8/10) Wednesday, August 11, 2021 Follow-ups on Previously Reported Incidents Yosemite National Park — The search for Richard Judd, who went missing while day hiking to Red Peak Pass from a base camp in the Lower Merced Pass Lake area on July 25, has been scaled back to "limited continuous search mode." A day pack and other clues have been found and are being investigated. Source: Merced Sun Star Wednesday, September 22, 2021 Yosemite National Park Toxic algae in Tenaya Creek The park has warned that testing on Tenaya Creek yielded positive results for toxic algal blooms. Visitors have been warned to not enter or drink from Tenaya Creek and to report large algal blooms that are particularly bright, bubbly, strange-looking, or appear like haze in the water. Source: Fresno Bee Wednesday, September 22, 2021 Yosemite National Park Solo hiker missing On September 6, a 31-year-old set out to hike for four days from Hetch Hetchy to Lake Eleanor and back. He is reported to have had a red inflatable kayak with him. After overdue for 2 days, he was declared missing. The park is seeking information from the public. Source: Merced Sun-Star Wednesday, December 1, 2021 Yosemite National Park Girl injured by deer While other visitors were feeding a buck, a girl approached the group. Something startled the animal, resulting in it coming into contact with the girl. She ended up with cuts and abrasions on the her arm and chest from its antlers. She was treated at the Yosemite Medical Clinic and later received care at a nearby hospital. Source: Sierra Sun Times Wednesday, April 20, 2022 Yosemite National Park Suspect found guilty of sexual assault After a three-day trial, a U.S. Attorney announced that a 31-year-old was found guilty of several sexual abuse-related charges. The suspect was an employee of the concessioner living in Yosemite Valley at the time of the incident. The perpetrator entered the victim's cabin while the victim slept and began sexually assaulting him. The victim yelled for help from a neighbor, who helped remove the perpetrator from the cabin. The perpetrator will be sentenced on July 8, facing the possibility of life in prison and a $250,000 fine. Source: KMPH June 15, 2022 Yosemite National Park 30 incidents of graffiti On May 20, the NPS received multiple calls about graffiti on the Yosemite Falls Trail. Upon investigation, rangers found about 30 areas of graffiti sprayed along the trail, ranging from one-foot by one-foot to eight-feet by eight-feet. The park is looking for any information the public may have related to the incident. Source: CNN July 13, 2022 Yosemite National Park Wildfire near Mariposa Grove On July 7, a wildfire started next to the Washburn Trail near the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias. The grove was immediately evacuated. On July 8, the South Entrance and the Wawona area were evacuated and closed. As of July 12, the Washburn Fire was 3,221 acres and 22% contained, with 545 personnel assigned. Firefighters have wrapped some of the oldest sequoias with fire-resistant foil and as of July 12, no mature giant sequoias have been severely damaged. During a public meeting with local residents, Superintendent Cicely Muldoon said that the fire was human-caused and is still under investigation. Source: NPR, Inciweb, KRON4 July 27, 2022 Yosemite National Park Individual indicted for assault on officer On July 3, 2022, two family members engaged in a violent altercation in Housekeeping Camp. As law enforcement rangers tried to subdue one of the individuals, they refused to comply, resulting in a violent confrontation with one officer. The individual was eventually subdued after striking the ranger multiple times. The individual was placed in a patrol car for transport, but then slipped out of the restraints and became violent again. The rangers stopped the vehicle to restrain the individual and another ranger was headbutted. On July 14, a federal grand jury returned a two-count indictment for assaulting a federal officer. Source: The United States Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California July 27, 2022 Yosemite National Park Employee charged with filming other employee in shower An individual, a law enforcement officer in the park, was using a "community shower" on July 4, when they noticed an iPhone camera peaking over the side of the shower, pointed toward them. The individual shouted, got dressed, and utilized their dog to search the grounds for the suspect. The individual found a suspect hiding under an NPS vehicle, and the suspect allegedly told the individual "he just couldn't help himself." On July 19, the individual was charged with one count of filming with intent to violate a person's privacy and one count of committing an obscene act to breach the peace." The suspect is a maintenance employee. A plea has not yet been entered. Source: The Union Democrat July 27, 2022 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident: Update on wildfires As of July 24, the Washburn Fire was 79% contained at 4,856 acres with 1,330 personnel assigned. Wawona and the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias continue to be closed. Highway 41 is open with no stopping or parking from the southern boundary to Yosemite West. Source: Inciweb, Yosemite National Park August 10, 2022 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident As of July 30, the Washburn Fire was considered 100% contained at 4,886 acres. Wawona and the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias reopened, though the Wawona Campground remains closed. The park is asking the public for any information they might have about ignition of the fire, which has been deemed to have been human caused. Source: Inciweb August 24, 2022 Yosemite National Park Assault on trail On August 4, the NPS responded to a reported assault between two individuals near the start of the Mist Trail. A suspect was arrested and the park is now looking for anyone who may have witnessed or have information related to the incident. Source: myMotherLode.com On August 18, a federal grand jury returned a one-count indictment of domestic violence charged to a 59-year-old. On August 4, the suspect was witnessed in a verbal confrontation in which they grabbed their spouse by the wrist, and both fell to the ground. The suspect allegedly threatened to kill their spouse and then kill themself. Other visitors intervened in the incident. [Editor note: It is not clear from news reports whether this incident and the incident outlined above are the same one, but the likelihood is high.] Source: The United States Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California August 24, 2022 Yosemite National Park Two backcountry wildfires Two lightning-caused wildfires are burning in the backcountry, and are being monitored by staff. The Red Fire was discovered on August 4 between Red Creek and Illillouette Creek. As of August 22, the Red Fire was 760 acres. The Rodgers Fire was discovered on August 8, northwest of Rodgers Canyon and southwest of Pleasant Valley. As of August 22, the Rodgers Fire was 230 acres. A section of trail between Pate Valley and the Pacific Crest Trail is currently closed. Neither fire is threatening structures. Source: Sierra Sun Times, Yosemite National Park, Inciweb (Red, Rodgers) September 7, 2022 Yosemite National Park Famed climber accused of sexual assault On August 29, a 38-year-old who is a well-known professional rock climber was arrested and charged with committing sexual assault in the park over two days in August 2016. Source: SFGate September 7, 2022 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident As of September 5, the Red Fire was 5,518 acres. Trails from Glacier Point to Merced Pass Lake in the Illilouette drainage are currently closed. The Rodgers Fire was 2,368 acres. A segment of trail in the Rodgers Canyon area from Neall Lake to the junction with Table Lake is currently closed. A new fire was also discovered on September 4, northeast of Aspen Valley. As of September 5, the Aspen Fire was 19 acres and being fully suppressed. Source: Yosemite National Park September 18, 2022 Yosemite National Park New lightning fires Between September 5-10, lightning strikes in the park caused several fires, all less than 1/10th of an acre. All were contained or are being suppressed, including the Chiquito, Turner, Empire, Lukens, Wolf, Obselisk, Ranch, and Alder Fires. As of September 16, other wildfires (reported in previous Coalition Reports) in the park are as follows: The Rodgers Fire is 2,785 acres with 15 personnel assigned. The Red Fire is 8,364 acres with 197 personnel assigned. The Aspen Fire is 26 acres, has been fully suppressed, and is in patrol status. Source: Yosemite National Park, Inciweb (Rodgers, Red) October 5, 2022 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident As of September 23, all safety closures associated with the Red and Rodgers fires were lifted. The Red Fire was at 8,364 acres, the Rodgers Fire at 2,790 acres, and the Chiquito, Empire, and Alder Fires were all under patrol status at less than a quarter-acre. Source: Yosemite National Park November 2, 2022 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On October 28, a 32-year-old was sentenced to 12 years and four months in prison for several charges related to a sexual assault in April 2020. The individual, an employee of the concessioner, entered a cabin in employee housing, attacking someone who was asleep. During the struggle, the perpetrator attempted to penetrate the victim. The victim was able to call for help and nearby neighbors responded and removed the attacker. The individual was found guilty after a three-day trial in April 2022. Source: U.S. Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California December 14, 2022 Yosemite National Park Unhoused individual charged for squatting On December 1, a federal grand jury returned a six-count indictment against a 28-year-old individual. The person, a previously convicted felon on parole, is accused of breaking into a private residence in Wawona and residing there for several months in Summer 2021. Property was damaged and stolen, and a firearm with ammunition belonging to the individual (illegally due to previous convictions) was found inside the residence. The individual is also accused of giving false statements to law enforcement about taking up residence in the structure. The case was investigated by Yosemite National Park with assistance from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the U.S. Marshals Service, the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, the California Department of Justice's Bureau of Forensic Services, and the Madera County Sheriff's Office. Source: U.S. Attorney's Office Eastern District of California Wednesday, January 11, 2023 Yosemite National Park Atmospheric river event On January 4, many public lands managers preemptively closed due to the prediction of an atmospheric-river event likely to bring flooding and the potential for power outages. As of January 9, many parts of Golden Gate, Redwood, and Sequoia remain closed due to the impacts of winter storms and further incoming weather. Source: Outside, Golden Gate National Recreation Area, Redwood National and State Parks, Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks Wednesday, January 11, 2023 Yosemite National Park Rockfall kills two On December 27, two individuals were killed in a rockfall event on Highway 140 near the entrance station. The rocks fell roughly 1,000 feet into their rented Dodge Ram truck, knocking the vehicle down onto the embankment of the Merced River. About 185 tons of rock fell, affecting 500 feet of roadway. The road was closed following the slide and then reopened the following day. Source: CBS News, CNN, KRON4 March 8, 2023 Yosemite National Park Record storms close park On February 25, the park closed due to severe weather conditions and the prediction of further storms. Roads inside the park have remained open for administrative use only. On February 28, Yosemite Valley tallied 40 inches of snow, breaking its record for single-day snowfall. As of March 7, the park was still closed while the park works to clear snow and restore services. The park expects to be closed through at least March 12, "possibly longer." Source: SF Gate (2/25, 3/3) March 8, 2023 Yosemite National Park Rockfall On February 20, a large rockfall on El Capitan near Horsetail Fall occurred, requiring Northside drive from Camp 4 to El Capitan Crossover to be closed. There no injuries from the incident. Source: yahoo!news March 8, 2023 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident A 59-year-old has pleaded guilty to domestic violence for an incident that occurred at Happy Isles in August 2022 (see 8/24/22 Coalition Report). The individual will be sentenced June 26. Source: The Fresno Bee March 22, 2023 Yosemite National Park Sentencing for sexual assault On March 8, a 52-year-old was sentenced to seven years and one month in prison for one count of attempted sexual abuse and one count of abusive sexual conduct. The sentencing was for an incident in Summer 2019 in which the individual sexually assaulted their roommate while they were sleeping. The perpetrator was working as a cook "for a private company in Yosemite" at the time. The individual was found guilty after a six-day trial. Source: U.S. Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California March 22, 2023 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On March 18, the park reopened Highway 140 access to Yosemite Valley, as well as Hetch Hetchy. "Very limited services" are available. The rest of the park remains closed due to ongoing storm clean-up and repairs. Further predicted storms may reclose the park. Source: Yosemite National Park, CBS News May 10, 2023 Yosemite National Park Flooding On April 28, the eastern end of Yosemite Valley closed due to predictions of high flooding due to snowmelt in the park over the following days. The park reopened the morning of May 1, two days earlier than expected, due to lower-than-predicted river levels. Source: ABC 7 May 10, 2023 Yosemite National Park Road damage The park has announced a 200-foot-long, four-foot-deep crack on the Big Oak Flat Road, requiring a closure between the Highway 120 park entrance and the Merced Grove. The road's surface is rapidly moving, as well as the embankment below the road and water is flowing through it. Officials have stated that it is not safe to drive, even for limited traffic. They will be working with the Federal Highway Administration to make repairs and it is expected to be closed until at least mid-June. Source: ABC7 May 24, 2023 Yosemite National Park Flooding On May 15, the park closed Lower Pines Campground, North Pines Campground, and Housekeeping Camp in Yosemite Valley due to forecasted flooding of the Merced River. As of May 22, they remain closed and many of the roads and pathways around Yosemite Valley have partial closures. Source: SF Gate, Yosemite National Park May 24, 2023 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On May 15, a 29-year-old pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition. In Summer 2021, the individual took up residence in private home in Wawona for several months. During a search of the house, the firearms and ammunition were found. The case was investigated by the NPS, with support from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, U.S. Marshals Service, California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, California Department of Justice's Bureau of Forensic Services, and Madera County Sheriff's Office. The case is part of the Project Safe Neighborhoods, an interagency effort by the Department of Justice to reduce violent crime and gun violence. The individual is scheduled to be sentenced on September 5. Source: U.S. Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California July 26, 2023 Yosemite National Park Wildfire On June 29, a lightning strike started a wildfire to the northwest of North Dome. As of July 21, the Pika Fire was 20% contained at 840 acres, and it is being managed by Yosemite Fire with a "confine and contain strategy." It is not currently threatening any structures. Source: SF Gate, Yosemite National Park July 26, 2023 Yosemite National Park Backpacker fatality On July 2, a 24-year-old went missing after entering Chilnualna Creek near Upper Chilnualna Falls. The individual had been backpacking with a group at the time. They were said to have been getting their face wet while kneeling on hands and knees before slipping into the creek. A search for the individual ensued, and they were found deceased on July 9. The official cause of death has not yet been determined but is "presumed to be accidental drowning." Source: NBC News July 26, 2023 Yosemite National Park Missing hiker found On July 22, a 22-year-old went out for a day hike, headed west from the Ostrander Lake Ski Hut area, and didn't return to camp that evening. A search ensued and the individual was found on July 24 in good condition "with just a few scrapes." Source: Fresno Bee July 26, 2023 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident Tioga Road reopened on July 22. Due to record winter storms, it is the latest the road has ever opened after its annual closure; the previous record was July 8. Infrastructure damage is extensive and visitors are cautioned that there will likely be delays for road repairs and limited services available. Source: Enterprise-Record Wednesday, August 9, 2023 Yosemite National Park Wildfire As of August 5, the Pika Fire was 841 acres and 80% contained, with 25 personnel assigned. The fire started June 29 due to lightning. Source: Sierra Sun Times, Inciweb August 23, 2023 Yosemite National Park Wildfire As of August 17, the Pika Fire was 100% contained at 841 acres. The fire started June 29 due to lightning. Some smoke is still present and the fire area is closed to the public. Source: Sierra Sun Times, Inciweb September 6, 2023 Yosemite National Park Possible cold case resolution A suspect in their mid-70s was arrested in Texas in connection with the 1986 disappearance of a 15-year-old in Modesto, California. The individual had been a suspect at the time, but was never arrested then. A witness claims that the individual told a story of killing an individual and burying their body at "a campground near the Big Oak Flat entrance" in Yosemite. The suspect was already serving time in a Texas prison for violations of sex offender registration and will soon be sent to Stanislaus County to face charges. Source: New York Post September 20, 2023 Yosemite National Park Rock fracture On August 20, a rock climbing guide scaled a route on the Royal Arches and observed a 200-feet-long crack, about an inch wide, that had not been present on a climb two weeks earlier. A climbing ranger and geologist went out to investigate and found it to be actively cracking with smaller rocks "rattling" down through the crack. The park proactively closed a number of rock climbing routes on the wall, as well as a quarter-mile of the Yosemite Valley Loop Trail adjacent to the Ahwahnee Hotel. There is a trail detour in place. Source: Los Angeles Times September 20, 2023 Yosemite National Park Wildfires On September 9, a storm brought several new lightning-caused fires to wilderness areas of the park. As of September 10, the following fires were active: Jan Fire (located between Hoover Lakes, 0.5 acres), Marmot Fire (near Moraine Meadow, 0.01 acres), Chiquito Fire (north of Chiquito Pass, 2 acres). As of September 10, there were no closures associated with these fires. Source: Yosemite National Park October 18, 2023 Yosemite National Park Bystander rescue On September 2, an off-duty Air Force flight instructor was hiking the cables on Half Dome when they watched a hiker fall about 80 feet, landing on a small ledge ("about six feet by one-and-a-half feet") with 500 feet of exposure below. They were able to reach the fallen hiker, splint their disfigured leg with sticks and a bandage, and cover them in a blanket. The bystander was able to "arrange" a call to the NPS. A ranger arrived on scene and worked with the other individual to help the injured hiker descend partway down the cables. Another emergency responder arrived and re-splinted the patient's leg. A pulley system was created to lower the patient the rest of the way down the cables. A helicopter flew the hiker out of the area to emergency care. Source: The Guardian October 18, 2023 Yosemite National Park Climber fatality On September 28, a climbing guide teaching a group of students rappelled off the end of their rope while descending Sickle Ledge, a section of "The Nose" route on El Capitan. The individual fell about 400 feet and is presumed to have died upon impact. Source: Climbing November 1, 2023 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On October 30, the 29-year-old who was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition while squatting on private property in Wawona in Summer 2021 (see 5/24/23 Coalition Report) was sentenced to five years and three months in prison. Source: U.S. Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California February 21, 2024 Yosemite National Park Rockfall On February 6, the park announced that a rockfall has closed the trail between Happy Isles and the Vernal Fall footbridge. A detour is available along the stock trail. A reopening date was not immediately available. Source: The Fresno Bee February 21, 2024 Yosemite National Park Theft indictment On February 15, a federal grand jury returned an indictment for a 28-year-old for theft of personal property, unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, and fleeing or eluding a police officer, in relation to a December 2022 incident. The individual is accused of stealing a Yosemite employee's vehicle after the employee pulled over to the side of the road to remove a bicycle from the roadway. The suspect then engaged in a high-speed chase, eventually driving against traffic on the one-lane bridge at the Ferguson Slide, colliding head on with another vehicle. The suspect was able to continue driving, eventually driving off a cliff and tumbling approximately 200 feet to the bottom of the canyon. Source: United States Attorney's Office: Eastern District of California February 21, 2024 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On February 13, a 39-year-old well-known in the rock climbing community was found guilty in federal court on three charges of sexual assault relating to an incident in 2016 (see 9/7/22 Coalition Report). The individual met up with another climber via Facebook, then assaulted them three times over a period of several days and choked them almost to death. Testimony was also heard by other climbers who said they were also previously assaulted and stalked by the individual. Over a 14-year period, nine protection orders or restraining orders were filed against the individual. The individual will be sentenced on May 21. Source: Outside March 6, 2024 Yosemite National Park Winter storm closure On March 1 at midnight, the park closed due to predictions of a heavy winter storm, including many feet of snow and high-intensity winds. It reopened on March 4, reporting "as much as 45 inches of snow in some areas and high winds that toppled trees." Source: USA Today, Yosemite National Park, Los Angeles Times April 17, 2024 Yosemite National Park Rockfall On April 7, a rockfall happened on the section of Big Oak Flat Road between Foresta Junction and El Portal Road. The road was closed until the following afternoon, and then reopened. Source: The Union Democrat May 1, 2024 Yosemite National Park Rockfall On April 15, a "substantial" rockfall occurred on the John Muir Trail near the top of Nevada Fall, close to the Panorama Trail junction. About 1,000 feet of trail was covered with boulders, trees, and other debris. No injuries were reported, as the trail was already closed for the winter season. The trail is currently closed between Nevada Fall and Clark Point. It will require "significant repair," including drilling and blasting of large boulders. Park staff are assessing the potential for additional rockfall events. Source: SFGate May 15, 2024 Yosemite National Park Concession actions led to injury SFGate recently obtained the 2023 annual report about Yosemite Hospitality, a subsidiary of Aramark Corporation that holds the main concession contract in the park. The report showed that the concession's "satisfactory" rating was later changed to "marginal" due to failures that injured a visitor and a staff member: a fall due to a poorly maintained balcony railing and the partial collapse of a dining room ceiling during meal service. It is the concessioner's second "marginal" rating in a row, which can be grounds for contract termination with the National Park Service. The report said that the NPS would work with the concessioner on "next steps in meeting outstanding contractual requirements." Source: SFGate June 12, 2024 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident On June 4, a 40-year-old was sentenced to life in prison for guilty charges of two counts of aggravated sexual abuse and one count of abusive sexual contact that occurred in the park in August 2016 (see 9/7/22 and 2/21/24 Coalition Reports). The individual is a well-known professional climber and guidebook writer. Source: USA Today June 26, 2024 Yosemite National Park Hiker rescue On June 9, a hiker was injured after falling "20 to 30 feet down granite stairs" on the Mist Trail. A California Highway Patrol helicopter was able to hoist the individual out. They landed at Ahwahnee Meadow, loaded the patient on board the helicopter, then took the individual to a trauma facility in Fresno for treatment. Source: ABC30 June 26, 2024 Yosemite National Park Concession employee attacks co-worker On June 20, a 36-year-old concession employee in the park was indicted on the charge of one count of aggravated sexual abuse. The individual is accused of raping, beating, and strangling a co-worker on May 31. They were arrested on June 12. Source: The Fresno Bee July 24, 2024 Yosemite National Park Bear run-in On July 7, a 33-year-old individual embarked on a 50-mile trail run from their home in June Lake, California, to Yosemite Valley. In their last mile, they saw a "large dark shape" coming at them, then felt "some sharpness" in their shoulder and a rough shove. They then saw headlamps and heard people yelling, "bear." The bear had been tagged and had a GPS collar affixed earlier that morning after it was observed with human food at the Cathedral Beach picnic area, several miles away in Yosemite Valley. Before the runner ran into the bear, it had also found a bag of trash in the Upper Pines Campground and ran with it onto the Happy Isles road, where they had their collision. The collision with the runner knocked the bag of garbage from the bear's mouth, and the bear began approaching the runner. The runner yelled and hit their trekking poles on the pavement, and people in a nearby campground also began shouting and banging pots and pans. The bear then moved away. The individual had "two substantial and bloody scratches," and tears to clothing and their running vest. An ambulance responded and bandaged the individual up, but they declined further medical care. A park spokesperson said, "biologists do not consider this encounter to be a predatory attack." Source: USA Today July 24, 2024 Yosemite National Park Wildfires On July 13, thunderstorms developed over the park, igniting nine lightning-caused fires: The Aspen Fire was located one mile west of Aspen Valley. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. The Cascade Fire is located south of Tioga Road, west of Yosemite Creek. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Dewey Fire was located southwest of Dewey Point. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. The Dog Leg Fire was located northeast of Crane Flat, near Unicorn Creek. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. The Grove Fire was located northwest of Crane Flat near the Tuolumne Grove Road. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. The Harden Fire was located northwest of White Wolf, west of Harden Lake. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. The Indian Fire is located south of Tioga Road, west of Lehamite Creek. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Porcupine Fire is located north of Tioga Road, southwest of Wegner Lake. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Smith Fire was located southeast of Smith Peak. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 100% contained. July 16, several more thunderstorms caused lightning strike fires. The Dorothy Lake Fire is just south of Dorothy Lake. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Eagle Creek Fire is east of Lukens Lake Trail and west of Yosemite Creek. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Wegner Fire is located near Mount Hoffman. As of July 17, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. August 7, 2024 Yosemite National Park Hiker fatality On July 13, a parent and their adult child (age 20) were hiking down the cable section of Half Dome when a storm began. The 20-year-old began slipping as their shoes struggled to maintain traction. Near the bottom of the cables, the 20-year-old slipped off and fell about 200 feet. The parent called 911 and attempted to make voice contact with the fallen individual, but did not hear anything. An NPS staff member arrived on site and stayed with the parent while they waited for a helicopter to be able to access the fallen individual. Due to worsening weather, the helicopter was unable to fly for three hours. The helicopter eventually was able to access the individual and determined they were deceased, likely due to severe head trauma. The park staff member hiked with the parent down to Yosemite Valley. Source: Independent August 7, 2024 Yosemite National Park Missing hikers found On August 3, two individuals, aged 63 and 40, left the Bridalveil Creek Campground for a hike to Ostrander Lake. They never returned to the campground. A search commenced, utilizing dog search teams, ground searchers, and aircraft, with personnel from the NPS, California Office of Emergency Services, and the California Highway Patrol. On August 5, the two individuals were found alive. Source: KSBW August 7, 2024 Yosemite National Park Wildfires The Alder Fire was located one half-mile east of Alder Falls. It was discovered on August 2 and caused by lightning. As of August 5, it was 100% contained at 0.1 acres. The Blue Jay Fire is located in the footprint of the 2020 Blue Jay Fire, near White Wolf. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 5, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Echo Fire is located north of Little Yosemite Valley above Echo Valley, near Merced Lake. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 5, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Forsyth Fire is located near Little Yosemite Valley in the 2014 Meadow Fire footprint. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 5, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Middle Fire is located near the Middle Fork of the Tuolumne River, west of White Wolf. It was discovered on August 4 and was caused by lightning. As of August 5, it was 2 acres and 0% contained. The Morrison Fire is located one mile north of Morrison Creek. It was discovered on August 4 and was lightning caused. As of August 4, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. Source: Yosemite National Park August 21, 2024 Yosemite National Park Hiker fatality On August 8, a 20-year-old passed away in a "tragic accident" while hiking with colleagues in the park. No other details were released about the incident. Source: The Sacramento Bee August 21, 2024 Yosemite National Park Wildfires The Echo Fire is located north of Little Yosemite Valley above Echo Valley, near Merced Lake. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 19, it was 0.5 acres and 0% contained. The Forsyth Fire is located near Little Yosemite Valley in the 2014 Meadow Fire footprint. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 9, it was 0.1 acres and 0% contained. The Middle Fire is located near the Middle Fork of the Tuolumne River, west of White Wolf. It was discovered on August 4 and was caused by lightning. As of August 19, it was 310 acres and 85% contained. The Morrison Fire is located one mile north of Morrison Creek. It was discovered on August 4 and was lightning caused. As of August 19, it was 31 acres and 50% contained. Source: Yosemite National Park (8/9, 8/19) September 4, 2024 Yosemite National Park Violent escapade On August 21, a 40-year-old entered a restaurant in Buck Meadows, CA (outside the park), approached a pregnant staff member, touched their belly, and stated, "The spirits led me to you and your baby belongs to me." They then asked when the staff member's break was so they could wait for them. They then "stole several drinks" and assaulted a different restaurant employee. They engaged in a high speed car chase with law enforcement through Yosemite National Park along Highway 41 before crashing their car just outside the park in the town of Fish Camp. They removed their shirt, stole a bicycle, and entered the Tenaya Lodge. They brandished a knife and threatened staff. They then made their way to a nearby clubhouse, stripped to their underwear, and told customers to leave or they would face danger. They vandalized the clubhouse, and assaulted and attempted to kidnap a store manager. The manager escaped, but the suspect stole the manager's car, and began ramming it into another vehicle. They drove south, crashing outside the town of Oakhurst. They were apprehended by Mariposa County deputies. Later, while being assessed for medical issues at a local hospital, the individual assaulted law enforcement. The individual is being held on $100,000 bail and faces charges of vandalism, vehicle theft, reckless driving, kidnapping, theft, first-degree burglary, robbery, obstructing an officer, and battery. The individual was said to have been posting "bizarre videos" to their social media before the incident, causing some to question the individual's mental health. Source: San Francisco Chronicle, Los Angeles Times September 4, 2024 Yosemite National Park Wildfires The Echo Fire is located north of Little Yosemite Valley above Echo Valley, near Merced Lake. It was discovered on August 2 and was caused by lightning. As of August 26, it was 6 acres and 0% contained. The Middle Fire is located near the Middle Fork of the Tuolumne River, west of White Wolf. It was discovered on August 4 and was caused by lightning. As of August 26, it was 310 acres and 100% contained. As of August 26, trail closures were still in place on the trail along Long Gulch Creek between Aspen Valley and White Wolf. The Morrison Fire is located one mile north of Morrison Creek. It was discovered on August 4 and was lightning caused. As of August 26, it was 31 acres and 75% contained. Source: Yosemite National Park (8/26) September 18, 2024 Yosemite National Park Hotel closure On September 11, the park announced that while undertaking a roof replacement project on the main building of the Wawona Hotel, they found a "need for more intensive investigation and assessment of the hotel." The hotel will thus close on December 2, with no estimated reopening date. Source: Los Angeles Times September 18, 2024 Yosemite National Park Backpacker fatality On September 12, an NPS staff member found a note on a vehicle, stating that the owner, a 61-year-old, was backpacking to the Ostrander Lake area from August 23-27. The park began a search and located the individual deceased on September 14. The incident is still under investigation, but a family member of the individual stated that they "may have lost track of the trail," based on initial evidence. Source: The New York Times, Yosemite National Park Facebook page, The Tribune Wednesday, October 30, 2024 Yosemite National Park Tree fall fatality On October 8, a 22-year-old and another individual were hit by a falling tree near Union Point on the Four Mile Trail. The trail was closed temporarily, and about "30 emergency personnel" responded to the scene. The 22-year-old was killed in the incident, while the other individual was flown by helicopter "for treatment at a hospital." There were "wind gusts" that day that contributed to the tree toppling. Source: The Union Democrat December 11, 2024 Golden Gate National Recreation Area, Joshua Tree National Park, Yosemite National Park Sexual assault accusation A 38-year-old who is well-known in the rock climbing community as an athlete, brand ambassador, and instructor has been charged with nine felony sexual assault charges with three victims. The incidents were said to take place between 2019 and 2023, in Pacifica, California, the Presidio (GGNRA), at Joshua Tree, and in Yosemite. On November 27, the individual pleaded "not guilty" to all charges and was released on $500,000 bail. The suspect will have their next court appearance on December 16. Source: ABC7 April 2, 2025 Yosemite National Park "Suspicious" injuries lead to death On March 20, a 34-year-old concession employee was found with "severe injuries" in concessioner housing in Yosemite Valley. Law enforcement and rescue personnel responded. The individual was transported to a hospital in Fresno, CA. They passed away from their injuries the following day. The individual's injuries are considered "suspicious." The incident is under investigation by the NPS Investigative Services Branch, Fresno County Sheriff and Coroner's Office, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Source: Democrat and Chronicle June 25, 2025 Yosemite National Park Climbing fatality Earlier this month, an employee of the park concessioner fell while climbing on Royal Arches, resulting in their death. The park's search and rescue team recovered the individual's body. No further details have been released. Source: Mariposa Gazette July 9, 2025 Yosemite National Park Follow-up on Previously Reported Incident The 36-year old concession employee accused of raping, beating, and strangling a co-worker in the park in May 2024, has been missing since June 27. The individual said they were going to ride their dirt bike "near a mine and a tower," and then never resurfaced. The Mariposa County (CA) Sheriff's Office conducted a search for several days over 500 miles, originally thinking they were searching for an "at risk missing person." However, upon learning the individual had an active federal warrant out for their arrest, the sheriff's office now considers the individual "an absconding fugitive from federal law enforcement." Surveillance footage confirmed that the individual's truck and dirt bike have been seen in the Fresno, California, area. The individual is awaiting trial for their charges and it is unclear if the individual is out on bail. Source: Los Angeles Times August 6, 2025 Yosemite National Park Branches kill hiker On July 19, a 29-year-old was hiking at the Tuolumne Grove of giant sequoias when they were struck in the head by a large branch. They became unresponsive with "blood pooling around [their] head." Another person in their party called 911 and performed CPR until an NPS staff member arrived and took over CPR. Resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful. An autopsy later revealed the mechanism of death was blunt trauma to the head. Source: The New York Times September 3, 2025 Yosemite National Park Staff fired for hanging flag On August 18, an NPS staff member posted on their social media that they were fired the previous week for hanging a transgender pride flag on El Capitan in May. They stated that they did so in their free time, and the flag hung for two hours. The day afterward, the park's acting superintendent updated the Yosemite's compendium, including a regulation banning large banners, flags, or signs in wilderness without a permit. The reason for firing was stated as "failing to demonstrate acceptable conduct." The NPS has stated publicly that they are "pursuing administrative action against several Yosemite National Park employees and possible criminal charges against several park visitors who are alleged to have violated federal laws and regulations related to demonstrations." Source: CBS News October 15, 2025 Yosemite National Park Climber fatality On October 1, a 23-year-old, completed a climb on the "Sea of Dreams" route of El Capitan. They began to bring their haul bag up the last pitch when it became stuck. The individual began to descend their rope to attempt to free it when they rappelled off the end of the rope. They passed away in the fall. Source: NBC News
