Title: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad

URL Source: https://www.peaceaction.org/2007/11/30/fighting-terrorism-at-home-abroad/

Published Time: 2007-11-30T17:27:23+00:00

Markdown Content:
Working for Peace Since 1957 CAMPAIGNS|TAKE ACTIONDONATE
FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD
HOME » FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD
FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD
By Paul Kawika Martin  Posted November 30, 2007  In Afghanistan, Africa, air strikes, Bruma, Bush Administration, Cheney, Congress, diplomacy, Global Activism, Iraq, Justice, Middle East, military, Musharraf, Pakistan, Peace, refugees, Senate, Sudan, terror, Vietnam, War, Youth
 485

When we talk about “Real Security through International Cooperation and the Funding of Human Needs” it is sometimes hard to understand what that means in terms of our daily lives. 

On my way home I often pass a family saying hello and usually exchanging brief pleasantries. Normally, the father and sometimes the mother sit on the front stoop watching the baby play.  Last night, however, as I rounded the corner something was very different.  All the contents of their house had been dumped haphazardly onto the sidewalk; they were not sitting on the porch but rather on the street near their clothes.  They had been “put out of their house.”  They could not make the rent for this month and so this family of three (with a toddler) was homeless, sitting in the dark and cold with no place to go.  They had left that morning for work and daycare with a small sense of security, only to arrive that night vulnerable and in genuine danger.  How is it, in the richest democracy in the world, we can put a family out?  

My neighborhood is known for gang activity.  I myself, have witnessed 3 shootings; none of which, thankfully, resulted in death or injury; but they were scary. I can’t imagine being a toddler on the street hearing those booming noises echo only feet away from me.  I have lots of Libertarian friends who don’t believe the government could solve these problems even if it did have a billion dollars.  I might agree if we ever had a chance to test the theory.  The money spent on militarism represents more than 70% of our Federal budget.  The money for social programs is less than 5%.  Where are our priorities?  Why have we, for decades, chosen bombs over people?

Again, I turn to my Libertarian friends who claim the ONLY function of a Federal government is the protection of national boarders from foreign invaders.  I would like to see a more comprehensive idea of ‘foreign invaders.’ I think hunger and frost bite should be counted among the terrorists affecting our world.

It strikes me that these terrorists are potently killing people all over the world on a daily basis – and U.S. investment in militarism only compounds the problem.  I lived in Kosova for a time about a year ago.  The people there are so grateful to the U.S. for ending the genocide perpetuated by Milosevic.  They have a picture of Bill Clinton or Gen. Wesley Clark on nearly every street; including a giant mural on Bill Clinton bvld in downtown Prishtina.  Of course there is another side to this gratitude.  On Bill Clinton blvd there are still apartment buildings bombed out from U.S. strikes in 1999.  People are still living in homes exposed to the elements with no water or electricity.  The unemployment rate is staggering and the thousands of ‘missing’ are still unaccounted for.  The political status of Kosova is still in flux between a Serbian territory and an independent state.  Neither Europe nor the U.S. has invested enough money and time into the rebuilding of Kosova.  We saved them from genocide and then condemned them to poverty through our inaction. 

There is a similar story happening all over the world:  in Ethiopia & Eutria; in Pakistan & Afghanistan; in Burma & S. Korea; in Sudan, in Sri Lanka, in Palestine, in Columbia, in Morocco, in every continent.   Real security, internationally, means investing in the health and well being of all humans; knowing that persons whose security needs are met will never strap a bomb to their back and then board a train.

Terrorism, both the Islamic kind and the gang kind, can only be stopped by meeting our human needs as a global community.  The U.S. is in a unique position to take leadership in this endeavor, and we have historically.  Although now contentious, the IMF and World Bank served their original purpose after WWII.  The funding provided by these international organizations rebuilt Europe after the devastation and renewed the historic cities to their former glory.  We have lost the philanthropy which launched us into a global super power.  Now we face our challenges with bombs and empty promises.  Ours is a path of destruction and destitution.  We must regain our conscious and expand our sense of community if we are ever to realize a peaceful world.

Paul Kawika Martin
RECENT POSTS
NO KINGS DAY – OCTOBER 18TH 2025
BLOCK THE BOMBS TO ISRAEL – SIGN TODAY
TRUMP IS NO PEACE PRESIDENT
STATEMENT ON KILLING OF ISRAELI DIPLOMATIC STAFF
SHOWING 485 COMMENTS
RONALD L. WALDRON
December 25, 2007
Reply

BARACK OBAMA, MOST ELECTABLE CANDIDATE:

A JFK type Candidate, and a refreshing reality to MLK’S dream. With integrity and ethics.

That of course is Barack Obama. Someone with out experience with the corrupt foreign and

corporate lobby deals, made with the polarized Washington insiders.

Change, reform, isn’t that what we the American people are looking for?

How concerned are you? National debt 10 Trillion and climbing.

No domestic ills being taken care of.
We need to take our Country back.. No
foreign or corporate special interest money. Thus
we need your help to fight against the established
system, corrupted system.

Pull together an act of Patriotism, not Patriot-Act.

EVERY ONE NEEDS TO VOTE IN THE PRIMARIES:

Do not “underestimate” the “anger,” “frustration,”

and “determination,” of your citizens who demand “justice and fairness.”

“Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere”.

All five of the leading Republican presidential candidates — including John McCain — would beat Democrat Hillary Clinton in a head-to-head match-up, according to a surprising new poll from Zogby International.
But Barack Obama outpolled all five GOP hopefuls — Rudy Giuliani, Mitt Romney, Fred Thompson, Mike Huckabee, and McCain.

WE NEED CHANGE, WE NEED OBAMA.

HE IS THE CANDIDATE THAT IS MOST ELECTABLE, DON’T TAKE ANY CHANCES.

We’re going to transform the political process by bringing together hundreds of thousands of ordinary Americans to build a campaign responsible to no one but the people – American people. Not the corrupt lobbies.

Required reading: “FINAL REPORT” by Ronald L. Waldron

Available for order at more than 25,000 retail outlets worldwide, on the Internet at Amazon.com,

Barnes and Noble.com, and through the Author House, online publishing company book store.

chet the vet
December 27, 2007
Reply

I think that the purpose of government is to serve and protect it’s citizens from all types of danger without infringing on their liberties and freedoms

barbpa
December 28, 2007
Reply

Yes, but I think we can all agree that this administration has not be upholding those ideals. This government is a danger to the people of the United States and of the world. Difficult decisions are often made in positions of power but that is why we have a system of checks and balances which this administration has trampled on. The separation of the political from the judicial, the oversight of the Congress (and by means of direct representation, the people), and the separation between the church and state. Without these checks the Bush administration has trampled on individual rights to privacy and speech, of protest and our rightful say in our government. All while condemning our economy to a long recession through an expensive occupation, ignorance, and mismanagement. There is nothing about the current government that serves or protects the people of the United States.

RONALD L. WALDRON
February 1, 2008
Reply

SMEAR OBAMA CAMPAIGN:

DEMAND MEDIA ETHICAL PRACTICE:

The main-stream media has done nothing to
correct the SMEAR campaign against Obama.
The complete lies circulated on the internet,
known and investigated to be false.
The only media source that has attempted to
correct such has been CNN.
Probably the only source not controlled, and
censored.
People are still receiving and believing the smear
tactics. I don’t believe such attacks have come
from the Republican Party, but from right smack
dab in the middle of an opposition CAMP.
The media has an obligation to put the truth
on their publications prior to super Tuesday.

Everyone should demand a correct response
from all MEDIA sources.

Ronald L. Waldron

RONALD L. WALDRON
February 15, 2008
Reply

HILLARY CLINTON’S CAMPAIGN. (FACE REALITY OF THE FUTURE)

Hillary Clinton has Flip Flopped on the campaign trail, the same as she has during her tenure as senator.

She has taken different positions depending on what she thinks the people want to hear. Stealing

The ideals and policies other candidates seem to be successful with.

There is a major problem with doing so. She does not give the American people benefit of doubt, being

able to see through the false pretence and deception, so common with her past experience in political office.

Now she uses John Edwards issues as if they have been her own. We see what is missing. True
principals, conviction, and moral values.

Obama has been the candidate of change from the very beginning. People coming together
with excitement for change. Thus she starts a change campaign, that voting for a woman is change. Some what naïve if she herself believes that. We see how polarized she is.

She also says she will challenge special interest groups, yet she has accepted more funds from those special interest groups then any other candidate.

The educated, informed, and employed vote for Obama, according to all exit polls.

They also show that the uneducated, uninformed,
unemployed vote for Clinton.

If you don’t know the facts, check them out before casting a vote. We do not need another term like the last several terms.

Question: A republican ask if the “blue dress” will be displayed at the Clinton library.

RONALD L. WALDRON
February 15, 2008
Reply

HILLARY CLINTON’S CAMPAIGN. (FACE REALITY OF THE FUTURE)

Hillary Clinton has Flip Flopped on the campaign trail, the same as she has during her tenure as senator.

She has taken different positions depending on what she thinks the people want to hear. Stealing

The ideals and policies other candidates seem to be successful with.

There is a major problem with doing so. She does not give the American people benefit of doubt, being

able to see through the false pretence and deception, so common with her past experience in political office.

Now she uses John Edwards issues as if they have been her own. We see what is missing. True
principals, conviction, and moral values.

Obama has been the candidate of change from the very beginning. People coming together
with excitement for change. Thus she starts a change campaign, that voting for a woman is change. Some what naïve if she herself believes that. We see how polarized she is.

She also says she will challenge special interest groups, yet she has accepted more funds from those special interest groups then any other candidate.

The educated, informed, and employed vote for Obama, according to all exit polls.

They also show that the uneducated, uninformed,
unemployed vote for Clinton.

If you don’t know the facts, check them out before casting a vote. We do not need another term like the last several terms.

Question: A republican ask if the “blue dress” will be displayed at the Clinton library.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 5, 2010
Reply

SHOULD WE TRUST ANYONE IN GOVERNMENT??

Total Contractors, aka Mercenaries, Will be 130,000 to 160,000, in Afghanistan :

They secured the Oil fields of Iraq, now
they will secure the poppy fields of
Afghanistan all for the Organized Crime
syndicate that is controlling much of
our government today.

Where are the companions of the China
cocaine deal presently??

Wouldn’t we destroy the fields other wise??
Do we trust any official this day and age??
Afghanistan now supplies over 90 percent of the world’s heroin, generating nearly $200 billion in revenue. Since the U.S. invasion on Oct. 7, 2001, opium output has increased 33-fold (to over 8,250 metric tons a year).
The U.S. has been in Afghanistan for over seven years, has spent $177 billion in that country alone, and has the most powerful and technologically advanced military on Earth. GPS tracking devices can locate any spot imaginable by simply pushing a few buttons.
Still, bumper crops keep flourishing year after year, even though heroin production is a laborious, intricate process. The poppies must be planted, grown and harvested; then after the morphine is extracted it has to be cooked, refined, packaged into bricks and transported from rural locales across national borders. To make heroin from morphine requires another 12-14 hours of laborious chemical reactions. Thousands of people are involved, yet—despite the massive resources at our disposal—heroin keeps flowing at record levels.

Common sense suggests that such prolific trade over an extended period of time is no accident, especially when the history of what has transpired in that region is considered. While the CIA ran its operations during the Vietnam War, the Golden Triangle supplied the world with most of its heroin. After that war ended in 1975, an intriguing event took place in 1979 when Zbigniew Brzezinski covertly manipulated the Soviet Union into invading Afghanistan.

Behind the scenes, the CIA, along with Pakistan’s ISI, were secretly funding Afghanistan’s mujahideen to fight their Russian foes. Prior to this war, opium production in Afghanistan was minimal. But according to historian Alfred McCoy, an expert on the subject, a shift in focus took place. “Within two years of the onslaught of the CIA operation in Afghanistan, the Pakistan-Afghanistan borderlands became the world’s top heroin producer.”

Soon, as Professor Michel Chossudovsky notes, “CIA assets again controlled the heroin trade. As the mujahideen guerrillas seized territory inside Afghanistan, they ordered peasants to plant poppies as a revolutionary tax. Across the border in Pakistan, Afghan leaders and local syndicates under the protection of Pakistan intelligence operated hundreds of heroin laboratories.”

Eventually, the Soviet Union was defeated (their version of Vietnam), and ultimately lost the Cold War. The aftermath, however, proved to be an entirely new can of worms. During his research, McCoy discovered that “the CIA supported various Afghan drug lords, for instance Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The CIA did not handle heroin, but it did provide its drug lord allies with transport, arms, and political protection.”

By 1994, a new force emerged in the region—the Taliban—that took over the drug trade. Chossudovsky again discovered that “the Americans had secretly, and through the Pakistanis [specifically the ISI], supported the Taliban’s assumption of power.”

These strange bedfellows endured a rocky relationship until July 2000 when Taliban leaders banned the planting of poppies. This alarming development, along with other disagreements over proposed oil pipelines through Eurasia, posed a serious problem for power centers in the West. Without heroin money at their disposal, billions of dollars could not be funneled into various CIA black budget projects. Already sensing trouble in this volatile region, 18 influential neo-cons signed a letter in 1998 which became a blueprint for war—the infamous Project for a New American Century (PNAC).

Fifteen days after 9-11, CIA Director George Tenet sent his top-secret Special Operations Group (SOG) into Afghanistan. One of the biggest revelations in Tenet’s book, At the Center of the Storm, was that CIA forces directed the Afghanistan invasion, not the Pentagon.

In the Jan. 26, 2003, issue of Time magazine, Douglas Waller describes Donald Rumsfeld’s reaction to this development. “When aides told Rumsfeld that his Army Green Beret A-Teams couldn’t go into Afghanistan until the CIA contingent had lain the groundwork with local warlords, he erupted, ‘I have all these guys under arms, and we’ve got to wait like little birds in a nest for the CIA to let us go in?’”

ARMITAGE A MAJOR PLAYER

But the real operator in Afghanistan was Richard Armitage, a man whose legend includes being the biggest heroin trafficker in Cambodia and Laos during the Vietnam War; director of the State Department’s Foreign Narcotics Control Office (a front for CIA drug dealing); head of the Far East Company (used to funnel drug money out of the Golden Triangle); a close liaison with Oliver North during the Iran-Contra cocaine-for-guns scandal; a primary Pentagon official in the terror and covert ops field under George Bush the Elder; one of the original signatories of the infamous PNAC document; and the man who helped CIA Director William Casey run weapons to the mujahideen during their war against the Soviet Union. Armitage was also stationed in Iran during the mid-1970s right before Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the shah. Armitage may well be the greatest covert operator in U.S. history.

On Sept. 10, 2001, Armitage met with the UK’s national security advisor, Sir David Manning. Was Armitage “passing on specific intelligence information about the impending terrorist attacks”? The scenario is plausible because one day later—on 9-11—Dick Cheney directly called for Armitage’s presence down in his bunker. Immediately after WTC 2 was struck, Armitage told BBC Radio, “I was told to go to the operations center [where] I spent the rest of the day in the ops center with the vice president.”

These two share a long history together. Not only was Armitage employed by Cheney’s former company Halliburton (via Brown & Root), he was also a deputy when Cheney was secretary of defense under Bush the Elder. More importantly, Cheney and Armitage had joint business and consulting interests in the Central Asian pipeline which had been contracted by Unocal. The only problem standing between them and the Caspian Sea’s vast energy reserves was the Taliban.

Since the 1980s, Armitage amassed a huge roster of allies in Pakistan’s ISI. He was also one of the “Vulcans”—along with Condi Rice, Paul Wolfowitz, Richard Perle, and Rabbi Dov Zakheim—who coordinated Bush’s geo-strategic foreign policy initiatives. Then, after 9-11, he negotiated with the Pakistanis prior to our invasion of Afghanistan, while also becoming Bush’s deputy secretary of state stationed in Afghanistan.

Our “enemy,” or course, was the Taliban “terrorists.” But George Tenet, Colin Powell, Porter Goss, and Armitage had developed a close relationship with Pakistan’s military head of the ISI—General Mahmoud Ahmad— who was cited in a Sept. 2001 FBI report as “supporting and financing the alleged 9-11 terrorists, as well as having links to al Qaeda and the Taliban.”

The line between friend and foe gets even murkier. Afghan President Hamid Karzai not only collaborated with the Taliban, but he was also on Unocal’s payroll in the mid-1990s. He is also described by Saudi Arabia’s Al-Watan newspaper as being “a Central Intelligence Agency covert operator since the 1980s that collaborated with the CIA in funding U.S. aid to the Taliban.”

Capturing a new, abundant source for heroin was an integral part of the U.S. “war on terror.” Hamid Karzai is a puppet ruler of the CIA; Afghanistan is a full-fledged narco-state; and the poppies that flourish there have yet to be eradicated, as was proven in 2003 when the Bush administration refused to destroy the crops, despite having the chance to do so. Major drug dealers are rarely arrested, smugglers enjoy carte blanche immunity, and Nushin Arbabzadah, writing for The Guardian, theorized that “U.S. Army planes leave Afghanistan carrying coffins empty of bodies, but filled with drugs.” Is that why the military protested so vehemently when reporters tried to photograph returning caskets?

Victor Thorn is a hard-hitting researcher, journalist and the author of many books on 9-11 and the New World Order. These include 9-11 Evil: The Israeli Role in 9-11 and Phantom Flight 93.

In short, many of the groups now supported (or tolerated) by the United States and NATO are important actors in the drug trade
Blackwater has arms warehouse in Islamabad –Blackwater has implanted sensitive instruments at Sihala to monitor activities of Khan Research Laboratories (KRL), Kahuta, as well as to keep an eye on the nuclear assets of Pakistan. 22 Oct 2009 Private US security firm Blackwater has a warehouse located in the industrial area of Islamabad that is reportedly involved in illegal arms trading. The warehouse, Kestral Logistics, is working as the subcontractor of Xe Worldwide or Blackwater, The Nation reports. According to sources, the company has arms deals with Blackwater and is importing heavy arms and ammunition for the US company for its ongoing illicit operations in Pakistan. [Wow. Blackwater ‘keeping an eye on’ the nuclear assets of Pakistan. I think we’d all prefer al-Qaeda watching them.]

“Israel Lobby” 10 Mar 2009 Chas Freeman’s full statement following his decision not to serve as National Intelligence Council chairman… ‘The tactics of the Israel Lobby plumb the depths of dishonor and indecency and include character assassination, selective misquotation, the willful distortion of the record, the fabrication of falsehoods, and an utter disregard for the truth. The aim of this Lobby is control of the policy process through the exercise of a veto over the appointment of people who dispute the wisdom of its views, the substitution of political correctness for analysis, and the exclusion of any and all options for decision by Americans and our government other than those that it favors.’

Egypt constructing steel wall on Gaza border
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has confirmed reports that Egypt is building a metal wall along its border with the Gaza Strip and noted the wall is being financed by the United States.
The wall could be a preparation for new Israeli attacks against Gaza, she said and stated the wall was part of an security agreement signed between Israel and former US President George Bush shortly before his term ended.

There are several explanations. Cynics point out that the Egyptian government receives a huge American subsidy every year – almost two billion dollars – by courtesy of Israel. It started as a reward for the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. The pro-Israel lobby in the US Congress can stop it any time.

TORAH JEWS WILL TAKE CLASS ACTION –

WHAT EVERYONE KNOWS, BUT AFRAID TO SAY SO.

“THE TRUTH”

TORAH JEWS WILL TAKE CLASS

ACTION;

Today in Bilin Palestinian, Israeli, and International activists joined together for yet another non-violent protest against the apartheid wall and Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian land. Demonstrators of all ages holding signs and Palestinian flags marched to the apartheid fence (also referred to as a wall) where they were met with sound bombs and tear gas. Dozens suffered from severe tear gas inhalation.

Today, activists managed to pull open the yellow gate next to the fence, after cutting through the surrounding barbed wire. This gate is regularly used by the army to invade and harass the people of Bilin. Beyond the gate you can see the Israeli army’s current encampment as well as fields and olive trees belonging to Palestinian families from Bilin. The apartheid wall usurps 60% of the village’s land.

International demonstrator T.D. commented, “All the values and principles of morality that we know have been completely inverted and perverted here, its Orwellian.” His placard read, “War monger Obama receives Nobel Peace Prize.” Another sign read: Rouge criminal state Israel: The only “democracy” in the Middle East.

True Torah Jews against Zionism:
Zionists Do Not Represent Jews
From the inception of the Zionist State and particularly in recent times, the impression has been created in the World that there is some connection between the State, which falsely calls itself Israel, and the Jewish people as a whole. Therefore, we who continue to uphold the never-changing tradition of the Jewish people find it proper to again clarify the following points:

A Jew is one who remains faithful to the laws of the Jewish religion, that is, the Holy Torah and its commandments.
The Jewish people became a people before they had their own land, and continued to exist as a people also after they went Into exile, because our very people hood is based exclusively on the Torah.
The Holy Land was given to the Jewish people on the condition that they observe the Torah and its commandments. When they failed to do this, their sovereignty over the land was taken from them, and they went into exile. From that time, we are prohibited by the Torah with a very grave prohibition to establish a Jewish independent sovereignty in the Holy Land or anywhere throughout the world. Rather, we are obligated to be loyal to the nations under whose protection we dwell.
This situation has existed for close to 2000 years when the Jewish people were dispersed throughout all corners of the world. During this time, the Jews always remained faithful to the country in which they lived.
The Jewish people are grateful to all those merciful nations which have allowed them to observe Torah and the commandments undisturbed.
From ancient times, the relations between the Jewish and Islamic peoples have always been those of peace and brotherhood, and friendship always reigned between them. The proof of this is the fact that for centuries, in all the Arab lands, hundreds of thousands of Jews lived in honor and amidst mutual esteem.
Jews throughout all generations yearned to grace the sacred soil of the Holy Land and to live there. However, their sole purpose was to fulfill the commandments dependent upon the land and to absorb Its holiness. Never, G-d forbid, did they have any nationalist or sovereign intent whatsoever which, as mentioned above, is forbidden to us. Indeed, also here in the Holy Land, our fathers lived in neighborly harmony with the Palestinian residents of the land, helping one another, to mutual benefit.
Until about two hundred years ago, the vast majority of Jews observed the Torah and the commandments in entirety. Jewry’s leaders were Torah scholars, who directed the people according to the Torah. They were loyal citizens in the host nations where they dwelled and to the local laws. They prayed for the welfare of their respective governments. To our sorrow, at that time a small number of Jews slowly left their observance of Torah and commandments. Together with this, they began to deride the spiritual leadership of their people. This assimilation was the basis upon which, one hundred years ago, the ideology of Zionism was born. Its founders were assimilated Jews who had abandoned the Torah.
Immediately at the founding of the Zionist movement, masses of Jews under the leadership of their Rabbis, launched a heavy battle against Zionism. Their attack was directed not only at the non-religious Zionist idea, but rather, primarily at its opposition to the Torah-ordained path that Jewry must follow while in exile. As such, the Zionists incited the nations of the world, demanding political sovereignty over the Holy Land while remaining oblivious to the resentment this would arouse In the Palestinian Arabs, the land’s veteran inhabitants. As stated, the leaders of Orthodox Jewry vehemently opposed the movement with all force.
The Zionists refused to heed the voice of the Rabbis and Torah authority. They persisted in their ways until they succeeded in influencing the British government to issue the Balfour Declaration concerning the “establishment of a national home for the Jews in the land of Israel.” To our great sorrow, from that point on began the deterioration of the good relations between the Jews and the Arab inhabitants of the land. This occurred because the Arab people understood that the Zionists wished to seize ruler ship from them. In addition, the Arab people had suspicions as if the Jewish people wished to seize control of the Temple Mount and other similar sites. Matters worsened as a result.
The Jewish leadership of that time saw it as proper to clarify before the Arab leaders that the Torah-true Jews had no desire whatsoever for sovereignty, and that our desire was to continue to live in peace with the Arabs, as we had always done. The leader of the G-d-fearing Jewish community at that time, Rabbi Yoseph Chaim Zonnenfeld. of blessed memory, organized a delegation in July of 24′ which visited King Hussein and his sons Faisal the King of Iraq and the Amir Abdullah In order to lucidly present to them the position of the G-d-fearing Jewish community. The Jewish delegation clarified unequivocally that Torah Jewry is totally opposed to the Zionist sovereignty over the Holy Land. It Is worth noting that the delegation was received with great honor. They were even assured that all Arab lands were completely open to Jews, however, on the condition that the Jews do not demand political rights. This condition also applied to the Holy Land. One of the members of the Jewish delegation, Professor Yisroel Yaakov De Haan, paid with his life for his participation.
Torah Jewry protests at every opportunity against the Zionist rule over the Holy Land, and the Zionist rebellion against the neighboring nations. Torah Jewry has condemned the Zionist oppression of the Palestinians, the land’s veteran inhabitants who have been driven from their homes and properties. The Zionists’ barbaric and violent deeds are absolutely antithetical to the essence of the Jewish people.
Torah Jewry has never ever recognized the Zionist state. Since the Zionists succeeding in establishing their state, Torah Jewry has continuously announced to the world that the Zionists do not represent the Jewish people, and that the name “Israel” that they use is a forgery. For as has been stated above, it is forbidden to us from the Torah to rebel against the nations, and all sovereignty by us is prohibited. Rather, we await the days when all the world will recognize the sovereignty of the Creator, and the words of the prophet Isaiah will yet be fulfilled: “And they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. No nation will lift its sword against any other, nor will they learn warfare anymore.”
Anti-Zionist Orthodox Jews have refrained to this day from taking any funds from the Zionist regime, whether for their educational institutions, synagogues or other benefits. Obviously, they do not participate in the Zionist elections, whether for the “Knesset” or for the municipality. We do not serve in their army, and we even avoid speaking in the Hebrew language that the Zionists Invented. (incidentally, this is not the holy and true Hebrew language in which the Bible is written.) All this is done because Torah Jewry does not recognize the Zionist regime, which Is against the Torah and against humanity.
Lately, the question has once again arisen concerning the Temple Mount and sovereignty over it. Thus, we wish to state unequivocally: a) In our time, it is a severe Torah prohibition for any Jew to set foot on any part of the Temple Mount area. b) The Jewish people have no claim whatsoever to sovereignty over this holy site, which is under Islamic authority, nor over any other holy site. Rabbi Zonenfeld was once asked, “is it true, that the Rabbi prefers an non-Jewish government over all of the Holy Land”? Rabbi Zonenfeld replied, “if King Hussein would rule over Palestine, the holiness of the Holy Land would not be diminished to even to an Iota degree”. We yearningly await G-d’s great day, when He will return His Divine Presence to Zion, restoring the holy city to its former holiness and glory as in days of old, to be a light to the peoples and the nations.
The Zionists have no right of any sovereignty over even one inch of the Holy Land. They do not represent the Jewish people in any way whatsoever. They have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people. Therefore, their words, declarations and actions are not in any way representative of the Jewish people. This is because the Zionists’ seizing of power over the Holy Land is antithetical to Jewish law, and also because the Zionists do not behave like Jews at all rather, they desecrate the sanctity of the land.
We once again clarify that it is our desire to live in peace with our Arab and Palestinian neighbors, as we did before the Zionist revolution, and as Jews all over the world till today live, accepting the yoke of rulership of their host nation, with complete loyalty. Our sole desire is to serve our G-d and to fulfill His commandments with a perfect heart and to delight in the radiance of the sanctity of the Land.
PUT THE “HOUSE’ IN ORDER.

A LAST DITCH EFFORT

Every last tissue of belief in the GOVERNMENT should by now be shred and cast aside. The Democrats are no less the corporate bailers and militarists than the Republicans. They hand trillions to the banks and brokerage firms; they dissolve union contracts and send the workers to the dogs; their unmanned drones bomb Pakistan, killing and maiming innocents and displacing tens of thousands; they sell the same lies about the wars-that they have to do with terrorism or democracy rather than oil and other resources-as their predecessors; they fund the very enemy that they claim to fight; they keep up the same contracts with Blackwater and its successors; they vote for the same war funding; they carry out the same secret renditions; they sanction and continue the same spying on US citizens; they exonerate torturers and war criminals from the previous administration; they are war criminals in complicity with other war criminals. It is now obvious

to most that both parties have

sold the American people out to

organized crime. The corruption

and control continues on the same

path with the same special

interest groups in charge.

The 14 characteristics of Fascism

remain the same now as they did

for the previous eight years.

Where is the change promised, the

coalition of Zionist states continues.

1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.
2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.
3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.
4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.
5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.
6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.
7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.
8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.
9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.
10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.
11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.
12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.
13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.
14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.
Public debate looks good, but the

closed door secrets and corruption

remains the same.

Now we know revolution is likely coming prior to a one world government.

Disappointment, to rage, to distruction.

We left the Republican Party, now the

Democrat Party has left us. Where do

we go from here.

We need to put our HOUSE in order.

FACE THE REALITY:

Dear G-D:

Our international HOLY LAND is being

distroyed. How can we protect it from

the present falsehoods? A political

movement.

The reality of the political movement,
Zionism, should be the re-establishment
of Sodom and Gomorrah as their capital
cities.

Christian Right Is ‘Trolling for Assassins’:

Messages that have been pouring out of FOX News … talking about doing away with Obama, asking God to kill him.”

Go to: highfive4u.com

The Ignorant ignors the truth. Is that you?

Read:
1. Final Report. 2. Deception. 3. What-If?
4. Watch-out. 5. The house of Treason.
6. Zionish Wall.(Coming soon)
Peace 4 All–Take down the Wall.

Available at: highfive4u.com , Barnes & Noble , and Amazon.com .

I would like your assistance in distributing. Thanks.

Wal-mart, Target, and K-mart will only accept my books though a vendor.I,m not such a vendor.. RLW

True Torah Jews against Zionism:
The Committee for the Open Discussion of Zionism (CODZ) was formed in September, 2007, in response to the efforts of certain Zionist organizations in the United States to suppress criticism of Israel and /or Zionism. These efforts, often successful, have included: pressuring academic institutions to deny tenure to faculty who have criticized Israeli policy; demanding the dismissal or suspension of pro-Palestinian teachers and administrators; instigating the denial of lecture and performance venues to critics of Israeli policy; and attempting to suppress distribution of books critical of Israel or Zionism.

Professors around the world are being attacked because of their views on Israel and Palestine.

Why we need to enforce separation

of Church and State.

It is fine to be:

Anti-Catholic, Anti-Luthern, Anti-Witness, Anti-Adventist, Anti-Muslim,

or Anti-Christian Science. BUT we

pass hate crime bills for Anti-Semitic.

Our taxes supporting a religious state

that in reality is a fraud.

Don’t celebrate our Christmas or display

on any public facility. YET we have to have the Star of David on everything.

“Come on”. Our only solution is for none

of it with in our government or policies.

“Transforming Palestine/Israel Into A Single, Secular, Democratic State With Equal Rights for All”
An Idea Whose Time has Come.

SUPPORT THE GOLDSTONE REPORT:

Support the Goldstone Report –War crimes during the attack on Gaza must be investigated. The UN Goldstone report is a well-researched, fair-minded report. Israel and Hamas must conduct credible, independent investigations on war crimes and possible crimes against humanity or face the International Criminal Court. We demand accountability for all victims, respect for the rule of law, international law and human rights.

As we tackle healthcare reform, catastrophic climate change, immigration and high finance reform, the last thing we need is for Congress to pass a resolution full of misinformation and falsehoods just to satisfy friends in AIPAC.

A Conservative Estimate of Total Direct U.S. Aid to Israel: Almost $114 Billion and climbing.

Cost of War in Iraq so far:

$696,626,160,587

Cost of War in Afghanistan so far:

$230,614,992,106

Health care reform will cost: That figure came to $3,885 per capita or $298.7 billion in total. BUT that is spending on Americans; do we have lobbies for us?

History suggests that anticipation of an end to the war might help lift the mood of consumers and investors whose fears now deepen the economic problem.

City, State, % of People below the Poverty Level, Americans in the USA.

1. Detroit , MI 32.5%

2. Buffalo , NY 29.9%

3. Cincinnati , OH 27.8%

4. Cleveland , OH 27.0%

5. Miami , FL 26.9%

6. St. Louis , MO 26.8%

7. El Paso , TX 26.4%

8. Milwaukee , WI 26.2%

9. Philadelphia , PA 25.1%

10. Newark , NJ 24.2%

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006 American Community Survey.

Heal the War-Torn Economy

Stand up for Justice and Say No! To LOCKHEED MONSTER:

During the Great Depression of the 1930’s, homeless men built “shanty towns” around the country and called them “HOOVERVILLES”, after President Herbert Hoover who presided over the worst economic collapse in U.S. history.

Today, we face an economy torn apart by more than a half century of U.S. militarism, empire, and corporate war profiteering. U.S. military spending this year is estimated at $925 billion, a figure that doesn’t include funding for the U.S. occupation of Iraq and the even more costly and escalating war in Afghanistan. The cost of the two wars, funded by supplemental spending, now stands at $14 billion a month. Our country continues to be held in the grip of a war economy resulting in poverty, which Gandhi called “the greatest form of violence”, a culture of unmet human needs here at home, and war and misery for untold millions around the world.

Lockheed Martin is the world’s largest weapons contractor and war profiteer, receiving more than $42.7 billion of our tax dollars annually. War and weapons profits continue to take priority over the justice of a caring economy and society. Many suffer, so very few may profit. The price we pay is:

“LOCKHEEDVILLE: Where the business of war matters (and human needs don’t!)”

ZIONISH WALL—- PEACE 4 ALL——TAKE DOWN THE WALL

Relevant Amendments to the U.S. Constitution

Amendment One: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or of the right of people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Amendment Four: The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Amendment Fourteen: All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws.

“Israel’s diplomatic status is undergoing a rapid collapse, whose like we have never known before. We did undergo crises during the first Lebanon War, the First Intifada and on other occasions – but never did we fall from a such great height to such a low depth, and the bottom is still far down”

Israel resembles a failed state
Ali Abunimah – Electronic Intifada – The shift in public opinion is palpable as Israel`s own actions transform it into a pariah whose driving forces are not the liberal democratic values with which it claims to identify, but ultra-nationalism, racism, religious fanaticism, settler-colonialism and a Jewish supremacist order maintained by frequent massacres.

International law is clear: Israeli settlements are illegal
Iain Scobbie (in reaction to Eric Rozenman)- Los Angeles Times – Israel refused to be seen as the successor state to the Palestinian mandate. Accordingly, it refused to pay the public debt that Palestine owed to Britain. How then can there be a right of Israeli settlement in the West Bank, territory to which Israel itself has never made legal claim?

DEMAND THE PROMISED TRANSPARENCY

Number Of Iraqis Slaughtered In US War And Occupation Of Iraq “1,366,350”

——————————————————————————–

Number of U.S. Military Personnel Sacrificed (Officially acknowledged) In U.S. War And Occupation Of Iraq 4,689

——————————————————————————–

Number Of International Occupation Force Troops Slaughtered In Afghanistan : 1,566

——————————————————————————–

Cost of U.S. War and Occupation of Iraq

$713,614,341,746

DEMAND THE PROMISED TRANSPARENCY:

Americans deserve to know the “TRUE”
facts, that is the rational behind our
“SUNSHINE LAWS”.
Decision making made by lobbist money
delutes our democracy. Foreign lobbies,
registered as American with TAX EXEMPT
STATUS have the most powerful influence
on our agencies, including our defense
department.
It has been reported that 75 retired military officers regularly appearing on television “have ties to military contractors vested in the very war policies they are asked to assess on air.”
Collectively, the group represented “more than 150 military contractors either as lobbyists, senior executives, board members or consultants,” and here’s the kicker: “Those business relationships are hardly ever disclosed to viewers.”Why is that? Media is
silenced by the same lobbies.
“major television networks continue to host retired generals as military analysts without alerting viewers to their extensive ties to defense contractors.”
Additionally, Wired magazine reports that neoconservative think-tankers who directly helped craft the Pentagon’s Afghan escalation are now appearing throughout the media as allegedly disinterested analysts of the escalation — again, without any mention of their concurrent work. Or connections to the Israeli lobbies.

It’s easy to think this opacity is the exclusive transgression of commercial media. Unfortunately, it’s not — it has bled into the country’s single most powerful economic institution, the Federal Reserve.

This is the bank currently lobbying against congressional oversight by arguing it must preserve its “independence” — the same institution whose regional board members are elected by the private banks they regulate and whose chairman, Ben Bernanke, quietly cavorts with the bank CEOs he’s supposed to be independent from. Even worse, the Fed is paying many of the ostensibly objective economists who sculpt the debate about Fed policy.

The Fed today doles out roughly $400 million a year for “research” — much of it to outside economists who then advocate for the Fed’s agenda without disclosing their Fed ties. For instance, seven of the eight economists on a recent anti-oversight letter to Congress failed to note they are or were on the Fed’s payroll.

That blatant chicanery, though, is not the worst of it. The real subterfuge is how the Fed’s shadowy pay scheme bakes an invisible pro-Fed consensus into our public discourse. Through its academic largesse, the Fed “so thoroughly dominates the field of economics that real criticism of the central bank has become a career liability for members of the profession.”

They think they have the USA under control enough, that they now can have global control of everyone’s

money. Our officials sell themselves and us out for personal gain. Will Americans revolt soon enough to regain what we once were, prior to 1994?

American News Media Works In Favor of Israel

A MOCKERY TO RELIGIOUS BELIEF (ISRAEL & USA)

Peace, Propaganda & the Promised Land
U.S. Media & the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict

How Israel manipulates and distorts American public perceptions

Through the voices of scholars, media critics, peace activists, religious figures, and Middle East experts, Peace, Propaganda & the Promised Land carefully analyzes and explains how–through the use of language, framing and context–the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza remains hidden in the news media, and Israeli colonization of the occupied terrorities appears to be a defensive move rather than an offensive one.

The faithful congregations taken for a Deceptive ride by GW Bush, republican party boys, AIPAC, and the organized crime & corruption involved

Will we ever recover from the mess left behind by such atrocities and the cost we will now bear for it all? FAITH BASED???

Explore the ways that U.S. journalists, for reasons ranging from intimidation to a lack of thorough investigation, have become complicit in carrying out Israel’s PR campaign. At its core, the documentary raises questions about the ethics and role of journalism, and the relationship between media and politics.

Explore the ways that U.S. journalists, for reasons ranging from intimidation to a lack of thorough investigation, have become complicit in carrying out Israel’s PR campaign. At its core, the documentary raises questions about the ethics and role of journalism, and the relationship between media and politics

CONSIDERING OUR CONSTITUTION

CHURCH MONIES:

Millions upon millions are embezzled every

year. Major amounts of that goes unreported, seldom is anyone prosecuted.

Missing funds are more common then thought by most members, why, because

it generally goes unreported.

Insiders steal big from unsuspecting churches:

While corporate scandals at Enron and Tyco have made headlines in recent years, churches and other nonprofit entities also have been victims of embezzlement. They can be particularly vulnerable, experts say, because of the level of trust given to employees and volunteers and their lack of sophisticated financial controls and oversight.

We should add here that the biggest

amounts are lost at the top. Not by

accident or mistake or oversight.

There are dozens and dozens of high-profile cases involving churches. There

is very little co-operation with law

enforcement.

Less then 10% of contributions come

back into the communities for the purpose given. Tax exemption is given

by “POLITICIANS” not the people,

for the implied purpose of it coming back to the community.

We see bigger buildings, except in poverty areas, bigger salaries, bigger

autos, bigger homes, expensive suits,

jewelry, and toys.

We do not see much being done for

people in desperate situations. Homeless

etc. Of course we hear that it is OK for

them to steal in that situation, but don’t

go to a church for help. Their monies

are now invested with Defense Contractors, and WAR machines.

For doing so they now can obtain low cost government grants for other business. “Faith based business” what

ever that means. Sort of like Faith based WARS I guess. BUT done with tax payer monies. Is that what we call

Separation of Church & State.

Everyone is entitled to believe or not

believe in their religion of choice, but

none should be supported by tax payer money. Especially a foreign religious

State, with the biggest lobby and influence on officials sworn to uphold

our laws, and to be accountable for such.

We hear that the “TEA PARTY” will

take a complete different approach

with lobbies. Let’s watch and see.

The ” TEA PARTY” promises a much

Different approach to FAIR TAXATION, with no exemptions.

Let’s watch and see.

The “TEA PARTY” promises to hold

War criminals accountable.

Let’s watch and see.

HAVE WE HEARD ALL THESE

PROMISES BEFORE.

HAVE THE PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATIONS AND LIES

MADE YOU ANGRY.

GO TO: highfive4u.com (read)

Ronald L. Waldron
January 15, 2010
Reply

Please investigate and report on the activities of these lobbies, and the real influence on State, Local, and Federal government.

Our alliance with Israel is immoral, corrupt and unconstitutional.

While many have looked into the effect of U.S. foreign policy on the Israeli/Palestinian conflict in general, the role of U.S. policy in internal Palestinian politics and the current divide between the two largest parties in the Palestinian political spectrum has been under discussed. What role has U.S. policy played in the inter-Palestinian divide? Does this help or hurt the long-term stated goal of American policy? Is it time for the US to reevaluate its policy based on these effects?

While economic conditions have improved in the West Bank, the conditions in Gaza continue to worsen after months of siege, devastating attacks and incursions. Largely, economic conditions in the Occupied Territories are greatly controlled by outside powers – most directly the Israeli occupation – and the donor nations which contribute aid money. Economic growth, without independence, continues to be tied to a relaxation of restrictions and an influx of donor dollars. Join us for a discussion on the economic conditions in Palestine and their prospects for change in the coming year.

Does humanitarianism delay a political solution to the question of Palestine? With the siege on Gaza and the occupation effecting the population in dramatic fashion and eliminating basic human needs for millions, there is a noticeable shift in the discourse on Palestine; that is a shift away from the struggle for freedom and toward a struggle for survival. If Palestinians are consumed with surviving for just another day they cannot focus on liberating their land. How does humanitarianism reinforce this situation and how can Palestinians avert suspended catastrophe?

The Palestine Center is an independent think-tank committed to communicating reliable and objective information about the Palestinian political experience to American policy makers, journalists, students and the general public. Established in 1991, it is the educational program.

The Palestine Center brings together people and resources within the American and Palestinian communities to educate about Palestine and the Palestinian people’s ongoing quest for sovereignty on their land, civil and political rights and an end to Israeli occupation.

The need for an organization such as The Palestine Center can be found in the effects of the economic, cultural and political oppression Palestinians have endured and which continues on a daily basis in East Jerusalem, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, the surrounding refugee camps and for Palestinians world-wide as they struggle to retain their homeland.

Palestinians’ ability to maintain their daily lives and strengthen their democratic political system depends on international humanitarian and non-governmental organizations.

a high-profile neoconservative think tank in the United States is reportedly working to establish a link between Iran, the Yemeni opposition groups and al-Qaeda militants. The alleged connection between Iran, the Shia Houthi fighters in northern Yemen, the Yemeni separatists in the south and the militants.

Since the post WWII era, many organizations just like the CSIS have been manipulating the US government to their own power hungry advantage and to their own agenda, without our knowledge. It is time we recognize who these people are and their strategic effects on the US government. It is time to put a stop to their control over America, now! To do this, we need to inform the American people of each organization one by one, alerting Americans to the organizations involved in affecting changes in our country that are illegal and unconstitutional.

Dick Cheney, James Woolsey, Henry Kissinger, James Schlesinger are all current CSIS members.

Mark Neuman, a longtime Jewish Republican activist and White House official during the Reagan administration, in reference to his support of George W. Bush, was quoted as saying this about George W. Bush, “He will surprise people with how diverse his administration will actually be.”

Diverse meaning the coalition between Jewish Neoconservative Democrats, Christian Compassionate Conservative Republicans, Jewish Republicans, Black Republicans and Black Neoconservatives. All of these movements divide party lines because they all have the same political agenda, which is, in a nutshell, US global domination with Israel by its side. These guys are always blaming the “evil terrorists” for everything that is wrong in the world and assert America as the “good-guy-super-power-super-hero” of the world.

Now, that all sounds nice and dandy but it’s just not true. We’d all love America to be the “good-guy-super-hero” of the world. But, sadly, it’s not real, it’s not the truth, it’s just a pretty picture painted with propaganda and lies, framed by your television set. What is real? What they do not show us on TV. The blood, the oil, the money, the power, the greed, land grabbing, hatred and Zionism.

The US Government has been giving military and monetary aid to Israel in their persecution of Palestinians and in the occupation of Palestinian land.

Palestinians have the right to return to their homeland. Because they are not being allowed to return to their native land, this angers many Arabs, many who’ve become “terrorists” in retaliation for Israeli occupation. These Arab revolutionaries or “terrorists” know that the United States of America is aiding Israel in the oppression of their people. This makes them very angry at the United States. They want the US to mind its own damn business. Under the US constitution that would be the right thing for us to do.

Neocons are notorious for avoiding all explanations for terrorists’ hatred towards America, because that would bring questions about US globalization and imperialism. So they “explain” terrorists as “freedom haters” or “anti-Semitics” (ignoring the obvious fact that Arabs can’t be anti-Semitic since they are Semitic) who are insane suicide bombers that enjoy killing people and themselves just because they oppose freedom and American values. The reason for terrorist activity is vastly more complicated than this Neocon explanation. Alternative media sources are trying to get the real news out but in these paranoid “Patriot Act” times, it can be very difficult.

“In spite of constant reassurances about the term ‘democracy’ one is rarely allowed to criticize the country of Israel without suffering some punishing consequence for it. If you are a Jew you may survive the accusations of anti-Semitism but if you consistently express yourself online in any dissidence about Israel’s current politick, you will probably not be immune to cyber attack.” OR worse. Most assassinations in the world including 138 journalist, and political figures is thought to be Mossad operatives.

Neocons support the most extremist elements in Israel such as the Likud Party. The Likud party is made-up of Jewish Zionists.
“The war in Iraq was conceived by 25 Neoconservative intellectuals, most of them Jewish, who pushed President Bush and the Republican Party to change the course of history.”

The AEI is considered by the US government to be America’s foreign policy “experts” that many members of US congress and executive branch depend on for policy decisions. None are ever in the best interest of America.

This Neoconservative think tank is a conglomeration of various groups including, CSIS, JINSA, AEI, ZOA, AIPAC, The Likud Party, the US Government, all of witch represent the Jewish community and Israel. Nothing American except payment made by the American tax-payer, and our sons & daughters in the USA military.

JINSA, CSIS, AEI and AIPAC are all Neoconservative Zionist think tank organizations working together to control US government policy, change laws and basically transform America to fit their ideals and agenda. These organizations were not formed with the interest of the American people in mind.

These Zionist Neoconservative organizations are mostly made up of un-elected officials. They are unconstitutional and un-American organizations that have an iron clad hold on our country and our lives as American citizens.

This needs to change. It can change with our US citizenship involvement in government lobbying with the Senate and Congress. “We the people” can regain our country and fight for our freedom from corporate tyranny perpetuated by these Neoconservatives.

Use your power as voters and US citizens. Our founding fathers decreed that WE rule this land and it is our long overdue responsibility to oust these treasonistic traitors of the American way. The future of America and the world depends upon it! If we do nothing, we are as much to blame as these corrupt corporate tyrants controlling our government.

Work to take back our country and our government today. Release our people from the tyranny of this Zionist occupied government once and for all!

Hypocrisy over the word “terrorism” is not an innocent dispute over semantics; it kills.

What if the entire tale of the Jewish Diaspora is historically wrong? Which of course it is !!

“It’s all fiction and myth that served as an excuse for the establishment of the State of Israel.”

What if the Palestinian Arabs who have lived for decades under the heel of the modern Israeli state are in fact descended from the very same “children of Israel” described in the Old Testament?

And what if most modern Israelis aren’t descended from the ancient Israelites at all, but are actually a mix of Europeans, North Africans and others who didn’t “return” to the scrap of land we now call Israel and establish a new state following the attempt to exterminate them during World War II, but came in and forcefully displaced people whose ancestors had lived there for millennia?

What if the entire tale of the Jewish Diaspora — the story recounted at Passover tables by Jews around the world every year detailing the ancient Jews’ exile from Judea, the years spent wandering through the desert, their escape from the Pharaoh’s clutches — is all wrong?

That’s the explosive thesis of When and How Was the Jewish People Invented?, a book by Tel Aviv University scholar Shlomo Zand (or Sand) that sent shockwaves across Israeli society when it was published last year. After 19 weeks on the Israeli best-seller list, the book is being translated into a dozen languages and will be published in the United States this year by Verso.

Its thesis has ramifications that go far beyond some antediluvian academic debate. Few modern conflicts are as attached to ancient history as that decades-long cycle of bloodletting between Israelis and Palestinians. Each group lays claim to the same scrap of land — holy in all three of the world’s major Abrahamic religions — based on long-standing ties to that chunk of earth and national identities formed over long periods of time. There’s probably no other place on Earth where the present is as intimately tied to the ancient.

Central to the ideology of Zionism is the tale — familiar to all Jewish families — of exile, oppression, redemption and return. Booted from their kingdom by the Romans around 2,000 years ago, the “Jewish people” — sons and daughters of ancient Judea — wandered the earth, rootless, where they faced cruel suppression from all corners — from being forced to toil in slavery under the Egyptians, to the Spanish massacres of the 14th century and Russian pogroms of the 19th, through to the horrors of the Third Reich.

This view of history animates all Zionists, but none more so than the influential but reactionary minority — in the United States as well as Israel — who believe that God bestowed a “Greater Israel” — one that encompasses the modern state as well as the Occupied Territories — on the Jewish people, and who resist any effort to create a Palestinian state on biblical grounds.

Inventing a People? CALL THEM ZIONIST !!

There never was a Jewish people, only a Jewish religion, and the exile also never happened — hence there was no return. Zand rejects most of the stories of national-identity formation in the Bible, including the exodus from Egypt and, most satisfactorily, the horrors of the conquest under Joshua.

The transformation of the Jewish people from a group with a shared cultural identity and religious faith into a vanquished “people” — was a relatively recent invention, hatched in the 19th century by Zionist scholars and advanced by the Israeli academic establishment.
NOW, Monitoring Middle East Studies on Campus. … Israel in the American Classroom .

Campus Watch has been widely accused of intimidating US scholars who have expressed views critical of US and Israeli policies in the Middle East. The organisation’s goal, according to critics, is to pressure US universities to avoid hiring left-wing lecturers or awarding them tenure.

“Students who study here need to know who their lecturers are, and if there are lecturers who oppose the state of Israel it is important to publish their names.”

Eliminate “TRUTH” from the equation, target professors for criticising the occupation, joining protests against Israel’s separation wall, signing petitions or attending conferences critical of Israel, defending the UN report of Judge Richard Goldstone on last winter’s attack on Gaza, or calling for a boycott of Israel.

Any professor, politician, religious leader, or author who opens a discussion critical of Israeli-USA policies have their opinions condemned as “morally repugnant” and warning that they are “welcome to search for a personal and professional home elsewhere”.

An occupation based on lies and genocide cannot afford to have freedom of speech and expression locally or on international level. Isrealis with their powerful Jewish lobby groups in North America and Europe – and the Zionist monopoly on western mainstream media – demand that all their Zionazi activities be kept under the carpet and instead their Palestinian and Lebanese victims be blamed for everything which goes wrong in the Middle East.

The latest example of Israeli rudeness is their on-going diplomatic war with Turkey as result of Turkey TV showing the true nature of Israelis.

All 50 states of the USA have chapters of these foreign lobbies located with-in the state, influencing all State governments, universities, and polling places.

We are and have been facing a coup d’etat, most evident with the 2000 and 2004 elections.

The hopeful 2006 & 2008 elections have not paid off for the American people.

THE FIX IS STILL PRESENT AND SEEMINGLY WILL STAY SO. THE CORRUPTION CONTINUES IN BOTH PARTIES UNABATED.

Ronald L. Waldron Jamestown, NY 14701

rwaldron@stny.rr.com

http://highfive4u.com

Ronald L. Waldron
January 16, 2010
Reply

OBVIOUSLY ITS THE SAME CONTROL
OF GOVERNMENT:
THE FOREIGN INFLUENCE TO SPEND
ONLY ON ISRAEL & THEIR MIDDLE EAST POLICIES.

Obama asks ‘Heckuva job, Brownie’ George W. Bush to help with Haiti relief efforts By Lori Price, http://www.legitgov.org 15 Jan 2010 Mega barf alert AND gag me with a chainsaw! Because George W. Bush did *such* a great job responding to Hurricane Katrina (aka blown levies), President Barack Obama is asking his killer drone soul mate to help with Haiti relief efforts! Such a request assigns legitimacy to the illegitimate P_resident that was Bush, who was installed in a coup d’etat, and serves to permanently elevate Bush from war criminal and torturer (Shock & Awe executor, Waterboarder-in-Chief) to world-class humanitarian.

E-MAIL PROVIDERS are marking
correspondence as SPAM. They
trigger false spam complaints
against any informative letter,
critical of current AIPAC policies.

PRIME EXAMPLES OF THE RIGHT WING AND THEIR ALLIANCE.

With most international aid yet to arrive in Haiti, bodies lined the streets of the capital, the injured gathered at hospitals devoid of doctors or functioning equipment, and swaths of the city were reduced to rubble.
BUT of course the religious and Republican leaders,Robertson and Limbaugh show the right wing rethoric
and instantly politicizing the Haiti quake,
stating Haitians are suffering because they made a pact with the devil?
That “Obama will use Haiti to boost credibility with ‘light-skinned and dark-skinned black community in this country.”
Great examples of the AMERICAN
CHRISTIAN RIGHT. How wrong do
you think they are??
Congregations will give and give, but
the Church will keep their money
invested in the WAR machines.
We are sure that Palin and the rest from
Fox will also through dirt in the face of
suffering peoples.
We wonder how the families of victims
from the States will react to such
remarks.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 18, 2010
Reply

ZIONISM: THE STOLEN JEWISH IDENTITY:

The best term for Zionist Jews, is Zionist Jewish Apostates. They have clearly rejected the commandments of the Torah forbidding establishing an earthly State and commanding them to remain “among the nations” until the Messiah comes. They’ve murdered, and they’ve stolen. And they do NOT represent the practice of real Judaism: Adherence to the Torah’s 10 commandments and 613 laws. They’ve brought ruin and disgrace and Antisemitism upon all Jews.
Zionism is a policy of the Third Reich.

Is the media controlled by Jews? No. It’s controlled by Zionist Jewish Apostates who’ve done to Judaism exactly what Radical Jihadists have done to Islam. The American media is 100 percent controlled by them, as is international banking, the dollar, and the United States. They are international gangsters, falsely hiding behind a usurped Jewish identity, nothing more. Their six pointed star’s origins are not even Hebrew but Babylonian. The Star of Moses has five points. They’re not “Semites”, nor does being a real Jew require one to be a Semite. It requires obedience to the Torah. “Antisemitism” is “newspeak”, a lie. “Israel” as a Jewish national state, is blasphemous under Jewish law. What can stop them. Wrong question. They are the most hated nation on earth. The outrage around the world against them grows on their murderous fascist imposition like a cancer.

Israel can not possibly survive. They can kill as many people opposing them, as their superior technology allows them to, but they can not kill the contempt it grows.

We now Question: Has the basic American
Christian identity also been stolen
by the same Zionist movement??
Remember the America that was once
respected and loved by most?
Have foreign lobbies and influence of the
corrupt zionist syndicate become the
occupiers of our governments, local,
state, and federal ? Are our universities
also becoming occupied by the foreign
Zionist movement?

How nieve Americans have become, totally
deficient in worldly wisdom or informed judgement. OPEN your eyes and ears.

The ZOA Campus Activism Network publishes a national student pro-Israel magazine, The College Zionist.

THE ZIONISH WALL: Peace4All–Take
down the Wall. New book coming soon .

TIME FOR SEPERATION OF CHURCH AND SYNDICATE!!

Ronald L. Waldron
March 18, 2010
Reply

MONOPOLIES IN AMERICA

48 % OF USA BILLIONAIRES ARE JEWISH-ZIONIST
Do you ever wonder about where the control of our
financial institutions, including Wall Street remains .

Monopolies in America:

Federated, they own all of the major department stores in America, many of which are in the same mall. This diminishes the chance of any competition. Also, Walmart is probably one of the biggest monopolies in America. They come into neighborhoods, offer jobs at minimum wage and put all the ‘mom and pop’ stores out of business, making it nearly impossible to buy from anybody but them.

They are so powerful they spend twenty four hours a day working out how they can alliminate the other to define themselves as a few. Mc Donalds, Micro Soft, Bank owners and the Wall Street Market. Kentucky Fried Chicken, all major companies, they work into gether and take out the weakest link. But if you want to get serious you can include the Bush family, Rockafella family,Binladin family, and of course the Rothchild family which are all linked to the National security bank. They run the world and they are the main players in the world. The others go under them. A secret society and they run the show. They push the buttons and then sit back and watch the game run on its own. And the money just keeps growing in the bank.

Monopolies continued:

According to these reports, Madoff was the chief financier for a vast Israeli spy and sabotage network set up by former Israeli Security Agency (Shin Bet) director Jacob Perry (Yaakov Peri) who `transformed’ himself into one of America’s most powerful businessman and led what FSB sources call the “Murderous/Fatal Gang of 7″ which references the leaders of this American-Israeli cabal who besides Madoff and Perry include:
Henry Taub, Hungarian born American-Israeli who created the giant United States payroll company ADP which continues to funnel to Israeli intelligence services financial records for nearly every US citizen.
Maurice Greenberg, American-Israeli who was the former chairman and CEO of American International Group (AIG), the World’s 18th largest public company and its largest insurance and financial services corporation which has (so far) funneled over $180 billion in US taxpayer money directly to Israel.
Larry Silverstein, the American-Israeli billionaire who secured a lease for the World Trade Center buildings in New York on July 24, 2001, insured them for $3.55 billion spread among 24 different insurance companies, and after their destruction 2 months later on 9/11 collected $4.55 billion for Israel.
Mort Zuckerman, Canadian born American-Israeli billionaire who through his vast publishing empire has direct control over 70 percent of the news reported in the United States.
Edouard de Rothschild, French born American-Israeli member of the all powerful European Rothschild Banking Empire and director of the Rothschild & Cie Banque reported by the FSB to hold nearly 80% of the wealth stolen by Israel from the United States Government and its citizens.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 25, 2010
Reply

Hey everyone,

I wanted to see if I could get your quick help. I just started a petition on Change.org titled ” BOYCOTT BP, DO NOT BAIL THEM OUT !!”, and I’d love your support. You can sign the petition in less than 30 seconds by clicking the link below:

http://www.change.org/petitions/view/boycott_bp_do_not_bail_them_out_

Thanks so much for the help!

– Ronald

SINK OR SWIM LIKE WE THE PEOPLE HAVE TO !!

BP continues to stonewall the American people about the growing Deep Horizon disaster in the Gulf, even while the company reaps millions of dollars in profits each day from its other federal leases.

The White House, the Department of Interior, and Congress are all crying foul, but they are not taking action to hold BP accountable. If the Obama administration is serious about making BP pay, there is a very simple and powerful tool at its disposal: the EPA can take away BP’s billions in federal contracts.

BOYCOTT IS IN ORDER. NO MORE BAIL-OUTS !!

You won’t believe this: As the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig continues to spill over 1 million gallons of oil into the Gulf everyday, Republicans are demanding less regulation for companies like BP and Transocean while also looking for a taxpayer-funded bailout of BP. Yeah, I’m serious. Impose sanctions on BP now..

VOTE ALL INCUMBENTS OUT OF OFFICE, NO MORE
DUEL CITIZENSHIP CANDIDATES, with conflicts of
interest. Special foreign interest, government officials
that are members of AIPAC. Ethics ??

Ronald L. Waldron
September 4, 2010
Reply

PROTECT OUR CONSTITUTION FROM-“RIGHT-WINGERS”
GOP “TRANSPARENCY”

Watch your elected officials on this issue. –THE CONSTITUTION.– GOP “TRANSPARENCY”– Shaping the Party’s Agenda–

GOP “Transparency” Means an Open Meeting with Lobbyists Who Will Shape the Party’s Agenda. Just how many foreigners that will be is yet undetermined. You can be sure AIPAC and associates will be well accounted for in the midst of their continued agenda. Of course we will hear and read all about it from their MEDIA.

Corruption still strong at Party Leadership.

THE CORRUPTION AND TREASON CONTINUES:

TRUTH COUNTS—-DON’T COUNT ON GETTING IT

Ronald L. Waldron
September 4, 2010
Reply

OLD NEWS—–REMEMBER IT??

RONALD L. WALDRON says:
12/20/2006 at 1:57 pm
DIPLOMATS SUPPRESSED DOCUMENT :

It’s the equivalent of another Downing Street Memo… Huge news!, but I’ve found only ONE MSM news report of it in this country, ” Ex-British expert on Iraq says intel overstated “. And Google News returns ZERO matches for that one news report! Imagine that …..
Diplomat’s suppressed document lays bare the lies behind Iraq war
The Government’s case for going to war in Iraq has been torn apart by the publication of previously suppressed evidence that Tony Blair lied over Saddam Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction. A devastating attack on Mr Blair’s justification for military action by Carne Ross, Britain’s key negotiator at the UN, has been kept under wraps until now because he was threatened with being charged with breaching the Official Secrets Act… ( more )

In the testimony revealed today Mr Ross, 40, who helped negotiate several UN security resolutions on Iraq, makes it clear that Mr Blair must have known Saddam Hussein possessed no weapons of mass destruction. He said that during his posting to the UN, “at no time did HMG [Her Majesty’s Government] assess that Iraq’s WMD (or any other capability) posed a threat to the UK or its interests.”

Mr Ross revealed it was a commonly held view among British officials dealing with Iraq that any threat by Saddam Hussein had been “effectively contained”.

He also reveals that British officials warned US diplomats that bringing down the Iraqi dictator would lead to the chaos the world has since witnessed. “I remember on several occasions the UK team stating this view in terms during our discussions with the US (who agreed),” he said.

“At the same time, we would frequently argue when the US raised the subject, that ‘regime change’ was inadvisable, primarily on the grounds that Iraq would collapse into chaos.”

He claims “inertia” in the Foreign Office and the “inattention of key ministers” combined to stop the UK carrying out any co-ordinated and sustained attempt to address sanction-busting by Iraq, an approach which could have provided an alternative to war.

Mr Ross delivered the evidence to the Butler inquiry which investigated intelligence blunders in the run-up to the conflict.

The Foreign Office had attempted to prevent the evidence being made public, but it has now been published by the Commons Select Committee on Foreign Affairs after MPs sought assurances from the Foreign Office that it would not breach the Official Secrets Act.

It shows Mr Ross told the inquiry, chaired by Lord Butler, “there was no intelligence evidence of significant holdings of CW [chemical warfare], BW [biological warfare] or nuclear material” held by the Iraqi dictator before the invasion. “There was, moreover, no intelligence or assessment during my time in the job that Iraq had any intention to launch an attack against its neighbours or the UK or the US,” he added.

Mr Ross’s evidence directly challenges the assertions by the Prime Minster that the war was legally justified because Saddam possessed WMDs which could be “activated” within 45 minutes and posed a threat to British interests. These claims were also made in two dossiers, subsequently discredited, in spite of the advice by Mr Ross.

His hitherto secret evidence threatens to reopen the row over the legality of the conflict, under which Mr Blair has sought to draw a line as the internecine bloodshed in Iraq has worsened.

Mr Ross says he questioned colleagues at the Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defence working on Iraq and none said that any new evidence had emerged to change their assessment.

“What had changed was the Government’s determination to present available evidence in a different light,” he added.

Mr Ross said in late 2002 that he “discussed this at some length with David Kelly”, the weapons expert who a year later committed suicide when he was named as the source of a BBC report saying Downing Street had “sexed up” the WMD claims in a dossier. The Butler inquiry cleared Mr Blair and Downing Street of “sexing up” the dossier, but the publication of the Carne Ross evidence will cast fresh doubts on its findings.

Mr Ross, 40, was a highly rated diplomat but he resigned because of his misgivings about the legality of the war. He still fears the threat of action under the Official Secrets Act.

“Mr Ross hasn’t had any approach to tell him that he is still not liable to be prosecuted,” said one ally. But he has told friends that he is “glad it is out in the open” and he told MPs it had been “on my conscience for years”.

One member of the Foreign Affairs committee said: “There was blood on the carpet over this. I think it’s pretty clear the Foreign Office used the Official Secrets Act to suppress this evidence, by hanging it like a Sword of Damacles over Mr Ross, but we have called their bluff.”

Yesterday, Jack Straw, the Leader of the Commons who was Foreign Secretary during the war – Mr Ross’s boss – announced the Commons will have a debate on the possible change of strategy heralded by the Iraqi Study Group report in the new year.

The Government’s case for going to war in Iraq has been torn apart by the publication of previously suppressed evidence that Tony Blair lied over Saddam Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.

By Colin Brown and Andy McSmith
Published: 15 December 2006
Be sure to snag a personal copy of the full transcript of evidence given to the Butler inquiry ….

WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, WHY, AND HOW ?

We certainly know now that Republicans in power cannot be trusted with the Constitution or the Budget.OR ANYTHING FOR THAT MATTER:
Twice now they just found it easier to go off and make wars rather than tackle the real reforms America needs. Donâ€™t forget that Bush Father also caved in on taxes & spending, once he started his war, just as his son followed the same path. The warfare state always pays homage to the Welfare State.
Freedom of expression consists of the rights to freedom of speech, press, assembly and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

A nonpartisan, international foundation advocating free press and speech rights for all people.Has been under attack for the last six years.

Due to Presidential Executive Orders, the National Security Agency may have read this email without warning, warrant, or notice. They may do this without any judicial or legislative oversight. You have no recourse nor protection save to call for the impeachment of the current President.

Many committees in the House and Senate, without taking any energy away from ending the war, can finally conduct the investigations that have gone undone for 6 years, exposing evidence that could very well lead to criminal, civil, or political accountability, as well as pressure to end the war and precedent to help prevent the next war.

State-Watch encourages the publication of investigative journalism and critical research in the fields of the state, civil liberties and openness,regarding telecommunications surveillance initiatives. Statewatch is a non-profit volunteer group comprised of lawyers, academics, journalists, researchers and community activists. The Global Internet Liberty Campaign is dedicated to promoting fundamental rights in the information society and cyberspace; towards that end, it has campaigned heavily against various government data retention proposals.

We’re sorry, the page you’re looking for has
been moved or been deleted by order of your
government. It is coming if our first Amendment rights
are not protected.

Freedom of expression, speech, and press has been
deluted down to. Yor have such right as long as it is
Politically correct, does not offend the executive department,
and conforms to its way of thinking. You are on my side or
you will pay penalties for it.
Penalties such as 112 Journalist killed, press offices being
blown up. Shot at newly established check points, or fired
if your information is somewhat incorrect.
The rules coming from the executive, influenced by
lobbies foreign or corporate, with no regard for the
people.
I notice, which I hope you have, the Media seems
more willing to report , and under less restraint the
last couple of weeks. Like since the last election.
The caution now remains with the “ownership of”
and influence by outside lobbies, over mainstream
media.

AMERICANS must remain vigilant, in protecting
OUR Constitution. STAY INVOLVED…

Contact the Media About Impeachment Coverage

The Bush Administration has ignored the Constitution. Impeachable offenses need to be investigated. These are two statements that are true, yet are rarely heard via the mainstream American media. We have all seen what complacency in the media can bring. The Iraq War could not have been executed without it. Impeachment is being framed as a distraction or as revenge. It is time for the media to discuss the real evidence that supports Impeachment and leave the opining to the citizens of this country.OLD NEWS–

Ronald L. Waldron
November 26, 2010
Reply

PERPETUAL WASHINGTON CORRUPTION: IT IS A TWO PARTY SYSTEM!

PERPETUAL WASHINGTON CORRUPTION:

The depth of their corruption knows no limits.

Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY) is a fifth-term senator from Kentucky. He is the minority leader in the 111th Congress and sits on the Senate Appropriations Committee. He was included in CREW’s 2007, 2008 and 2009 reports on congressional corruption for exchanging earmarks for campaign contributions by clients of his former chief of staff.

A good-government group has cited Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell, of Kentucky, as one of the 26 most corrupt members of Congress, chiding the veteran lawmaker for directing federal funds toward political friends.

John Boehner admits to giving bribes from Big Tobacco on the House floor :
Boehner came under fire for distributing campaign checks from tobacco interests to colleagues on the House floor.

Last year, Rep. Boehner supported legislation that would benefit banks that make student loans and increase payments for millions of students. Banks and other institutions that provide loans to students donated nearly $60,000 to Boehner and nearly $70,000 to his leadership PAC, the Freedom Project.
Boehner Likes to Travel on the Dime of Special Interests:
A group of Washington lobbyists led by Richard Kessler under the umbrella of the Ripon Educational Fund and the Ripon Society has spent millions of dollars taking lawmakers to European capitals and U.S. resorts, thereby skirting congressional ethics rules that forbid registered lobbyists from paying for congressional travel. John Boehner took two trips costing a total of at least $13,920.
Boehner has Connections to the Abramoff Scandal:
John Boehner received $32,500 in political contributions from Indian tribes represented by fallen lobbyist Jack Abramoff, placing him in the top tier of lawmakers who got donations from the lobbyist or his clients.
Boehner and Rep. Roy Blunt (R-MO) were the point men for former Majority Leader Tom DeLay (R-TX) in communicating with corporate lobbyists. At one point, Boehner even convened a weekly meeting called the “Thursday Group” to huddle with K Street lobbyists.

Rep. Charles Rangel (D-NY) is a twentieth-term member of Congress representing New York’s 15th district. Rep. Rangel was included in CREW’s 2008 and 2009 reports on congressional corruption. Rep. Rangel’s ethics issues stem from (1) improperly leasing four rent-controlled apartments; (2) improperly using congressional stationary; (3) failing to report rental income from a vacation property; and (4) trading legislative assistance for contributions to the Rangel Center at City College. Rep. Rangel is awaiting trial by the House ethics committee.

On Feb. 25, 2010, in a separate matter, the House ethics committee admonished Rep. Rangel for his acceptance of corporate-sponsored trips to the Caribbean.

Harry Reid: The Most Corrupt of the Corrupt?
Nevada Senate 2010, Harry Reid racks up Republican endorsements:

INVESTIGATE NANCY PELOSI for CORRUPTION, ETHICS VIOLATIONS, and HER FAMILIES’ PROFITEERING from taxpayer extorted “Bailouts” billions!
IF Congresswoman Maxine Waters is charged, by the House Ethics Committee, with “improperly benefiting” from a “BAILOUT” loan the powerful Minority Congresswoman insisted by steered to save her own local, community bank back during the financial crisis of September 2008… then the House Ethics Committee should INVESTIGATE __EVERY__ member of Congress, to see how much THEIR stocks and pension portfolios have BENEFITED from the TRILLIONS of American taxpayer dollars the Pelosi 110th & 111th Congresses have dished out to “bail out” the big New York, Wall Street, Chicago, and San Francisco banks… ..INCLUDING the multi-million dollar investment holdings of SPEAKER PELOSI and HER own family members!

Clearly the politicians don’t get it. America should NOT be about corruption. Americans don’t LIKE the corruption of the Halliburton, Blackwater, AIPAC, Zionist congress. Americans are getting tired of the Greedy Old Parties. Why are politicians so soft on corruption? Why do they seem to favor their MOST corrupt members rather than force them into line?
They all look for, and likely receive a piece of the PIE!

26 more Reasons for Ethics Reform
16 Republicans–10 Democrats, the list keeps growing.

Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN)
Rep. Roy Blunt (R-MO)
Rep. Vern Buchanan (R-FL)
Sen. Roland Burris (D-IL)
Rep. Ken Calvert (R-CA)
Sen. John Ensign (R-NV)
Rep. Doc Hastings (R-WA)
Rep. Jesse Jackson, Jr. (D-IL)
Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-LA)
Rep. Jerry Lewis (R-CA)
Rep. Dan Lipinski (D-IL)
Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY)
Rep. Gary Miller (R-CA)
Rep. Alan B. Mollohan (D-WV)
Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R-AK)
Rep. Tim Murphy (R-PA)
Rep. Charles B. Rangel (D-NY)
Rep. Laura Richardson (D-CA)
Rep. Harold Rogers (R-KY)
Rep. David Scott (D-GA)
Rep. Pete Sessions (R-TX)
Rep. Mike Turner (R-OH)
Rep. Pete Visclosky (D-IN)
Sen. David Vitter (R-LA)
Rep. Maxine Waters (D-CA)
Rep. Don Young (R-AK)
We need a third party, but certainly not the Tea Party. All ready heavily influenced by the republicans.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 21, 2010
Reply

Letter to the Editor

America, from the change we expected, to change by foreign influence.
Failure upon failure will continue if we do not set the stage, and demand the
reforms expected by we the “American” people.
From no child left behind, to no witness left behind. From strong leadership
to profiteering by foreign lobby, and privatization of government agencies,
values, and responsibility of government to corporate greed and fascism.
From United we stand, to division by FALSE prophecies, propaganda and
foreign agenda. From freedom of religious belief, separated from government.
To faith forced by government regulation and old testament teachings, rather
then that of the New Testament Era we live in, and 95% of Americans should
have faith in.
Merry Christmas watered down to retail profits, and all related issues watered
down also.
What should be one of the most wonderful spiritual times of year is full of
atrocities in the Holy land, and very disturbing destruction, with no concerted
effort for reform or true democracy any where in the lands of Palestine.
No one is or has been held accountable, but in time I certainly believe the
false prophecies will not go unpunished.
Gods people are the peace makers, not the takers.
It may not be political correctness to say Merry Christmas, but in the
Hearts & Minds of most Americans, we say Merry Christmas and Happy
New Year. Hearts & Minds not changed by force or propaganda.
Was Christ born in Bethlehem? Is he the son of God? Who’s holy land
is it?
No government, Lobby, or legislation will change the hearts & minds
of we the people of America. Land of the FREE?

Ronald L. Waldron
48 Hammond Street
Jamestown, N.Y. 14701

MERRY CHRISTMAS, AND HAPPY NEW YEAR !!

Ronald L. Waldron
June 10, 2011
Reply

Israelis Rush
for Second Passports

If political and social trends
continue, as many as half
of the Jews now living in Israel
will consider leaving in the
next few years.

Franklin Lamb
June 3-5, 2011

Perhaps historians or cultural anthropologists surveying the course of
human events can identify for us a land, in addition to Palestine, where such
a large percentage of a recently arrived colonial population prepared to
exercise their right to depart, while many more, with actual millennial roots
but victims of ethnic cleansing, prepared to exercise their right of return.

One of the many ironies inherent in the 19th century Zionist colonial
enterprise in Palestine is the fact that this increasingly fraying project
was billed for most of the 20th century as a haven in the Middle East for
“returning” persecuted European Jews. But today, in the 21st century, it is
Europe that is increasingly being viewed by a large number of the illegal
occupiers of Palestinian land as the much desired haven for returning
Middle Eastern Jews. To paraphrase Jewish journalist Gideon Levy “If our
forefathers dreamt of an Israeli passport to escape from Europe, there are
many among us who are now dreaming of a second passport to escape to
Europe.”

Several studies in Israel and one conducted by AIPAC and another by the
Jewish National Fund in Germany show that perhaps as many as half of the
Jews living in Israel will consider leaving Palestine in the next few years
if current political and social trends continue. A 2008 survey by the
Jerusalem-based Menachem Begin Heritage Center found that 59 per cent of
Israelis had approached or intended to approach a foreign embassy to
inquire about or apply for citizenship and a passport. Today it is estimated
that the figure is approaching 70 per cent.

The number of Israelis thinking of leaving Palestine is climbing rapidly
according to researchers at Bar-Ilan University who conducted a study
published recently in Eretz Acheret, (“A Different Place”) an Israeli NGO
that claims to promote cultural dialogue. What the Bar-Ilan study found is
that more than 100,000 Israelis already hold a German passport, and this
figure increases by more than 7,000 every year along an accelerating
trajectory. According to German officials, more than 70,000 such passports
have been granted since 2000. In addition to Germany, there are more than
one million Israelis with other foreign passports at the ready in case life
in Israel deteriorates.

One of the most appealing countries for Israelis contemplating emigration,
as well as perhaps the most welcoming, is the United States. Currently more
than 500,000 Israelis hold US passports with close to a quarter million
pending applications. During the recent meetings in Washington DC between
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s delegation and Israel’s US agents,
assurances were reportedly given by AIPAC officials that if and when it
becomes necessary, the US government will expeditiously issue American
passports to any and all Israeli Jews seeking them. Israeli Arabs need not
apply.

AIPAC also represented to the Israelis that the US Congress could be trusted
to approve funding for arriving Israeli Jews “to be allocated substantial
cash resettlement grants to ease transition into their new country.”

Apart from the Israeli Jews who may be thinking of getting an “insurance
passport” for a Diaspora land, there is a similar percentage of Jews
worldwide who aren’t going to make aliyah. According to Jonathan Rynhold,
a Bar Ilan professor specializing on U.S.-Israel relations, Jews may be safer
in Teheran than Ashkelon these days—until Israel or the USA starts bombing
Iran.

Interviews with some of those who either helped conduct the above noted
studies or have knowledge of them, identify several factors that explain the
Israeli rush for foreign passports, some rather surprising, given the
ultra-nationalist Israeli culture. The common denominator is unease and
anxiety, both personal and national, with the second passport considered a
kind of insurance policy “for the rainy days visible on the horizon,” as one
researcher from Eretz Acheret explained.

Other factors include:

• The fact that two or three generations in Israel has not proven enough to
implant roots where few if any existed before. For this reason Israel has
produced a significant percentage of “re-immigration” — a return of
immigrants or their descendants to their country of origin which Zionist
propaganda to the contrary notwithstanding, is not Palestine. Fear that
religious fanatics from among the more than 600,000 settlers in the West
Bank will create civil war and essentially annex pre-1967 Israel and turn
Israel more toward an ultra-fascist state.

• Centripetal pressures within Israeli society, especially among Russian
immigrants who overwhelmingly reject Zionism. Since the fall of the Berlin
Wall in 1989, some one million Jews have come to Israel from the former
Soviet Union, enlarging the country’s population by 25 per cent and forming
the largest concentration in the world of Russian Jews. But today, Russian
Jews comprise the largest group emigrating from Israel and they have been
returning in droves for reasons ranging from opposition to Zionism,
discrimination, and broken promises regarding employment and “the good
life” in Israel.

• Approximately 200,000 or 22 per cent of Russians coming to Israel since 1990
have so far returned to their country. According to Rabbi Berel Larzar, who
has been Russia’s chief Rabbi since 2000, “It’s absolutely extraordinary how
many people are returning. When Jews left, there was no community, no Jewish
life. People felt that being Jewish was an historical mistake that happened
to their family. Now, they know they can live in Russia as part of a
community and they don’t need Israel.”

• No faith in or respect for Israeli leaders, most of whom are considered
corrupt.

• Feelings of anxiety and guilt that Zionism has hijacked Judaism and that
traditional Jewish values are being corrupted.

• The recent growing appreciation, for many Israelis, significantly abetted by
the Internet and the continuing Palestinian resistance, of the compelling
and challenging Palestinians narrative that totally undermines the Zionist
clarion of the last century of “ A People without and land for a land
without a people.”

• Fear mongering of the political leaders designed to keep citizens
supporting the government’s policies, ranging from the Iranian bomb, the
countless “terrorists” seemingly everywhere and planning another Holocaust
or various existential threats that keep families on edge and concluding that
they don’t want to raise their children under such conditions.

Explaining that he was speaking as a private citizen and not as a member of
Democrats Abroad Israel, New York native Hillel Schenker suggested that
Jews who come to Israel “want to make sure that they have the possibility of
an alternative to return whence they came.” He added that the “insecurities
involved in modern life, and an Israel not yet living at peace with any of
its neighbors, have also produced a phenomenon of many Israelis seeking a
European passport, based on their family roots, just in case.”

Gene Schulman, a former American-Jewish fellow at the Switzerland-based
Overseas American Academy, put it even more drastically, emphasizing that
all Jews are “scared to death of what is probably going to become of Israel
even if the U.S. continues its support for it.” Many observers of Israeli
society agree that a major, if unexpected recent impetus for Jews to leave
Palestine has been the past three months of the Arab Awakening that
overturned Israel’s key pillars of regional support.

According to Layal, a Palestinian student from Shatila Camp, who is
preparing for the June 5 “Naksa” march to the Blueline in South Lebanon,
“What the Zionist occupiers of Palestine saw from Tahrir Square in Cairo to
Maroun al Ras in South Lebanon has convinced many Israelis that the Arab
and Palestinian resistance, while still in its nascence, will develop into a
massive and largely peaceful ground swell such that no amount of weapons
or apartheid administration can insure a Zionist future in Palestine. They
are right to seek alternative places to raise their families.”

Franklin Lamb

dedicated server review
June 29, 2012
Reply

I have learned some new things via your blog site.

One other thing I’d prefer to say is newer computer operating systems are likely to allow more memory for use, but they as well demand more memory space simply to run. If a person’s computer can’t handle much more memory as well as the newest computer software requires that memory increase, it could be the time to buy a new PC. Thanks

Ronald L. Waldron
September 25, 2012
Reply

President Obama,

A sizable number of us Americans understand the pressure you are under from Israel to attack Iran. We also know that your military and intelligence advisors are telling you this would be disastrous to our nation. We also know that if Israel does not get her way she will more than likely try another false flag attempt on an American interest somewhere, no different than what took place with Israel’s attack on the USS LIBERTY in 1967. The American people are with you and do not want another war for Israel’s benefit. Stay firm and resolute in the face of the demands they are making on you.

We also know the silence of the Republican Party, media,J-street,religious leaders, and AIPAC when it comes to the threats against you from Israel, Mossad and their leaders.

We support you and yours, and realize how corruption has taken over in many ways over you rivals. PLEASE stay safe and healthy.

There remains more questions then answers regarding 911 and where the responcibility of such attack truly came from, and is israel an ally of the United States?

We rightfully have our doubts, based on all the false flag operations created by them.

Zionism (The downfall of America)

Zionism is expansionistic, very much like a malignant cancer. This is why, no people on earth can remain safe if living with or next to Zionism.

Racism, genocide, murder, your choice. … Ideology both religious and secular Zionism.

Zionists can go to the devil! There is no need to assist them in their aims of globalization.

Zionism:

The one world order. One world government, BANK, religious belief, and control of educational institutions.

Zionist Collaboration With the Nazis, the killing of Torah Jews, and the stealing of their identity.

The organized Crime syndicate that now controls the USA government, leading to America’s downfall.

Politicians, religious leaders, and media alike bought out.

Wars and more Wars for the benefit of Israel and Zionism.

To call the actions as a benefit for and by the World is more deception, more compounded lies. Watch the

war profiteers and benefit for them. (The Zionist)

Beware of the private military, private policing, and private run jails & prisons.

The cost of such falls on the middle class worker & tax-payers. Tax cuts for the rich and powerful.

48% of the billionaires in America and/or the world are Zionist criminals. People never held accountable

for their actions. Moral values never is associated with Zionism, and never will be.

How-ever most can associate Zionism with the anti-Christ.

http://www.universal-peace.com

Jews Hate Christians

Ronald L. Waldron
September 30, 2012
Reply

MR. Netanyahu:

Please explain to the UN and the rest of the world, the fact that ISRAEL is and has been way beyond the “RED_LINE” for years.

WHY no inspections are allowed ? why Israel does not sign a non-proliferation treaty ?

It certainly does not take a brain surgeon to see why you have so many enemies!

Israel should be stopped or all will be lost:
“Christianity has been corrupted by Zionist interests and is now being used as a tool in infecting the rest of the world,” Mark Glenn, from the Crescent and Cross Solidarity Movement, wrote in a letter addressed to the Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

Glenn said the Zionists are trying to pit the Christians and Muslims against each other, in what has become the “clash of civilizations,” through corrupt media, corrupt culture, immorality, war, economic exploitation, and a whole host of other diseases.

“Their goal is obvious – to see these two peoples destroy each other so that like some vulture she can pick the carcasses clean for herself,” Glenn said.

He further asked for an extensive interview with the Iranian president on issues ranging from the Israeli plots for the Middle East and how it is trying to bring its “evil desires” about, such as war and terrorism etc., to the conspiracies that the US and Israel have committed against Iran since 1953 to the commonalties between Islam and Christianity.

Israel is widely known to be the sole possessor of nuclear weapons in the Middle East. Tel Aviv began building its first plutonium and uranium processing facility, Dimona, in the Negev desert in 1958.

Former US President Jimmy Carter said Israel has a nuclear arsenal that includes between 200 and 300 warheads. Decades of recurrent reporting and aerial footage have also established the possession of atomic arms by Israel.

Under its official policy of nuclear ambiguity, Tel Aviv neither confirms nor denies the possession of nukes and refuses to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) or allow inspections of its nuclear facilities.

“I am convinced that if the Christian world were made aware of the fact that their enemies are NOT the Muslims but rather the Zionists who have all but destroyed their religion and culture, that we will be able to eventually get a rope around the neck of this animal where it could be thrown back into the cage where it belongs,” Glenn concluded.

Mark Glenn.

Panetta to Netanyahu:” Israel may not survive the current Arab/Islamic awakening”
In the Next War, Only Fleeing Israelis Will Be Safe
Having trouble viewing this email? View it in your browser .

September 19th, 2012

The Red Line on Iran

Take Action now and tell your Senator that you do not support war with Iran!

TAKE ACTION NOW!

Your voice is needed to tell your Senators that now is not the time for military action against Iran. As the presidential election approaches, Iran’s pursuit of a nuclear weapon has returned to the spotlight, reducing a major diplomatic effort into partisan saber-rattling. Many public figures are again calling for renewed talk of a military strike again, even though U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice has said there hasn’t been enough time for the diplomatic process to take effect.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu took to the American airwaves Sunday to demand the U.S. set a “red line” that Iran must not cross if it wishes to avoid war with Israel. Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney also spent a lot of time talking about a red line last week, who has stated that he would order a military strike before Iran acquired a bomb. New York Times columnist Nicholas Kristof declared this position, “a blithe, too-light embrace of a path to yet another war.”

The economic, political and human costs would be devastating. After more than a decade of war costing thousands of American lives and trillions of dollars, America cannot afford the costs of another war of choice in the Middle East. A recent report endorsed by more than 30 former military officers, diplomats and others explained that for a military operation to achieve more than a temporary setback to Iran’s nuclear program, a ground war with Iran would be more costly than the Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined. Further, security experts from across the political spectrum agree that military action would at best delay, not prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon.

Now is not the time for launching a war against Iran, and we know the American public agrees. A recent survey by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs indicated that a full 70% of Americans are opposed to unilateral military action against Iran. Our politicians need to hear this opposition directly from you, their constituents. Some in Congress – who are being lobbied hard every day by familiar war hawks- continue to push the nation towards war, calling for an end to diplomacy and a return to the disastrous policies that led our nation into the swamps of Iraq.

Will you take a few minutes to send a message to your Senator, telling them you want the want the U.S. to strengthen diplomatic efforts to avoid an unnecessary military confrontation with Iran?

Organized religion & Organized crime, partners of crime , corruption, and Deception under the umbrella of the Republican party and their faith based corporate world.

Last week, when Democrats tried to extend the payroll tax cuts Obama passed last year — you know, the tax cuts that actually benefited poor and middle class workers — Republicans blocked it.

They said paying for the cuts by raising taxes on millionaires stops job creation. Senator Harry Reid had a great response:

“Millionaire job creators are like unicorns. They are impossible to find and don’t exist.”
Frankly, Republicans are hypocrites that only care about lining the pockets of their big-money friends and it’s time we called them out for it.

GET OUT AND VOTE FOR DEMOCRATS THIS YEAR

We need elected OFFICIALS who represent what the people want.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 16, 2012
Reply

The world is changing, and with it the demands on the United Nations. Because the USA Congress is impudent which seems permanent.

UN provides a unique platform for international action. It offers unparalleled legitimacy for global engagement, owing to its universal membership; its inclusive decision-making processes; its unequalled reach; and its ability to provide critical services that are essential to international The world is changing, and with it the demands on the United Nations. The peace, security, stability and prosperity.
The United Nations is engaged in a continuous process of change and reform to strengthen its ability to meet new demands and deliver its vital services in the most effective and efficient ways. This means:

Constant emphasis on transparency, accountability, integrity, efficiency and flexibility.
Creating an environment in which improvement is expected and innovation is welcomed.
These efforts are aimed at delivering results to those most in need, doing more with what we have and strengthening accountability.

IF JESUS CAME TO ISRAEL TODAY.
President Obama,
A sizable number of us Americans understand the pressure you are under from Israel to attack Iran. We also know that your military and intelligence advisors are telling you this would be disastrous to our nation. We also know that if Israel does not get her way she will more than likely try another false flag attempt on an American interest somewhere, no different than what took place with Israel’s attack on the USS LIBERTY in 1967. The American people are with you and do not want another war for Israel’s benefit. Stay firm and resolute in the face of the demands they are making on you.
We also know the silence of the Republican Party, media,J-street,religious leaders, and AIPAC when it comes to the threats against you from Israel, Mossad and their leaders.
We support you and yours, and realize how corruption has taken over in many ways over you rivals. PLEASE stay safe and healthy.
There remains more questions then answers regarding 911 and where the responsibility of such attack truly came from, and is israel an ally of the United States?
We rightfully have our doubts, based on all the false flag operations created by them.
Zionism (The downfall of America)

Zionism is expansionistic, very much like a malignant cancer. This is why, no people on earth can remain safe if living with or next to Zionism.
Racism, genocide, murder, your choice. … Ideology both religious and secular Zionism.
Zionists can go to the devil! There is no need to assist them in their aims of globalization.
Zionism:
The one world order. One world government, BANK, religious belief, and control of educational institutions.
Zionist Collaboration With the Nazis, the killing of Torah Jews, and the stealing of their identity.
The organized Crime syndicate that now controls the USA government, leading to America’s downfall.
Politicians, religious leaders, and media alike bought out.
Wars and more Wars for the benefit of Israel and Zionism.
To call the actions as a benefit for and by the World is more deception, more compounded lies. Watch the
war profiteers and benefit for them. (The Zionist)
Beware of the private military, private policing, and private run jails & prisons.
The cost of such falls on the middle class worker & tax-payers. Tax cuts for the rich and powerful.
48% of the billionaires in America and/or the world are Zionist criminals. People never held accountable
for their actions. Moral values never is associated with Zionism, and never will be.
How-ever most can associate Zionism with the anti-Christ.
http://www.universal-peace.com
Jews Hate Christians

Moral Decay (TOP DOWN)
Dysfunctional Government and religious institutions brings about dysfunctional society.
Google: Harry Reed, Mitch McConnell, John Boehner, Nancy Pelosi, our leaders that are
influenced by foreign -Street. Wall Street & insider trading. Look
at the contributions to campaigns, the trips to Israel, the appearances before such groups.
Next, the gain in personal finances.
Look close at the staffers, advisors, think tanks, and relationships with organized crime.
The lack of over-sight, the lack of prosecution for treason , war crimes, corruption, both
sides of the Isle.
Changes in our laws, nationally, and Internationally for the benefit of these Special
interest groups. Both parties supporting the atrocities, Genocide, and illegal occupation
of Palestinian land by Israel. Support by money, Military equipment, weapons, nuclear
war heads, and false doctorial propaganda that Zionism is Judaism .
When factually they are the wolves in sheep clothing, seeking World wide dominance
and control of all assets.
These leaders give the false impression that they represent the Christian community,
that the USA government represents a Christian nation. They have sold the USA and
ZIONISM:
The world wide enemy of 99%. The head of the snake reappearing,
starting re-development approximately 1917, and gaining obscene power from
1948 on.
Study the facts, demand true democracy.
“AIPAC” or “the Israel lobby”
While on Air Force One, President Barack Obama issued a press release that has been utterly ignored by the Western Press.

The president has openly announced a move against violent plotters inside the US government and espionage agents. He does not use the terms “AIPAC” or “the Israel lobby” but it is highly unlikely he could be referring to anything else.

In fact, we can think of no other group.

I was privately briefed on some of the reasons behind this document. On what is known, not “surmised,” I will explain:

There is, currently, within the US military, the Executive branch of government and among extremist “power brokers” in America an active plot to “alter” America’s form of government through “decapitation.”

Let me be clear. Where the memo, printed in full below, refers to “violent”, it means “assassination” of many top leaders in America including but not limited to the President, Vice President, Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense and others.

The plot makes use of the resources of major private defense contractors and their intelligence and special operations personnel. There has been active recruiting that has been noted and is why the memo was released and why many members of the military have been subjected to investigation.

The Benghazi attack was planned and financed by this group.

Many writers in the alternative media have noted much of what is going on but not all. Some have shown access to very knowledgeable sources.

Behind the plotters are drug cartels that have penetrated the US government, former lobbyists who were moved into government during the Bush (43) administration and now are suspected of being involved in a coup attempt.

There is no direct evidence tying any foreign government to this plot though most are “fanatically” aligned with the militant Likudists in Israel under Netanyahu’s regime.

The President’s text below, unedited:
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
For Immediate Release
November 21, 2012

Presidential Memorandum — National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs

Memorandum for the heads of executive departments and agencies

Subject: National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs

This Presidential Memorandum transmits the National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs (Minimum Standards) to provide direction and guidance to promote the development of effective insider threat programs within departments and agencies to deter, detect, and mitigate actions by employees who may represent a threat to national security. These threats encompass potential espionage, violent acts against the Government or the Nation, and unauthorized disclosure of classified information, including the vast amounts of classified data available on interconnected United States Government computer networks and systems.

The Minimum Standards provide departments and agencies with the minimum elements necessary to establish effective insider threat programs. These elements include the capability to gather, integrate, and centrally analyze and respond to key threat-related information; monitor employee use of classified networks; provide the workforce with insider threat awareness training; and protect the civil liberties and privacy of all personnel.

The resulting insider threat capabilities will strengthen the protection of classified information across the executive branch and reinforce our defenses against both adversaries and insiders who misuse their access and endanger our national security.

Barack Obama

A very real threat to world stability

To some, at a glance, this might actually sound like a response to leaks within the CIA and White House except for some extraordinary language. Please make very special note of the following:

“…to deter, detect and mitigate actions by employees who may present a threat to national security…These threats include…violent acts against the Government and the Nation…”

Please note that they refer to “violent acts” and speak of both the “government” and “nation.”

By “government,” they are indicting, with no “wiggle room,” assassination plots.

By “nation,” they may well be referring to false flag terrorism that may well include use of weapons of mass destruction.
Britain was subject to such a threat during the London Olympics, one that would never have been successfully overcome without the help of journalists who put themselves at great risk.

Espionage

The US government has had a twelve-year moratorium against arrest and prosecution of spies within our government and military other than those who can be tied to China.

The most famous Chinese “spy” was Wen Lee Ho, a nuclear scientist at Los Alamos Labs. He was arrested in 1999, held in solitary confinement for a year and then released.

In order to get an accurate picture I phoned two friends, one a senior FBI counter-intelligence operative and the other a very senior US Army intelligence officer.

The question I put before them, while eating breakfast, was:
“Please list the nations that represent the greatest threat of espionage against the United States and, which nations, in order, are believed to represent the “penetration threat” that President Obama is referring to.”

From the FBI, their appraisal not intended for the “pop culture” media:
“Our greatest direct threat is Israel and the Israel lobby. They have systematically penetrated every aspect of government and the military and, if they cannot get documents from those branches, friends in congress will give them access to anything that branch has available.
After that is India, with every research facility at risk from RAW (Indian Intelligence) penetration and then Cuba, Mexico and Turkey.

The primary end users of this intelligence, the “clients,” are Russia and China.”

From the US Army:

“I agree with Israel and the rest but we have not had Turkey on our radar. The obvious end users are, of course, Russia and China based on capability.

The issue I have is how a presidential press release, an extraordinary and almost “draconian” document has gone without an uproar from congress and wide press coverage. Who has the power to suppress reporting on something like this, though, I know that you will say it is Israel, I would want proof.

Though there has been no official notification of this, I am of the impression that we now consider any mention of Israeli spying to be highly classified. Only Russia and China are officially listed, entirely out of concern not to offend lobbyists whose feelings outweigh real issues of national security.”

Then I turn on my television, hour after hour of TV shows about espionage and terrorism. Both American and British TV are the same.

All spies are from Iran and Pakistan; nations that our actual intelligence agencies indicate represent no espionage threat to speak of.

In fact, in my two Saturday morning phone interviews, which can, of course, be confirmed by Homeland Security who has tapped my phones, I have reflected with great accuracy.
Thus, we ask you to read what President Obama really did not say “between the lines,” the message is quite clear.

We do not see a roundup of AIPAC spies, not like in the early days of the Bush administration although Attorney General John Ashcroft quashed that investigation.

What we are seeing is a hunt for traitors within the American government and military, some of which is working its way onto the news.

The question of the moment, however, is this:

How can a President of the United States announce that the government is infiltrated with terrorists and spies and no newspaper, television network or other form of media notices?

Andrew
December 17, 2012
Reply

Heya! I’m at work browsing your blog from my new apple iphone! Just wanted to say I love reading through your blog and look forward to all your posts! Carry on the great work!

traditional bathroom
December 23, 2012
Reply

Post writing is also a fun, if you be acquainted with then you can
write if not it is complex to write.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

Dysfunctional Government and religious institutions brings about dysfunctional society.

Google: Harry Reed, Mitch McConnell, John Boehner, Nancy Pelosi, our leaders that are
influenced by foreign lobbies such as AIPAC, J-Street. Wall Street & insider trading. Look
at the contributions to campaigns, the trips to Israel, the appearances before such groups.
Next, the gain in personal finances.
Look close at the staffers, advisors, think tanks, and relationships with organized crime.
The lack of over-sight, the lack of prosecution for treason , war crimes, corruption, both
sides of the Isle.
Changes in our laws, nationally, and Internationally for the benefit of these Special
interest groups. Both parties supporting the atrocities, Genocide, and illegal occupation
of Palestinian land by Israel. Support by money, Military equipment, weapons, nuclear
war heads, and false doctorial propaganda that Zionism is Judaism .
When factually they are the wolves in sheep clothing, seeking World wide dominance
and control of all assets.
These leaders give the false impression that they represent the Christian community,
that the USA government represents a Christian nation. They have sold the USA and
us Americans out to the Anti-Christ, to Lucifer’s (Satan and the Devil) group called
Zionism.
ZIONISM: The world wide enemy of 99%. The head of the snake reappearing,
starting re-development approximately 1917, and gaining obscene power from
1948 on.
Study the facts, demand true democracy.

WWW. World Wide Web. Used to bring attention to AIPAC and the corruption with-in USA Government, and the foreign influence of Zionism
on members of the House & Senate.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

WORDS OF THE RABBIS
Rabbi Aryeh Leib Alter, known as the Sfas Emes
The following is a letter from Rabbi Aryeh Leib Alter, known as the Sfas Emes, which he wrote early in the Zionist period:

Now behold Satan has come and confused the world….A thick cloak rest over the eyes of the leaders of the Zionists. ONLY OWING TO THEIR LACK OF FAITH AND ABSENCE OF BELIEF IN G-D DO THEY FAIL TO REALIZE THE EXTENT OF THE DANGER INVOLVED IN THEIR PROMISES TO THE MASSES OF THE PEOPLES AMONG WHOM WE LIVE, OF ALL THE WORLDLY DELIGHTS PROVIDED THEY GIVE AID TO THE ZIONISTS. THEY EVEN URGE THEM TO EXPEL JEWS FROM THEIR MIDST. Every sensible person will realize the help they are providing the enemies of the Jewish People….

Aryeh Leib Alter
Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld
Leader of the Orthodox Jewish community in Jerusalem and a staunch anti Zionist. Around 75 years ago he participated together with the martyr Professor Yaakov Yisroel DeHaan (later murdered by the Zionists for his participation) in a delegation which visited King Hussein, his sons Faisal the King of Iraq and the Amir Abdullah, in order to lucidly present to them the position of the G-d-fearing Jewish community. The Jewish delegation clarified unequivocally that Torah Jewry is totally opposed to the Zionist sovereignty over the Holy Land. Rabbi Sonnenfeld later established the anti-Zionist Rabbinical court of the Eidah Hacharedis and was appointed as its head and Chief Rabbi by the Orthodox community in Jerusalem, this court standing in opposition to the Zionist puppet “Rabbinical court” and its “Chief Rabbis”.
Quotes from Rabbi Yosef Rozen of Dvinsk, known as The Rogatchover
The following is a letter written in 1904 by Rabbi Yosef Rozen of Dvinsk, known as The Rogatchover:

Heaven forbid that we should test G-d and strive with him concerning the length of the Exile in order to be masters in the Holy Land.

To those who share these Zionist views but profess to be believers, whose lips drip with Torah and piety, I have this to say: Do you not know that Zionism and self-rule are VANITY AND PURSUIT OF EMPTINESS AND IMITATION? Why do you despise the Torah and stretch out your hand to transgressors tainted with HERESY, and why do you not consider in whose company you go?

How long will the Zionists be permitted to lead into a trap? One need not fear contention and discord with them, since they have already brought it about. In the book, Gates of Repentance, paragraph 59, we find ‘HE WHO DOES NOT ENTER INTO CONFLICT WITH THOSE WHO STAND ON A BAD PATH IS PUNISHED FOR THEIR TRANSGRESSIONS AND FOR ALL THEIR SINS.

I have already written letters to those who ask whether there is any substance in the books of the Mizrachi rabbis Rabinovitz and Reines. I have replied that according to Jewish Law the two works of the above-mentioned rabbis are an abomination and desolation, according to the Torah.

May the day come when we are not subjugated and oppressed by HERETICS ORIGINATING FROM THE JEWISH PEOPLE – ESPECIALLY SEEING THAT THEY SPREAD EVIL TIDINGS ABOUT US.

Yosef Rozen
WORDS OF THE RABBIS
Rabbi Baruch Kaplan
This is a free translation of a Yiddish transcript of a taped interview made some twenty years ago with the late Rabbi Baruch Kaplan, who was a principal of the Beis Yaakov Girls School in Brooklyn, and who was a student in the Hebron yeshiva (religious school) in 1929 at the time of the killing of a number of Jews by some Arabs. Rabbi Kaplan explains how events unfolded, and how it was the arrogant and cowardly Zionist maniacs who perpetrated the events by provoking the Palestinians. He also adds some comments about events at the time he recounted this story, some 20 years ago.
——————————————————————————–

“When I was in Hebron in 1929, there occurred the tragic massacre of over twenty yeshiva students, great scholars, plus another forty members of the Jewish community. I would like to describe the error that has circulated in Jewish communities – a horrible error, that accuses the Arabs in Hebron of being murderers who attacked the Jews simply because the Arabs were “bad people.” In order to correct the record, this error must be corrected. The Arabs were very friendly people, and the Jewish People in Hebron lived together with them and had very friendly relations with them. They worked for Jews, and everybody got along just fine.

To take just one example, I used to have the habit of walking a mile or two out of town all by myself to visit a tree that was believed to be the tree where our patriarch Abraham met the three angels, as described in Genesis. I especially enjoyed visiting the tree in the summertime. Along the way I would talk to the Arabs, though it was mostly using our hands because I didn’t speak any Arabic. Interestingly enough, no one in the yeshiva ever told me it was dangerous to go by myself among the Arabs. We just lived with them, and got along very well.

I have also seen a letter from the Grand Rabbi of the Gerrer Hassidim of those days, Rabbi Avraham Mordechai Alter of Poland, regarding his trip to the Holy Land during the days when people were talking about emigrating to Palestine. He wanted to find out what kind of people the Palestinians were, in order to be able to advise people whether to move there or not. He wrote in his letter that the Arabs were a very friendly and fine people.

Therefore it’s necessary to set the record straight about the accusations that the Palestinians were terrible killers who liked attacking Jews. This was never the situation at all!

Today’s wicked Zionists are just like their predecessors, who were responsible for causing terrible suffering in Palestine with their wars with the Arabs, may G-d have mercy. At that time in 1929, the Zionists had a slogan arguing that the Western Wall in Jerusalem was a Jewish “national symbol.” Of course, the Arabs disagreed with this idea, considering that they had control of the location for over 1,100 years. However, the Zionist mobs were yelling that “The Wall is ours!” It’s hard to understand why they felt that way considering they have no connection to the Jewish holy places whatsoever. An argument erupted in the Jewish newspapers about establishing a permanent prayer area for Jews at the Wall. This provoked the Arabs, and the rabbi of Jerusalem at the time, Rabbi Yosef Chaim Zonnenfeld begged them to stop and to be appreciative to the Arabs for allowing Jews to pray at the Wall for so many centuries undisturbed. However, the Zionists wanted a permanent setup under their control.

The Zionists refused to heed the calls of Rabbi Zonnenfeld, and they called a large meeting of Jews in Jerusalem – supposedly some 10,000 people showed up. One of the speakers was their “chief Rabbi” (Avraham Isaac Kook), who proclaimed, “Hear O Israel, the Wall is our Wall, the Wall is One” (which is a ridiculous pun on the blessing, “Hear O Israel, the Lord your G-d, the Lord is One”). This began the conflict at the time between the Zionists and the Arabs.

Afterwards, we were studying at the yeshiva in Hebron, and saw a bunch of boys in short pants carrying weapons on bicycles and motorcycles, running around the streets of Hebron. We were very worried about this. What were they up to?

In brief, our rabbi, the supervisor of our religious academy, Rabbi Moshe Mordechai Epstein, called them for a meeting, but they refused. He was forced to go over to them, and asked them what they were up to. He accused them of wanting to provoke the Arabs. They responded that they were coming to protect us!! We cried out, “Woe is us! G-d have mercy!” They didn’t want to leave town until it was too late!

These arrogant cowards only ran away when the local leaders of the Arabs called for a mass meeting of the people of the surrounding Arab villages. But it was too late; the Arabs got organized, and the Mufti called on his people to be ready Friday night when the yeshiva would be attending prayers. At this point, the yeshiva was alone against the Zionists, but the Arabs didn’t know to distinguish between us and the Zionists. Sadly they attacked and killed some of our people, including the great scholar, Rabbi Shmuel Rosenhaltz.

The next morning we heard about the excitement in town, and even worse, we heard the crying and shouting. I and a friend, Avraham Ushpener, lived in an apartment that was part of a three-story building leased by a Jew from an Arab. We could hear all the noise from our apartment on the third floor. We were terrified to let the Arabs in because we knew how angry they had become, but a while later things calmed down. In total, some 65 people were killed. On the other side of town, however, the Jews were spared.

Why am I telling this story? It is because I wanted to describe how the wicked Zionists, both today and in those days, were the cause of our suffering! They cooperated with the Nazis, and our religion teaches that a person who causes someone to sin is worse than someone who kills him.

It reminds me of an event recounted by Rabbi Moshe Schonfeld, who once visited Rabbi Avraham Yeshayahu Karelitz {Chazon Ish) when the Zionist state was established, and when there was fighting between the Zionists and the Arabs. Rabbi Schonfeld told Rabbi Karelitz about what was happening. Rabbi Karelitz told him that the crimes of the Zionists were much worse, because they were wicked heretics who were uprooting hundreds of thousands of Jews from their faith and that is much greater pain since our Sages stated that a person who causes another person to sin is much worse than if he kills him.

In our own days there is a Zionist leader (Begin), whose arrogance and selfishness is more important than anything else to him, and for which he is prepared to sacrifice hundreds and thousands of Jews. These heretics and evildoers, this Zionist leader of a state that killed the Judaism of the Yemenite and Moroccan Jews, and of many other Sephardic Jews! This is the work of these thugs and gangsters. And there are religious Jewish parties who dare to state that they love this man?! Everyone must know that the anger of the Arabs against us is only caused by the Zionists!

The Arabs were a friendly people to us, and I am a witness to it. We lived very well with them in Hebron. Rabbi Alter attested to this as well, and it is the accursed Zionists who caused them to hate us. The Zionists dare to use their power to expel the Arabs, and even today in Lebanon, they kill and butcher the Arabs; they wipe out whole villages with the airplanes they get from the United States.

Everyone should know who the murderers are – the Zionists are the biggest murderers in the world, who refuse to let the Jewish People live in peace either physically or spiritually!”

Orthodox anti-Zionist rabbis of past generations

Site MapSite MapUnsubscribeUnsubscribeJoin Mailing List Join Mailing List Make a DonationMake a DonationOur MissionOur MissionSupport UsSupport UsVisitor Response Visitor Response Changing Hearts & MindsChanging Hearts & MindsAsk the RabbiAsk the RabbiContact UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy PolicyThree Strong OathsThree Strong OathsZionism Promotes Anti-SemitismZionism Promotes Anti-SemitismFounder of Zionism – T. HerzlFounder of Zionism – T. HerzlWorld Jewry Declared War on GermanyWorld Jewry Declared War on GermanyIndependence DayIndependence DayElectionsElections10 Questions to the Zionists10 Questions to the ZionistsRabbinical OppositionRabbinical OppositionLetters to the United NationsLetters to the United NationsLetters to the League of NationsLetters to the League of NationsPresent Day ImpactPresent Day ImpactThe Jews of IraqThe Jews of IraqYemenite JewsYemenite JewsThe Children of TehranThe Children of TehranThe Children of YemenThe Children of YemenA Martyr’s MessageA Martyr’s MessageMurder of Dr. DeHaanMurder of Dr. DeHaanImmigration Needed to SurviveImmigration Needed to SurviveHistorical EventsHistorical EventsPresent Day EventsPresent Day EventsOpposition to the Zionist State Opposition to the Zionist State Impact on Jews Worldwide Impact on Jews Worldwide Historical ImpactHistorical ImpactAutopsies & Organ HarvestingAutopsies & Organ HarvestingDesecration of Jewish GravesDesecration of Jewish GravesWhat is Zionism?What is Zionism?Zionism and Anti-SemitismZionism and Anti-SemitismZionists Do Not Represent Jews Zionists Do Not Represent Jews The History of Zionism The History of Zionism The Zionist StateThe Zionist StateZionist Threat to Human Rights Zionist Threat to Human Rights Protests Against ZionismProtests Against ZionismProtest Video and Audio ClipsProtest Video and Audio ClipsProtests Called by CRCProtests Called by CRCZionism Promotes Anti-SemitismZionism Promotes Anti-SemitismAnti-Semitism TodayAnti-Semitism TodayNazi Support of the Zionist StateNazi Support of the Zionist StateRole of Zionism in the HolocaustRole of Zionism in the HolocaustMillions That Could Have Been SavedMillions That Could Have Been SavedHolocaust Victims AccuseHolocaust Victims AccuseWith Rabbi Teitelbaum in Bergen BelsenWith Rabbi Teitelbaum in Bergen BelsenTruth and PeaceTruth and PeaceLetter to King HusseinLetter to King HusseinMeeting with King HusseinMeeting with King HusseinMeeting Churchill VideoMeeting Churchill VideoMaimonidesMaimonidesRabbi Yitzchok AramahRabbi Yitzchok AramahRabbi Nachman of BreslovRabbi Nachman of BreslovThe Maharal of PragueThe Maharal of PragueRabbi Avraham GalantiRabbi Avraham GalantiRabbi BechayeRabbi BechayeRabbi Aryeh Leib AlterRabbi Aryeh Leib AlterRabbi Y. HalberstamRabbi Y. HalberstamRabbi Tazdok HakohenRabbi Tazdok HakohenRabbi Yehoshua DiskinRabbi Yehoshua DiskinRabbi Samson R. HirschRabbi Samson R. HirschRabbi Yosef C. Sonnenfeld Rabbi Yosef C. Sonnenfeld Rabbi Yehoshea DzkoverRabbi Yehoshea DzkoverClarification of Statements by the Chofetz ChaimClarification of Statements by the Chofetz ChaimRabbi David Friedman of KarlinRabbi David Friedman of KarlinRabbi Meir Simcha of DvinskRabbi Meir Simcha of DvinskRabbi Yosef RozenRabbi Yosef RozenRabbi Avraham FreundRabbi Avraham FreundRabbi Elchonon WassermanRabbi Elchonon WassermanRabbi Chaim SoloveichikRabbi Chaim SoloveichikRabbi Chofetz ChaimRabbi Chofetz ChaimRabbi Sholem SchneersohnRabbi Sholem SchneersohnRabbi Shaul BrachRabbi Shaul BrachRabbi Yissachar Dov Belze RabbeRabbi Yissachar Dov Belze RabbeRabbi Chaim O. GrodzinskiRabbi Chaim O. GrodzinskiRabbi Chaim Elazar ShapiroRabbi Chaim Elazar ShapiroVisit to Holy Land 1965 VideoVisit to Holy Land 1965 VideoMay Jews Wage WarMay Jews Wage WarVayoel Moshe Part IVayoel Moshe Part IVayoel Moshe Part IIVayoel Moshe Part II1961 Letter to British JP1961 Letter to British JPStatement to UN July 1947Statement to UN July 1947The Question of JeruslaemThe Question of JeruslaemCommunication to UNCommunication to UNVideo Clip from DocumentaryVideo Clip from DocumentarySatmar Grand Rebbe Joel Teitelbaum Satmar Grand Rebbe Joel Teitelbaum Rabbi Yosef Tzvi Dushinsky Rabbi Yosef Tzvi Dushinsky Rabbi Y Z SoloveitchikRabbi Y Z SoloveitchikRabbi Avraham KarelitzRabbi Avraham KarelitzRav Yitzchok KoppelmanRav Yitzchok KoppelmanRabbi Michael WeissmandlRabbi Michael WeissmandlRabbi Aharon KotlerRabbi Aharon KotlerRabbi Mordechai GifterRabbi Mordechai GifterRabbi Elya SveiRabbi Elya SveiRabbi Baruch KaplanRabbi Baruch KaplanRabbi Amram BlauRabbi Amram BlauRabbi Avigdor MillerRabbi Avigdor MillerCRC StatementsCRC StatementsMass ProtestsMass ProtestsLetters & DocumentsLetters & DocumentsAcco, Holy Land 2004Acco, Holy Land 2004Mea ShearimMea ShearimRabbis of Edah HarachedisRabbis of Edah HarachedisA Serious Warning 2002A Serious Warning 2002Protests Protests Central Rabbinical Congress Central Rabbinical Congress Edah Harachedis Edah Harachedis Before WW I Before WW I Before WW II Before WW II After WW II After WW II Rabbinical Courts Rabbinical Courts Books – EnglishBooks – EnglishBooks – YiddishBooks – YiddishCDsCDsWashington PostWashington PostWashington TimesWashington TimesNew York TimesNew York TimesNewsletter ArchivesNewsletter ArchivesPress ReleasesPress ReleasesRadio Advertisements Radio Advertisements Press Advertisements Press Advertisements An Open Letter to President BushAn Open Letter to President BushCurrent Events Current Events Publicizing our Position Publicizing our Position Share Your StoryShare Your StoryRead StoriesRead Stories
Home
About Us
Our Mission
Privacy Policy
Annual Dinner 2007
Support Us
Join Mailing List
UnsubscribeMake a DonationQuestions & Answers
Articles
Zionism
What is Zionism?
Zionists do not Represent Jews
Three Strong Oaths
Zionism Promotes Anti-SemitismThe History of Zionism
The Founder of Zionism
World Jewry Declared War on GermanyThe Zionist State
Immigration Need to Survive
Historical Events
Present Day Events
Opposition to the Zionist State
10 Questions to the Zionists
Rabbinical Opposition
Letters to the United Nations
Letters to the League of NationsImpact on Jews Worldwide
Historical Impact
The Jews of Iraq
The Jews of Yemen
The Children of Tehran
The Children of Yemen
The Murder of Dr. DeHaan
A Martyr’s MessageZionist Threat to Human Rights
Autopsies and Organ Harvesting
Desecration of Jewish GravesProtests
Protest Video & Audio Clips
Protests Called by CRCAnti-Semitism
Zionism Promotes Anti-Semitism
Nazi Support of the Zionist State
Zionism & Anti-Semitism
Threat LevelThe Holocaust
Role of Zionism in the Holocaust
Millions that could have been saved
Holocaust Victims Accuse
Rabbi Teitelbaum in Bergen-BelsenScriptures
Rabbis & Sages
Before WW I
Maimonides
Rabbi Yitchok Aramah
Rabbi Nachman of Breslov
The Maharal of Prague
Rabbi Avraham Galanti
Rabbi Bechaye
Rabbi Aryeh Leib Alter
Rabbi Yechezkel Halberstam
Rabbi Tazdok Hakohen of Lublin
Rabbi Yehoshua Leib Diskin
Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch
Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld
Rabbi Yeoshea DzikoverBefore WW II
Rabbi David Friedman of Karlin
Rabbi Meir Simka of Dvinsk
Rabbi Yosef Rozen
Rabbi Avraham Freund
Rabbi Chaim Soloveichik of Brisk
Rabbi Chofetz Chaim
Rabbi Shaul Brach
Rabbi Yissachar Dov Belze Rabbe
Rabbi Chaim Oizer Grodzinski
Rabbi Chaim Elazar ShapiroAfter WW II
Satmar Grand Rebbe Joel Teitelbaum
Rabbi Yosef Tzvi Dushinsky
Rabbi Yitzchock Zev Soloveitchik
Rabbi Avraham Yeshayau Karelitz
Rabbi Yitzchok Dov Koppelman
Rabbi Michael Dov Weissmandl
Rabbi Aharon Kotler
Rabbi Mordechai Gifter
Rabbi Elya Svei
Rabbi Baruch Kaplan
Rabbi Amram Blau
Rabbi Avigdor Miller zt’l
Rabbi Yitchok Hutner zt’lRabbinical Courts
Central Rabbinical Congress
Edah HareidisResources
Books in English
Books in Yiddish
CDsCurrent Events
Publicizing our Position
Our Publications
Interviews
Newsletter Archives
Press Releases
Radio Advertisements
Press AdvertisementsSearch This Site
Other Languages

Select LanguageAfrikaansArabicCatalanChinese (Simplified)CzechDanishDutchEstonianFinnishFrenchGermanGreekHebrewHindiHungarianIcelandicItalianJapaneseKoreanMalteseNorwegianPolishPortugueseRomanianRussianSerbianSlovakSlovenianSpanishSwedishTurkishUkrainianYiddish
Powered by Translate

Statement of Principals

——————————————————————————–
Issued by the CRC in the New York Times, 30 September 1982

Home | About Us | Zionism | Anti-Semitism | Scriptures | Rabbis & Sages | Resources | News | Threat Level | Site Map
©2002 – 2012 True Torah Jews, 183 Wilson St., PMB 162, Brooklyn, NY 11211
/* Yahoo Web Player */ Original text
Contribute a better translation
——————————————————————————–

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

BURN THE OLD TESTAMENT–COMPLETE CHRISTIAN REVIVAL & REFORM

530,000 Churches in America, only 7% do not belong to a corporation.
Corporations that invest in wars of false intelligence, support the corruption
of the republican party, and believe the propaganda and false prophecy
supporting the atrocities of Israel, Mossad, and AIPAC.

The old testament was written by Jews, to the Jews, and for the Jews only.
Not for Gentiles. Jesus Christ was not a Jew. Jesus said to the Jews ‘Because
you are not sheep of my flock you do not believe ‘ (John 10:24-27) and ‘I was
only sent to the lost sheep of the House of Israel’ …

Can you Decide from the Bible Who the Antichrist is? Study Zionism and the
theft of the Jewish faith by them. Beginning 1917 and their influence and
manipulation on Hitler in killing of 6 million Torah Jews that would object to
stealing the lands of Palestine & our holy land.

Most professors who are critical of Israel do not organise themselves to fight against Israel.
American Jews are either organised and pro-Israel, or are apathetic and critical of Israel?
AIPAC, a foreign lobby yet the most powerful lobby, has control over several members
of America’s government and agencies, Duel citizens with Israel as their only interest.
Control of Hollywood, all major media, TV programing, congress, the pentagon,
think tanks, advisors, staffers, universities, theology schools, pulpits, and religious
leaders. There is no dispute that financial institutes and banking is controlled by them.
Acts of war by Israel. The attack on the USS Liberty. Assassinations of JFK,
RFK, MLK and witnesses of Garrison. 911 and their involvement.
Nothing about Israel is moral, ethical, or any benefit to us. Lies after lies
to keep us involved in their attacks on their neighbors.
Convincing our government to send our sons & daughters to die, get injuried or disabiled for
life. No ligitimate reason for it.
Israel hates christians, Catholics, or anyone with a different belief. They are out for
global take over.

Take a united stand now against the corruption, loss of freedoms, changes in our laws.
A large per-cent of Christian Americans have already decided to seperate from government atrocities,
corruption, treason and false patriotism. They will stay home and worship Christ, the son of god ,who
was killed by WHO!
Gods punishment against Israel was to be an end to their immorality. Nothing has changed except
misconception and lies.
Do not support the illegal occupation of Palestine, the genocide of Palestinians, or the vetoing
by our government of the 67 UN sanctions against Israel for their actions.
Ronald L. Waldron
http://www.universal-peace.com/
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was involved in smuggling nuclear triggers out of the United States
carried out by a network of front companies, a report says.

Complete
Dysfunction of federal agencies comes from the top down. Home
Land Security with the top leaders all being duel citizens with Israel, all decisions coming from AIPAC, MOSSAD, and the illegal state of ISRAEL. Until the
American people insist on leadership being
American with American interest the priority, until the Zionist organized crime syndicate is put out of
business in WASHINGTON, D.C. America will
continue on a downward slide. It certainly
would help if the religious right recognizes that Christians do not live in the OLD testament, That only the NEW
testament applies to US and our government.
Zionism is not biblical, and is the Anti-Christ We need to be more concerned about the Anti-Christ group,
rather then all the false flags of
anti-Semitism.
.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

“Christianity has been corrupted by Zionist interests and is now being used as a tool in infecting the rest of the world,”

” WAY BEYOND THE “RED-LINE”

MR. Netanyahu:

Please explain to the UN and the rest of the world, the fact that ISRAEL is and has been way beyond the “RED_LINE” for years.

WHY no inspections are allowed ? why Israel does not sign a non-proliferation treaty ?

It certainly does not take a brain surgeon to see why you have so many enemies!

Israel should be stopped or all will be lost:
“Christianity has been corrupted by Zionist interests and is now being used as a tool in infecting the rest of the world,” Mark Glenn, from the Crescent and Cross Solidarity Movement, wrote in a letter addressed to the Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

Glenn said the Zionists are trying to pit the Christians and Muslims against each other, in what has become the “clash of civilizations,” through corrupt media, corrupt culture, immorality, war, economic exploitation, and a whole host of other diseases.

“Their goal is obvious – to see these two peoples destroy each other so that like some vulture she can pick the carcasses clean for herself,” Glenn said.

He further asked for an extensive interview with the Iranian president on issues ranging from the Israeli plots for the Middle East and how it is trying to bring its “evil desires” about, such as war and terrorism etc., to the conspiracies that the US and Israel have committed against Iran since 1953 to the commonalties between Islam and Christianity.

Israel is widely known to be the sole possessor of nuclear weapons in the Middle East. Tel Aviv began building its first plutonium and uranium processing facility, Dimona, in the Negev desert in 1958.

Former US President Jimmy Carter said Israel has a nuclear arsenal that includes between 200 and 300 warheads. Decades of recurrent reporting and aerial footage have also established the possession of atomic arms by Israel.

Under its official policy of nuclear ambiguity, Tel Aviv neither confirms nor denies the possession of nukes and refuses to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) or allow inspections of its nuclear facilities.

“I am convinced that if the Christian world were made aware of the fact that their enemies are NOT the Muslims but rather the Zionists who have all but destroyed their religion and culture, that we will be able to eventually get a rope around the neck of this animal where it could be thrown back into the cage where it belongs,” Glenn concluded.

Mark Glenn.

Panetta to Netanyahu:” Israel may not survive the current Arab/Islamic awakening”
In the Next War, Only Fleeing Israelis Will Be Safe

Pushing Americans to die for Israel in the Muslim world.

Boycott all Republican candidates. They have committed our military to back Israel in attacking Iran. Meaning our sons & Daughters are ask to fight and die in another WAR for Israel.
VOTERS say NO That is HELL NO !!
Rants about religion (Christianity) should be in the town square influencing political views. He seems to forget that the rest are all paying taxes. If they want such an involvement with in the government, then they need to give up the tax exemptions that amounts to billions of tax free properties.
They take more and more property off the tax rolls, invest money given for benefit of the community with Wall Street, War equipment and attack on other faiths.

Already, the Talmudic Jew, Michael Chertoff, the head of the DHS, has made a secret deal with Israel disguised as the “Maryland/Israel Homeland Security Partnership” which will be used against Americans who are sick & tired of the Jewish cabal here in America. Largest problem in America today is the religious involvement of Israel and their faith. We need to keep, or go back to, separation of Church & State.

Any politically-aware person will tell you that US President Barack Obama is totally defeated and humiliated by the Zionist-regime and its supporters in the Congress, Senate, Wall Street and Zionist-controlled mainstream media in almost every field especially in Washington’s dealing with the Muslim world. One just have to study the pro-Israel, anti-Muslim 1500-page manifesto of Norwegian mass killer Anders Behring Breivik to find out how Israel-Firsters are pushing Americans to die for Israel in the Muslim world.

Just a matter of time.

Occupiers of Washington, DC

It’s just a matter of time before U.S. tires of Israel & the atrocities they commit.

Americans are sick & tired of the acts of war by Israel that are covered up by their crime partners (Occupiers of Washington, DC).

Republican Leaders Are Afraid of Rush Limbaugh. He is the prime example of the Republican parties base and is the most listened to party leader. Regardless of how radical his views are, his messages are carried right up to the pulpits of the Right Wingers.

Will they send our sons & daughters into another false flag war to die for Israel’s benefit. Another preemptive WAR will further distroy America as we have known it.

Israel has been the victimizer not the victim for the last 64 years.

Organized Crime, and organized religion has become one in the same in that time line.

Get rid of the duel citizenship people in government or agencies paid by tax payers.

We need an audit of the Fed. and religious institutions. Intent of tax payers, and congregations giving money and what it is used for.

When religious leaders wake up to the fact that the Israel of today (Zionist controlled illegal occupation) is not the biblical Israel, and
the support they give to WARS, atrocities and genocide is not in accordance with the word of God, people may come back.
Other-wise true protestants will continue to worship at home.
From: Newsmax.com
Sent: Tuesday, October 09, 2012 3:08 PM
To: rlw643@windstream.net
Subject: Pew: Protestants No Longer US Majority, ‘No Religion’ Rising

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

Republicans accept the following as being religious freedom. Romney and Ryan both agree
that such actions are ok as religious practice. That government should not involve themselves,
and that such is not a violation of law. ??? Only when you accept Millions from them for
campaign funding would you “COP” out like that.

Google it, where are the child protection agencies, government , and PARENTS. Sick bastards. WHERE ARE THE CHURCHES ON THIS!!
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.. YOU HAVE TO BE KIDDING. WHERE ARE OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS??

Will you ignore it also and vote Republican that supports such actions, THAT TAKES THEIR CAMPAIGN FUNDS, where are your values???
Jews Suck Baby Penises | Subverted Nation.
Baby Dies From Rabbi Sucking Blood From Baby’s Penis.
JEWISH RABBI LOVES BABY PENIS SUCKING!!! –

Pedophile Jewish Rabbis Suck Dick.
Rabbi Yosef Weisburg sucking baby penis is religious freedom for pedophiles …

New York rabbis sucking 10 infant penises per day .
Jew Rabbis suck freshly circumcised baby penises? –
Jewish Rabbi Explains Why Baby Penis Is To Be Sucked.
Barbaric post-circumcision penis-sucking practice .
Infant Dies from Herpes Infection After Rabbi Sucks Blood from His Penis.
Rabbi Explains the Importance of Sucking a boys Penis .

You can talk all day in detail on the crimes of the Jews but nothing hits harder than the reality of seeing one of these disgusting Rabbis
sucking an infants bloody penis videos.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

NO MORE DIRTY WARS FOR ISRAEL!

March 11, 2012
I was not impressed at all with the Israeli Prime Minister Benji Netanyahu’s address to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee [AIPAC] Annual Policy Conference.
Netanyahu came to Washington for two reasons: (A), Secure presidential pardon for the convicted Jewish spy, Johnaton Pollard and (B), enlist U.S. comittment to bomb Iran. While US mainstream news media gave his rhetoric about Iran extensive coverage, non mentioned about his request of Pollard’s release, whom Natenyahu visited in 2002. The release of Pollard was reported by Israeli daily Ynet. Pollard was a civilian intelligence analyst before being convicted of spying for Israel and who is serving a life sentence.
According to 16 US intelligence agencies and IAEA inspectors, Iran has no nukes, but Israel does. Iran has signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and Israel (with nuclear weapons) refuses to sign and refuses to allow AEIA inspectors into their nuclear facility.
This begs the question, why is it Iran–and not Israel–that is being subjected to strangling sanctions? Iran has never threatened Israel, America, or any of its neighbors, whereas Israel is threatening to bomb Iran every day and has a long history of attacking and invading many Arab countries. Israel is now making life a hell on earth for Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem as I write this. Where is the outrage, threats of sanctions and the calls for Israel to adhere to the rules of civilized nations?
Thankfully, this time president Obama stood his ground and showed this arrogant and ungrateful guest some back bone. Netanyahoo (by all appearances) left America empty-handed . He did however succeeded, as Dr. Hassan El-Najjar, the editor of Aljazeerah.info put it, “Netanyahu succeeded to put the illegal Jewish settlements and the theft of Palestinian lands on the back burner.”
If I had to rate Benji’s barking–heretofore known as his ‘speech’ at the AIPAC conference, it deserves about a 3 out of 10. Dull, boorish, and completely uninspired. He was so overconfident in his actions, yet the words he spoke were plainly unconvincing. In general, it was a bad performance, and even from this experienced dramatist.
I believe his demeanor throughout his speech will damage his likeability even amongst the faithful crowds at these AIPAC soirees. He showed us an ego that even the great hall couldn’t contain, the two body guards only reinforced that notion. The way he leaned on the podium and held those 2 letters aloft, revealed a sloppy and overconfident speaker. I will give him credit for begging for assistance without really needing to say it, as all the Congress know what he came for and will certainly appease AIPAC.
Then the section about walking like a duck and quacking like a duck, and pushing the audience to engage in the final ‘it must be a duck’ was very tacky and strange for a supposed statesman. He seemed intoxicated with power. No one should support a man like this, in truth, because he is only a deluded beggar with nuclear weapons, pushing a foreign state to sacrifice their citizens for war. This isn’t about their survival, it’s about the Clean Break strategy that has been implemented decades ago. Many doubt the seriousness of Netanyahu since those who make threats usually do not plan to excute or even are unable to.
His real objective is to request the American war machine to do his bidding through his congressional proxies. If this is the type of speech that excites the Pro-Israel crowd, they are a sad lot indeed.
AIPAC speaks only for Israel, not for Jews and not for America. AIPAC calls for war and not for diplomacy-one more war for Israel. A dirty and disastrous war for all. A war that neither they nor their children will be fighting. Red-blooded Americans should be screaming; no more dirty wars for Israel.
Mahmoud El-Yousseph
Retired USAF Veteran

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

NO MORE DIRTY WARS FOR ISRAEL!

March 11, 2012
I was not impressed at all with the Israeli Prime Minister Benji Netanyahu’s address to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee [AIPAC] Annual Policy Conference.
Netanyahu came to Washington for two reasons: (A), Secure presidential pardon for the convicted Jewish spy, Johnaton Pollard and (B), enlist U.S. comittment to bomb Iran. While US mainstream news media gave his rhetoric about Iran extensive coverage, non mentioned about his request of Pollard’s release, whom Natenyahu visited in 2002. The release of Pollard was reported by Israeli daily Ynet. Pollard was a civilian intelligence analyst before being convicted of spying for Israel and who is serving a life sentence.
According to 16 US intelligence agencies and IAEA inspectors, Iran has no nukes, but Israel does. Iran has signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and Israel (with nuclear weapons) refuses to sign and refuses to allow AEIA inspectors into their nuclear facility.
This begs the question, why is it Iran–and not Israel–that is being subjected to strangling sanctions? Iran has never threatened Israel, America, or any of its neighbors, whereas Israel is threatening to bomb Iran every day and has a long history of attacking and invading many Arab countries. Israel is now making life a hell on earth for Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem as I write this. Where is the outrage, threats of sanctions and the calls for Israel to adhere to the rules of civilized nations?
Thankfully, this time president Obama stood his ground and showed this arrogant and ungrateful guest some back bone. Netanyahoo (by all appearances) left America empty-handed . He did however succeeded, as Dr. Hassan El-Najjar, the editor of Aljazeerah.info put it, “Netanyahu succeeded to put the illegal Jewish settlements and the theft of Palestinian lands on the back burner.”
If I had to rate Benji’s barking–heretofore known as his ‘speech’ at the AIPAC conference, it deserves about a 3 out of 10. Dull, boorish, and completely uninspired. He was so overconfident in his actions, yet the words he spoke were plainly unconvincing. In general, it was a bad performance, and even from this experienced dramatist.
I believe his demeanor throughout his speech will damage his likeability even amongst the faithful crowds at these AIPAC soirees. He showed us an ego that even the great hall couldn’t contain, the two body guards only reinforced that notion. The way he leaned on the podium and held those 2 letters aloft, revealed a sloppy and overconfident speaker. I will give him credit for begging for assistance without really needing to say it, as all the Congress know what he came for and will certainly appease AIPAC.
Then the section about walking like a duck and quacking like a duck, and pushing the audience to engage in the final ‘it must be a duck’ was very tacky and strange for a supposed statesman. He seemed intoxicated with power. No one should support a man like this, in truth, because he is only a deluded beggar with nuclear weapons, pushing a foreign state to sacrifice their citizens for war. This isn’t about their survival, it’s about the Clean Break strategy that has been implemented decades ago. Many doubt the seriousness of Netanyahu since those who make threats usually do not plan to excute or even are unable to.
His real objective is to request the American war machine to do his bidding through his congressional proxies. If this is the type of speech that excites the Pro-Israel crowd, they are a sad lot indeed.
AIPAC speaks only for Israel, not for Jews and not for America. AIPAC calls for war and not for diplomacy-one more war for Israel. A dirty and disastrous war for all. A war that neither they nor their children will be fighting. Red-blooded Americans should be screaming; no more dirty wars for Israel.
Mahmoud El-Yousseph
Retired USAF Veteran

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

Swindler’s List: A Brief Look at the Holocaust Reparations Racket:
Forcing the Germans to Pay Up

Formally known as the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, Luxembourg is an agreement signed on September 10, 1952 following lengthy negotiations between an ad hoc committee of Jews representing various Jewish organizations, including the World Jewish Congress; officials from the new state of Israel; and representatives of the West German government, including the country’s then-chancellor Konrad Adenauer. The upshot of the accord was that West Germany was to make restitution, partly in the form of large payments to Israel, on behalf of Jews who had suffered during the Nazi era. The agreement is discussed at some length in an article by Mark Weber, who tells us the West Germans basically had little choice in the matter, and who also supplies us with a rather illuminating quote from Adenauer’s memoirs:

Ronald L. Waldron
December 27, 2012
Reply

In the last few hours we have learned that the US had made massive reductions to joint military exercise with Israel. Originally slated to include 5,000 US troops, Washington will now only send 1,500 to participate in Austere Challenge 12 with Israel. Apparently, the American administration is concerned with a possible Israeli strike on Iran.

Some Israelis seem unhappy with the American decision. The Times quoted a senior Israeli military official as speculating, “Basically what the Americans are saying is, ‘We don’t trust you.’” Well, America has good reason not to trust Israel. The only question here is why did it take America so long to move in the right direction?

Although Washington will still send the Patriot missile defense systems as planned, the crews that man them will not arrive. And whereas two Aegis ballistic missile defense ships were slated to arrive for the joint drill, now only one is expected. The message to Israel is clear – if you want to launch a world war without US approval, you’d better find how to defend your people on your own.

Not specifically referring to the exercise, Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs Martin Dempsey said on Thursday that he did not want to be “complicit” if Israel chose to strike Iran’s nuclear program. Dempsey also added that an attack would “clearly delay but probably not destroy Iran’s nuclear program.” It should also be mentioned that Dempsey’s views are overwhelmingly supported by most Israeli military experts who also contend that Israel lacks the military capacity to strike Iran, let alone dismantle the Iranian nuclear program.

As much as the American Jewish Lobby, together with Barak and Netanyahu are pushing for a new global conflict, America may still be saved by just a few brains who are beginning to realize that Israel is the biggest threat to world peace.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 1, 2013
Reply

President Obama :

Now is the time. Demand an audit of the Fed. There is no better
time then right now!!

Petitions to follow..

http://tinyurl.com/nickfido34140
January 19, 2013
Reply

How did u get the ideas to write ““Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad | Peace Action Blog”?
Many thanks -Charity

Allen D. Post
March 20, 2013
Reply

NO ONE IS BEING HELD ACCOUNTABLE

WWW. World Wide Web. Used to bring attention to AIPAC and the corruption
with-in USA Government, GOP, and the foreign influence of Zionism on
members of the House & Senate.
The Republican Party – The Real Extremist Anti-American Radicals .
Any agency that tries to hold any one accountable is dismantled and
watered down to being paper shufflers,
such as the FBI, CIA, and Interpol.
Home-land Security, top four officials being duel citizens with Israel,
another AIPAC controlled federal agency.
It seems like any attempt today by anyone their life is very much
compromised.
The silence has delivered a bigger message to millions “LOUD and CLEAR”.
The world is changing, and with it the demands on the United Nations.
Because the USA Congress is impudent which seems permanent.
UN provides a unique platform for international action. It offers
unparalleled legitimacy for global engagement, owing to its universal
membership; its inclusive decision-making processes; its unequalled
reach; and its ability to provide critical services that are essential
to international The world is changing, and with it the demands on the
United Nations. The peace, security, stability and prosperity.
The United Nations is engaged in a continuous process of change and
reform to strengthen its ability to meet new demands and deliver its
vital services in the most effective and efficient ways. This means:

Constant emphasis on transparency, accountability, integrity, efficiency
and flexibility.
Creating an environment in which improvement is expected and innovation
is welcomed.
These efforts are aimed at delivering results to those most in need,
doing more with what we have and strengthening accountability.

AIPAC & J-Street, Foreign lobbies with foreign interest only.

Chapters in most every USA States, involved with local, State and
Federal elections, Governors, Mayors, and legislative officials.

From financial institutions, education Institutions, Corporations, and
religious institutions the foreign influence and benefits for them exist.

Pork barrel spending for the benefit of Israel.

An audit of the fed. is necessary for the American peoples interest.. An
audit of each States is also very necessary with the criminal
involvement and corruption we all know is ramped.

We have to hold every official, CEO,Faculties, and false prophets in our
religious institutions accountable. MEDIA TALKING HEADS are also owned
lock, stock, and barrel.

http://WWW.universal-peace.com

Allen D. Post
March 20, 2013
Reply

Help UFPJ continue to resist war through efforts like the Iran Pledge of Resistance and the Jobs Not Wars campaign
.
Thank you for your years of resistance to U.S. wars and militarism. Your efforts and support have helped to force change. In his State of the Union address, President Obama claimed that a decade of war is coming to an end. If only that were true. The Administration’s plans for Afghanistan are unclear, killer drones fly across Asia and Africa with no end in sight, and threats to attack Iran are a common occurrence. Ten years on, United for Peace and Justice will continue to call for an end to U.S. wars. We will continue to demand a change in our nation’s priorities from war making to peacemaking. We ask you to continue to support our work for peace and justice.

STOP THE BLANK CHECK

NEW CAMPAIGN! Sign a “check” that promises your vote to the candidate who finally ends our blank check to Israel. Let’s deliver thousands of these to political candidates around the country before the next election.

Council for the National Interest:

“Palestine Papers” Expose U.S. As Dishonest Peace Broker

American Israel Public Affairs Committee is a lobbying group that advocates pro-Israel policies to the Congress and Executive Branch of the United States.AIPAC members are encouraged to become active in the campaigns of their choice so they can help candidates understand the importance of Israel to American interests abroad and the growing challenges facing Israel. While building support in Washington is essential, AIPAC is found wherever the future of the U.S.-Israel relationship could be affected. The core of AIPAC’s mission is building a base of citizen advocates who team with our expert staff to educate America’s elected officials, policy makers and opinion leaders.AIPAC also helps its membership stay in touch with their elected officials, offering up-to-date and reliable information to share with congressional leaders and their staffs and opportunities to lobby their members face-to-face.
ZIONIST: A racist individual who uses Judaism and his/her goal in supporting Israel as an excuse to occupy, control, and subdue an entire group of people.

CANADA MORE THEN HALF WAY THERE : AIPAC conference highlights Canada-Israel ties.

Canadian Foreign Minister John Baird electrified the massive pro-Israel crowd at this week’s AIPAC’s policy conference with his straight-talking affirmation of Israeli-Canadian shared values.

Known for his no-nonsense anti-terror policies toward Iranian- sponsored terrorism and its main proxy – the Lebanese terrorist group Hezbollah – Baird earned accolades from experts on Israel, leading to a crystallization of Canadian-Israeli ties into a non-formal special relationship.

BUYER BEWARE !!

Are Canadian officials as corrupt as the USA officials, if not its looking
very close.

TOTAL FOREIGN AID FROM USA TO ISRAEL:

A Conservative Estimate of Total U.S. Aid To Israel: More Than $123 Billion.

Israel also receives regular grants from the “American Schools and Hospitals Abroad” (ASHA) program.

A significant amount of aid to Israel comes from the DOD budget for so-called “joint defense projects”—although to date the Pentagon has shown little interest in these projects for its own use. Previous Washington Report estimates identified about $7.694 billion to Israel from the DOD budget through FY ’08. To that has been added amounts for FYs ’09, ’10 and ’11, as shown in Table 1. Of the $415 million shown for FY ’11, the most significant amount is the $205 million appropriated to support Israel’s “Iron Dome” short-range missile defense system.

A significant part of U.S. support for Israel’s defense program is the deployment to Israel in 2008 of the X-Band radar system to detect incoming missiles. Since this system is U.S.-owned and -operated (meaning the constant presence on Israeli soil of U.S. troops and defense contractors), its costs are not reflected in these numbers.
Canada, Israel sign foreign-aid pact
Posted on: December 12, 2012

Canada and Israel have drawn up a pact to work together on international development and aid projects, further strengthening ties between the two countries at a time when Israel faces increasing international isolation.

Daniel Carmon, head of Israel’s agency for international development, and Julian Fantino, Canada’s International Co-operation Minister, met in Ottawa Tuesday to sign the new agreement. Mr. Carmon said the deal will encourage the two countries to share strategies for international development and could lead to partnerships on specific projects.

Michell
March 24, 2013
Reply

I think the admin of this site is genuinely
working hard for his web page, for the reason that here every stuff is quality based
data.

Allen D. Post
April 1, 2013
Reply

38 Responses to Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad

RONALD L. WALDRON says:
December 25, 2007 at 1:35 pm

BARACK OBAMA, MOST ELECTABLE CANDIDATE:

A JFK type Candidate, and a refreshing reality to MLK’S dream. With integrity and ethics.

That of course is Barack Obama. Someone with out experience with the corrupt foreign and

corporate lobby deals, made with the polarized Washington insiders.

Change, reform, isn’t that what we the American people are looking for?

How concerned are you? National debt 10 Trillion and climbing.

No domestic ills being taken care of.
We need to take our Country back.. No
foreign or corporate special interest money. Thus
we need your help to fight against the established
system, corrupted system.

Pull together an act of Patriotism, not Patriot-Act.

EVERY ONE NEEDS TO VOTE IN THE PRIMARIES:

Do not “underestimate” the “anger,” “frustration,”

and “determination,” of your citizens who demand “justice and fairness.”

“Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere”.

All five of the leading Republican presidential candidates — including John McCain — would beat Democrat Hillary Clinton in a head-to-head match-up, according to a surprising new poll from Zogby International.
But Barack Obama out polled all five GOP hopefuls — Rudy Giuliani, Mitt Romney, Fred Thompson, Mike Huckabee, and McCain.

WE NEED CHANGE, WE NEED OBAMA.

HE IS THE CANDIDATE THAT IS MOST ELECTABLE, DON’T TAKE ANY CHANCES.

We’re going to transform the political process by bringing together hundreds of thousands of ordinary Americans to build a campaign responsible to no one but the people – American people. Not the corrupt lobbies.

Required reading: “FINAL REPORT” by Ronald L. Waldron

Available for order at more than 25,000 retail outlets worldwide, on the Internet at Amazon.com,

Barnes and Noble.com, and through the Author House, online publishing company book store.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________

Today’s date: 04/01/2013. To date. I have published six books. 800+ postings on Congress.org,. Messages sent to

every Senator, Congress member, media outlet, Also international media, officials, UN, NATO, HAGUE, Justice Dept.

Interpol, Peace organizations, on & on. NOT one word released regarding such. I have been Censored, blocked,

internet service monitored, blocked , and disconnected.

Only contact made was the Secret-Service coming to my house twice. The reason, I forwarded messages from

Israeli officials that threatened our President because he would not attack Iran labs. Not one word of such

threats by any of our MEDIA. THINK WHY.

Allen D. Post
April 5, 2013
Reply

January 2013: Anti-Zionist Orthodox Jews in Washington, DC marched to the White House on Inauguration Week-end to demonstrate their support of Palestine.

We are the anti-Zionist’s “think tank.” We are an important part of the anti-Zionist’s mission to produce and disseminate ideas so that individual and corporate members, as well as policymakers, journalists, students, and interested citizens in the United States and other countries, can better understand the world and how Zionism policy choices are causing serious problems to the American Republic and other nations around the world.

We do that by thinking, writing, and speaking about a broad range of Zionist issues. We are not racist, xenophobic, homophobic, or prejudiced against any race, creed, or national origin. We are prejudiced only against criminals.

Daryl Bradford Smith does not discuss or investigate evidence related to the Holocaust. He will, however, speak about free speech issues and our basic human right to freely exchange ideas.

An anti-semite is not someone who hates Jews; it is someone the Zionists hate.

Do you know what Zionism is, and why so many people — including Orthodox Jews — are complaining about it?
We have articles and interviews to help you understand it.

“I’ve never seen a President — I don’t care who he is — stand up to them. It just boggles the mind. They always get what they want. The Israelis know what is going on all the time. I got to the point where I wasn’t writing anything down. If the American people understood what a grip these people have got on our government, they would RISE UP IN ARMS. Our citizens certainly don’t have any idea what goes on.”

Thomas H. Moorer
(1912 – 2004)
Admiral,
US Navy & Chairman,
Joint Chiefs of Staff during
interview on 24 August 1983.

If a Gentile exposes Zionism, they are called “anti-semitic” which is nothing more than a smokescreen to hide the Zionists actions.

But, if a Jew is the person doing the exposing, they resort to other tactics.

First, they ignore the charges, hoping the information will not be given widespread distribution.

If the information starts reaching too many people, they ridicule the information and the persons giving the information.

If that doesn’t work, their next step is character assassination. If the author or speaker hasn’t been involved in sufficient scandal they are adept at fabricating scandal against the person or persons.

If none of these are effective, they are known to resort to physical attacks.

But, NEVER do they try to prove the information wrong.

Jack Bernstein, (assassinated by MOSSAD)

Aren’t 85% + or -, of assassinations done by MOSSAD?

Do you know what Zionism is, and why so many people — including Orthodox Jews — are complaining about it?
We have articles and interviews to help you understand it.

WHAT IS THE NETUREI KARTA?

Neturei Karta opposed the establishment of and retain all opposition to the existence of the so-called “State of Israel”!

Neturei-Karta is the Aramaic term for “Guardians of the City. The name Neturei-Karta originates from an incident in which R. Yehudah Ha-Nassi (Rabbi Judah the Prince) sent R. Hiyya and R. Ashi on a pastoral tour of inspection. In one town they asked to see the “guardians of the city” and the city guard was paraded before them. They said that these were not the guardians of the city but its destroyers, which prompted the citizens to ask who, then, could be considered the guardians. The rabbis answered, “The scribes and the scholars,” referring them to Tehillim (Psalms) Chap. 127. (Jerusalem Talmud, Tractate Hagiga. 76c).

The name was given to a group of Orthodox Jews in Jerusalem who refused (and still refuse) to recognize the existence or authority of the so-called “State of Israel” and made (and still make) a point of publicly demonstrating their position, the position of the Torah and authentic unadulterated Judaism.

The group was founded in Jerusalem, Palestine in 1938, splitting off from Agudas Yisroel. Agudas Yisroel was established in 1912 for the purpose of fighting Zionism. Gradually lured by money and honor they sold out to the “Golden-Calf” (see Exodus, XXXII) of Zionism. Those who wanted to maintain their faith and continue the struggle against Zionism, dissociated themselves from Agudas Yisroel and associated parties.

Over the years, a number of Neturei Karta activists and followers settled outside of Palestine. Some of the reasons that these individuals abandoned the country in which they and their families had lived for many generations (having lived there many years prior to the establishment of the illegitimate so-called “State of Israel”) include; ideological refusal to live under the illegitimate heretical “Israeli” regime, their being exiled by the Zionist government for their insistence of remaining independent of the illegitimate heretical regime or them being unable to live a normal family life due to them and their families being persistently harassed, repeatedly incarcerated and many times even physically tortured by the Zionist police and agents. This dispersion resulted in the emergence of various Neturei Karta establishments on the broader international scene. These establishments include synagogues, educational institutions, publishing houses and organizations. The establishments in New York include three synagogues in Brooklyn (Boro Park and Williamsburg), three upstate, and organizations include the Friends of Jerusalem in NY, NY.

Neturei Karta is not – as is often alleged – a small sect or an extremist group of “ultra-orthodox” Jews. The Neturei Karta have added nothing to nor have they taken anything away from the written and oral law of the Torah as it is expressed in the Halacha and the Shulchan Aruch. The Neturei Karta are fighting the changes and inroads made by political Zionism during the past one-hundred odd years. Guided by the rabbis of our time and under the inspiring leadership of the late Reb Amram Blau, the Neturei Karta refuse to recognize the right of anyone to establish a “Jewish” state during the present period of exile.

There are those who wish to play down the Neturei Karta and its’ Torah-true beliefs. This has been attempted many a time by stating that the Neturei Karta is a minority group and that compared to other Jewish groups the Neturei Karta aren’t even noticeable in terms of number.

The name Neturei Karta is a name usually given to those people who regularly pray in the Neturei Karta synagogues (Torah Ve’Yirah Jerusalem, Torah U’Tefillah London, Torah U’Tefillah NY, Beis Yehudi Upstate NY, etc.), study in or send their children to educational institutions run by Neturei Karta, or actively participate in activities, assemblies or demonstrations called by the Neturei Karta. Although it is true that the number of families which could be classified as Neturei Karta members or activists per-se is relatively small (several thousand), the number of Orthodox Jews who believe in the anti-Zionist ideology which Neturei Karta is known for, number in the hundreds of thousands.

Neturei Karta oppose the so-called “State of Israel” not because it operates secularly, but because the entire concept of a sovereign Jewish state is contrary to Jewish Law.

All the great rabbis who in accordance with Jewish Law opposed Zionism at its inception did not do so merely due to consideration of the secular lifestyles of the then Zionist leaders or even for their opposition to Torah heritage and rejection of its values and practices, but due to the fact that the entire concept of a Jewish state is in direct conflict with a number of Judaism’s fundamentals.

Condemnation of and segregation from anything connected to or affiliated with the so-called modern day “State of Israel” is based on the Talmud, the key fundamental doctrine of the Oral Tradition handed down by G-d to Moses on Mt. Sinai. The Talmud in Tractate Kesubos (p. 111a), teaches that Jews shall not use human force to bring about the establishment of a Jewish state before the coming of the universally accepted Moshiach (Messiah from the House of David). Furthermore it states that we are forbidden to rebel against the nations and that we should remain loyal citizens and we shall not attempt to leave the exile which G-d sent us into, ahead of time.

Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.

Neturei Karta forbid any participation with the so-called “State of Israel” or any of its subsidiaries. Neturei Karta followers do not participate in “Israeli” elections nor do they accept any aid from “Bituach Le’Umi” (Social Security), and the educational institutions of the Neturei Karta reject any form of financial support from the so-called “Va’ad HaYeshivos” (equiv. to Department of Education).

The Zionist state employs a set of chief rabbis and uses religious parties to ornament their state with a clerical image. They study the Torah with commentaries altered to clothe the words with nationalistic nuances. Our rabbis have countless times proclaimed that it matters little which individuals or parties govern in the Zionist state because the very establishment and existence of the state itself is to be condemned and to be deplored.

The true Jews remain faithful to Jewish belief and are not contaminated with Zionism.

The true Jews are against dispossessing the Arabs of their land and homes. According to the Torah, the land should be returned to them.

Neturei Karta deplore the systematic uprooting of ancient Jewish communities by the Zionists, the shedding of Jewish and non-Jewish blood for the sake of Zionist sovereignty and the Neturei Karta favor a peaceful transition from the present Zionist rule to a non-Zionist entity.

According to Judaic Law the Torah has the last word. There is no such thing as a majority of Jews who happen to be Jewish by birth who can alter Torah Law in any way. In fact even the greatest rabbi or as Maimonides writes, “even the greatest prophet” [referring actually to an authentic prophet], has no right to distort or amend even one letter of the Torah.

Rabbi Blau stated shortly before his death that the acceptance by the United Nations of the Zionist state as a member state constituted a grave injustice to the Jewish people. Neturei Karta hope that this great error will be corrected at the earliest opportunity. The Neturei Karta regret that the Zionist state has usurped the holy name of Israel and that the Zionists so often pretend to speak in the name of the Jewish people and assume the right to act on our behalf. Only those rabbis who have not been affected or influenced by the poison of Zionism, can be considered the spiritual leaders of today’s Jewry.

The world must know that the Zionists have illegitimately seized the name Israel and have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people!

business marketing
April 5, 2013
Reply

The other day, while I was at work, my sister stole
my iPad and tested to see if it can survive
a 25 foot drop, just so she can be a youtube sensation. My
iPad is now broken and she has 83 views. I know this is completely off topic but I had to
share it with someone!

home based business
April 7, 2013
Reply

I read this article fully about the comparison of hottest and earlier technologies, it’s remarkable article.

melina
April 27, 2013
Reply

What’s up, this weekend is fastidious designed for me, for the reason that this time i am reading this great informative paragraph here at my house.

candy crush saga cheats
May 12, 2013
Reply

I have read a few just right stuff here. Certainly price bookmarking for revisiting.

I wonder how much effort you set to create the sort of
great informative site.

Nora
May 21, 2013
Reply

We’re a gaggle of volunteers and opening a brand new scheme in our community. Your site offered us with useful info to work on. You have done an impressive job and our entire group might be grateful to you.

http://forum.tipak.cz/profile.php?id=7324
June 17, 2013
Reply

I delight in, cause I discovered exactly what I used to be having a look for.
You’ve ended my 4 day long hunt! God Bless you man. Have a great day. Bye

Ronald L. Waldron
July 10, 2013
Reply

Zionist: False Prophets and Profiteers influencing the Republicans and religious leaders by buying their complete support and dictating any future policy, foreign or domestic .
The Media is the Enemy

President Bush may have committed a lot of crimes, but the most important criminals are Edgar Bronfman, Sumner Redstone, Samuel Newhouse, and other people who control Hollywood, television, school textbooks, and other sources of information.

They are criminals,
not executives

The people who control the media are often describes as “executives”, but they should be referred to as “criminals” because they are deceiving us with propaganda; providing entertainment and sexual titillation to distract us; and suppressing people who try to expose their crimes.

Many people on the Internet refer to this group as “The Powers That Be” (TPTB), but they are not powerful. They should be described as Criminals On The Loose (COTL).

The media criminals
distort our view of the world

By getting control of the information we are exposed to, they can distort our perception of the world.

For example, there are still people all over the world they don’t know what Building 7 is, let alone that it crumbled into a pile of rubble for no apparent reason on September 11.

The September 11 attack would have been exposed years ago if it were not for these media criminals. These people are collaborators in these crimes.

Children are exposed to this, What effect is this having on children?

These media criminals provide infantile and psychotic entertainment in their television shows, newspapers, magazines, movies, and other forms of propaganda. Diarrhea, bathrooms, and sex a common subject.

They often portray drunks as amusing people. The slurring of words and staggering as they walk is treated as family entertainment.

They promote the musicians and actors who encourage violence, drug abuse, sexual perversion, neurotic attitudes, or psychotic behavior.

Throughout most of human existence, children grew up around their parents, neighbors, and other children. Today they are growing up around selfish, immoral business executives you are trying to manipulate them into purchasing products; who titillate them with diarrhea jokes, sexual titillation, and slurring alcoholics; and who offer them role models who I would classify as psychotic. How can anybody justify this type of childhood?

There is no possible way that the sex slave trade, the kidnapping and raping of children, and other forms of perversion could be occurring on such a large scale around the world without support from the government, and without the media to suppress evidence of the crimes.

Because most of the media criminals are Jewish, I am sometimes criticized as an anti-Semite for complaining about them. So let me point out that there are Jews who also complain about them. This is not an issue of religion, nor of Jews. It is an issue of crime.
For frequency of coverage, the Holocaust places a close second to the daily weather report.

Hardly a week passes without a major Holocaust-related story in the New York Times
Which book gets into Barnes & Noble and other large distributors? Which book gets a favorable review by the New York Times, Scientific American, or Newsweek?

The books that are promoted are the ones that the media criminals approve of. This is why you cannot find my books in the national bookstores, and they will never be given a review by the New York Times.

The media criminals are not providing us with “news”. They are not providing us with book reviews, either. Rather, they are providing us with propaganda to promote their particular view of the world, and to cover up their crimes.

The American and European media spend a lot of time promoting the hatred Arabs, and they spend lots of time promoting pity for the innocent and superior Jews. Therefore, I would say that the primary goal of the media criminals is the creation of Israel.

There are probably lots of other reasons that they provide deceptive news reports, such as supporting their friends in the defense, banking, and oil industry.

They may be encouraging immorality in order to break down American and European nations, which would make it easier for them to get even more control over us.

The reason they encourage crummy school courses may be to produce a generation of ignorant and badly behaved children. This helps weaken the nation, making it easier for a small group to get more control of it.

Don’t dismiss the role Israel
has played in the 20th century

Many people promote the idea that the Vatican is trying to take over the world, or that some mysterious group of people called “neocons” or “illuminati” are trying to get control.

However, most of the wars and chaos of the 20th century seem to have been intended to help Israel and to destroy America, Europe, and Russia.

Finkelstein also believes the support of Israel is one of the reasons they lie about the Holocaust:

Organized American Jewry has exploited the Nazi Holocaust to deflect criticism of Israel’s and its own morally indefensible policies.

Some Vatican officials, some secret societies, some oil company executives, and other people may be assisting the Zionists in their wars and corruption, but I would say the Zionists are the masterminds, and the other people are their Useful Idiots.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 10, 2013
Reply

Thank You Governor Cuomo, the ONLY politician to stand up
against the corruption in government.

All Americans should be supporting the Governor, and demanding
more to do the same.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 11, 2013
Reply

Republican Party Leaders, Mitch McConnell (Senate Mitch McConnell most corrupt Senator in Washington) and John Boehner
(John Boehner ” Cry baby Boner” is caught red-handed in an amazing act of corruption). Together with Eric Cantor, typical corrupt republican politician, have taken the Party down to the bottom of the sewer “the infrastructure of the party NOW”.

It is amazing to most American,s that the conservative right
supports such, along with the Evangelical religious leaders,
and the Tea Party leaders also supporting the same.
Supporting the Israeli, AIPAC, corrupt agenda as well.
There is no ethics or real ethics committee in Washington
to enforce any rules & regulations.

The research is done my friends: Google
Mitch McConnell & corruption.
John Boehner & Corruption.
Eric Cantor & Corruption.
Republican Party & Corruption.
The Tax fraud of Tax Exemption, and cover-up, breaking down
the IRS to change makers.

Also Google AIPAC and corruption & control of our government.

Research also done: Done so by several professors, authors, and
Journalist. 127 Journalist assassinated in Iraq, dying along with
our sons & daughters fighting a WAR on false information from Israel, & Mossad.
An illegal war, and several war crimes committed
with no prosecution of any one.

BUT any one giving us the TRUTH, is a terrorist, a whistle-blower.
Come on Americans wake to Hell up. THIS IS YOUR GOVERNMENT,
Take it back, before our kids are forced to learn Hebrew.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 14, 2013
Reply

The American people respect others, have strong moral values, they have strong ethics,
integrity and a strong sense for what is right & wrong.

Our government had the same values until after World War TWO.
From then o there has been a dwindling away of the values
once had. Now Totally gone, gone due to the development of
very large immoral foreign and domestic lobbies influencing,
financing, and manipulating our laws & officials to the point of
it being TREASON. It is now up to us the voters to change things.

We know what is RIGHT (correct). That is to say NO to the
RIGHT-WING. No more WAR for the wrong reasons, no more
foreign aid and blank checks. No more money for foreign
military bases, CUT the 300 foreign bases down. Let
others pay for their own defense, quit placing all cost
on the backs of the middle class tax payer that is disappearing
due to no enforcement of rules & regulations on the foreign
trade LAWS. The leaving of slave law alone. Out-sourcing of
our jobs, and ignoring the global warming & weather
change with no enforcement of environmental LAWS.

LETS HEAR YOUR VOICES!!

Ronald L. Waldron
July 14, 2013
Reply

This following POST will be my last. I realize that my work for the last 12 years has made me many enemies. Even amongst family
& friends.
I’m prepared to die for all of them. BUT mostly hoping for the
future of children, grand-children, and most of all for our
great- great grand kids. Kenadi & Zoey. ALL: of them the love
of Barbara’s and my life. ETERNITY.

.RELIGION, POLITICS, and Government do not mix, never has,
that is why we need separation of CHURCH & STATE.

Study: Religion Going Extinct in Most Western Countries — Why Does It Still Dominate Our Politics?
We know that languages die out. We also know that religions die out. How many people believe in Zeus or Poseidon or Apollo? But could we see religions as a whole die out in modern societies? A new study predicts that that is exactly what is going to happen in Australia, Austria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Switzerland. The list is notable because in includes the two countries most similar to the United States. Both Canada and Australia were founded, mainly, by British settlers. How could it be that they are readying to bury Christianity and we’ve handed over one of our two viable political parties to a fundamentalist version of that religion?

I mean, Big Oil and Big Money operate in Canada and Australia, too. So, why haven’t the dollars gone to the megachurches in those countries? It might have something to do with political efficacy. It is easier to capture a major party in the United States than in Canada or, especially, Australia.

Still, it’s astonishing to think that Christianity may soon be extinct in Canada at the same time as it is morphing into something so powerful in our country that it can destroy reproductive choice and the teaching of biology, geology, and sex education.

We’re not inherently more religious than Canada. We just have a political system that allows financial elites to enlist religious fundamentalists in their service. In other words, religion has tremendous utility in our country.

“The idea is pretty simple,” said Richard Wiener of the Research Corporation for Science Advancement, and the University of Arizona.

“It posits that social groups that have more members are going to be more attractive to join, and it posits that social groups have a social status or utility.

“For example in languages, there can be greater utility or status in speaking Spanish instead of [the dying language] Quechuan in Peru, and similarly there’s some kind of status or utility in being a member of a religion or not.”

Dr Wiener continued: “In a large number of modern secular democracies, there’s been a trend that folk are identifying themselves as non-affiliated with religion; in the Netherlands the number was 40%, and the highest we saw was in the Czech Republic, where the number was 60%.”

The team then applied their nonlinear dynamics model, adjusting parameters for the relative social and utilitarian merits of membership of the “non-religious” category.

They found, in a study published online, that those parameters were similar across all the countries studied, suggesting that similar behaviour drives the mathematics in all of them.

And in all the countries, the indications were that religion was headed toward extinction.

I don’t care what people believe. I think the single best thing about our country is that we are allowed to believe whatever the hell we want. I don’t believe in mixing religion and politics, even to promote agnosticism. But I think it is fascinating how our political system actually encourages a form of religious fanaticism that is actually in the process of completely dying out in counties much like ours.

Could simple electoral reform destroy organized religion in this country?

By BooMan | Sourced from Booman Tribune

Posted at March 23, 2011, 8:00 am
submit to reddit digg Share
220 COMMENTS
A A AEmail
Share
See more stories tagged with: politics, religion

A female US soldier stands watch in central Baghdad in 2008. US commanders are taking a second look at policies that bar women from ground combat, as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have thrust female soldiers into the thick of the fight.
WORLD Can You Face the True Consequences of War? The Horrors of Bagging Soldiers’ Bodies in Iraq

TEA PARTY AND THE RIGHT 3/4ths of Senate GOP Doesn’t Believe in Science — When Did Republicans Go Completely Off the Deep End?
A woman prepares to use a treadmill.
Women (and Men) Increasingly Hate Their Bodies — A New Movement Wants to Change That

CULTURE Alone Together: Why We’ve Started Expecting More from Technology and Less from Each Other

MEDIA The New York Times’ $50 Million Paywall Crumbles With Simple Code Exploit

Hot News and Views Study: Religion Going Extinct in Most Western Countries — Why Does It Still Dominate Our Politics?

ENVIRONMENT Kochs Profit from Canadian Eco-Nightmare

ECONOMY US Uncut: Corporate Tax Dodging Unifies Unlikely Allies — Like Cops and Protesters

CIVIL LIBERTIES CIA Psychologist’s Notes Reveal True Purpose Behind Bush’s Torture Program

TEA PARTY AND THE RIGHT 7 Things to Do When Right-Wingers Attack

WORLD Obama in El Salvador — ‘Trapped by History’ or ‘Space for Hope?’
Email
Print
A A A Sharesubmit to reddit
diggPROGRESSIVE WIRE
Australia to rescue hundreds stranded by floods

Pat Buchanan Says Obama’s Libya Policy Ruled by Emotions Of His Female Advisers

New Jersey Governor Chris Christie’s Budget Cuts Ruled Unconstitutional

Boehner, McConnell recognize health reform anniversary by vowing to destroy it

State Marriage Watch: Court Denies Prop 8 Plaintiffs Request To Allow Marriages To Resume In California

Portuguese PM announces resignation

Understanding the AT&T Takeover of T-Mobile

Detroit Mayor Vows To Challenge Population Tally

When Banks Won’t Help Homeowners, Scammers Help Themselves

GQR/Democracy Corps poll: GOP House majority in jeopardy already

MORE
Starbucks and Makeup: The Daily Ritual of the At-Home Worker

Biggest Energy Blunder of Obama Years? Administration Opens New Lands for Mining

Why the Chamber of Commerce Has Been Wrong on All the Issues — For 99 Years and Counting
Advertisement
Most ReadMost EmailedMost DiscussedOn REDDITOn DIGG
Glenn Greenwald: How the US Government Strikes Fear in Its Own Citizens and People Around the World
Glenn Greenwald, AlterNet
6 Sadistic State Laws Conservatives Are Trying to Ram Through
David Sirota, AlterNet
3/4ths of Senate GOP Doesn’t Believe in Science — When Did Republicans Go Completely Off the Deep End?
Robert Benson, Miller-McCune.com
Crime Rates Are Plummeting — And No One Knows Why
Anneli Rufus, AlterNet
Drinking From the White Fountain: Tea Party Candidate Herman Cain Turns His Back on the African-American Community
Chauncey DeVega, AlterNet
Former Goldman Sachs Banker Revving Up Smear Campaign Against Elizabeth Warren
Zach Carter, Huffington Post
How Psychedelics Can Be a Path to Transformation
Phil Wolfson, Tikkun
How You End Up Bankrolling Fox News: News Corp. and Rupert Murdoch Weasel Out of Paying Taxes
Mark Howard, News Corpse
Secret Experimental Prisons Subject Inmates to Drastic Isolation
Alia Malek, Investigative Fund at The Nation Institute
Officials Are “Underestimating the Seriousness of the Problem” with Japan’s Nuclear Reactors
Juan Gonzalez, Democracy Now!
Glenn Greenwald: How the US Government Strikes Fear in Its Own Citizens and People Around the World
197 emails sent since March 21, 2011.
3/4ths of Senate GOP Doesn’t Believe in Science — When Did Republicans Go Completely Off the Deep End?
196 emails sent since March 22, 2011.
Former Goldman Sachs Banker Revving Up Smear Campaign Against Elizabeth Warren
115 emails sent since March 18, 2011.
Moyers and Winship: We Can’t Let an Amateur Right-Wing Smear Campaign Destroy NPR
115 emails sent since March 18, 2011.
6 Sadistic State Laws Conservatives Are Trying to Ram Through
108 emails sent since March 21, 2011.
Drinking From the White Fountain: Tea Party Candidate Herman Cain Turns His Back on the African-American Community
102 emails sent since March 17, 2011.
Vision: Urban Gardening and Green Economy Flourish in Detroit
100 emails sent since March 20, 2011.
How You End Up Bankrolling Fox News: News Corp. and Rupert Murdoch Weasel Out of Paying Taxes
90 emails sent since March 21, 2011.
How Psychedelics Can Be a Path to Transformation
78 emails sent since March 18, 2011.
PA Government Official Compares Oscar-nominated Film ‘Gasland’ to Nazi Propaganda
69 emails sent since March 16, 2011.
More Most Emailed Stories »
loading reddit content ..
loading digg content ..

loading …
POWERED BY DIGG’S USERSABOUT DIGG
News & Politics
NEWS & POLITICS World
WORLD Economy
ECONOMY Rights
CIVIL LIBERTIES GENDER IMMIGRATION Environment
ENVIRONMENT FOOD WATER Media & Culture
BOOKS CULTURE MEDIA Living
BELIEF DRUGS FOOD PERSONAL HEALTH SEX & RELATIONSHIPS Vision
VISION Investigations
INVESTIGATIONS THE CASE FOR ALTERNET
OUR MISSION
WHO WE ARE
ABOUT IMI
OUR FOUNDATIONS
PRESS INFORMATION
WRITER GUIDELINES
PRIVACY POLICY
ADVERTISE ON ALTERNET
CONTACT US
DONATE
MOBILE
REGISTER
LOGIN
RSS
Facebook
Twitter
[w2]

life insurance for over 50 years of age
July 18, 2013
Reply

Now I am going to do my breakfast, when having my breakfast coming over again
to read further news.

all-loans-indo
July 24, 2013
Reply

Hi there, just became aware of your blog through Google, and found that it’s truly informative. I’m
gonna watch out for brussels. I will be grateful
if you continue this in future. A lot of people will be benefited from your writing.
Cheers!

Ronald L. Waldron
July 27, 2013
Reply

Removed from posting on this site by big brother and the people
in charge. Ron Waldron

No reason given.

Sandra Lee
July 29, 2013
Reply

Apr 19, 2013 – Compared with last year, the joint wealth of the 165 Zionist billionaires has grown substantially.

The Zionist Billionaires Who Control Political Discourse

Obama has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Obama is held captive, not protected . Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house,
Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, the internet, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, and religious leaders.

America is in big trouble, and there’s hell to pay. That’s my conclusion, based on careful analysis and evaluation of the clear and present danger which confronts us. Swindlers are in charge of this country, and not ordinary swindlers either. These greedy crooks are devil-men, murderous in nature, determined to pull the plug on our freedoms and liberties.

Sadly, many years of steady media indoctrination, moral decay, and political compromises by the people have made it possible for America to reach this great crisis point. Taken over completely by Zionism, The Russian Zionist Mafia and Israel in charge.

Zionist: False Prophets and Profiteers. Republican: CORRUPTION.

ZERO: Ethics & Integrity.

Republican Party Leaders, Mitch McConnell (Senate Mitch McConnell most corrupt Senator in Washington) and John Boehner
(John Boehner ” Cry baby Boner” is caught red-handed in an amazing act of corruption). Together with Eric Cantor, typical corrupt republican politician, have taken the Party down to the bottom of the sewer “the infrastructure of the party NOW”.

It is amazing to most American,s that the conservative right
supports such, along with the Evangelical religious leaders,
and the Tea Party leaders also supporting the same.
Supporting the Israeli, AIPAC, corrupt agenda as well.
There is no ethics or real ethics committee in Washington
to enforce any rules & regulations.

The research is done my friends: Google
Mitch McConnell & corruption.
John Boehner & Corruption.
Eric Cantor & Corruption.
Paul Ryan & Corruption.
Carl Rove The master mind of corruption, partner,
Dick Cheney and The Halliburton Loophole .
Republican Party & Corruption.
The Tax fraud of Tax Exemption, and cover-up, breaking down
the IRS to change makers.

Also Google AIPAC and corruption & control of our government.

Research also done: Done so by several professors, authors, and
Journalist. 127 Journalist assassinated in Iraq, dying along with
our sons & daughters fighting a WAR on false information from Israel, & Mossad.
An illegal war, and several war crimes committed
with no prosecution of any one.

BUT any one giving us the TRUTH, is a terrorist, a whistle-blower.
Come on Americans wake to Hell up. THIS IS YOUR GOVERNMENT,
Take it back, before our kids are forced to learn Hebrew.

Zionist: False Prophets and Profiteers influencing the Republicans and religious leaders by buying their complete support and dictating any future policy, foreign or domestic .
The Media is the Enemy

President Bush may have committed a lot of crimes, but the most important criminals are Edgar Bronfman, Sumner Redstone, Samuel Newhouse, and other people who control Hollywood, television, school textbooks, and other sources of information.
Love of Money the Root of All Evil

The list of swindlers surrounding Obama must be made known if we are to survive this deadly assault. Here I publish their names, and note: They are all Zionist Jews. They are, every one of them, sociopathic criminals who have been given the master keys to our national treasury. And they are busy non-stop emptying the vault. Truly, the biblical admonition, “The love of money is the root of all evil” is proven to be so, in spades.

Any question in people’s minds that this grand conspiracy to murder America is anything but Jewish surely is answered simply by observing the names of the greedy criminals. There are no Smiths, Johnsons, Rileys, Jones, Jacksons, and Adams among them. Obama has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Observe the top money men on the swindlers list in Obama’s household of deceit:

Secretary of Treasury

—

Tim Geithner (Jew)

Chairman, Federal Reserve

—

Ben Bernanke (Jew)

Office of Management & Budget

—

Peter Orszag (Jew)

Chief Financial Advisor

—

Larry Summers (Jew)

Hold on, there’s more. At Obama’s side, guiding his every move in the Oval Office, are two more slimy Jewish agents of financial and political intrigue: Obama’s White House Chief of Staff, Rahm “The Cruel” Emanuel (Jew), and Chief Political Advisor David Axelrod (Jew). Over-seeing Obama’s quest to socialize our entire medical system and set up “death panels” to mete out euthanasia to the old and “unfit” is none other than Rahm Emanuel’s M.D. brother—Ezekiel Emanuel (Jew). The new IRS commissioner is Doug Shulman, also—of course—a Jew.

Israel’s & AIPAC’s Vicious Band of Zionist Criminals Are Stealing America Blind and Now Threaten Our Very Lives.

OH! how well I know. What can we or any one else do about it. To begin with International organizations that have
warned us for the last sixty years.

Sandra Lee & RLW & ALLEN AND MANY MORE
July 29, 2013
Reply

HERE WE ARE AGAIN.

rlw643@windstream.net
August 4, 2013
Reply

Beginning just after the 2000 appointment of George Bush as President of the USA, by the Supreme Court.
Which in turn was the greatest hit against the voting rights of us, the American people.

All messages from that date on were sent to the majority of all members of the house and senate. Congress. org, and the
White House.

To all major news media outlets, and several anchors of such.
Tip lines included.

Hundreds of letters to the Editors.

To all major news papers, nationally and internationally.
Aljazeera, BBC, and the Guardian UK. Aljazeera being the only
one to reply with comments and acceptance.

To most state and federal agencies, Interpol, the UN, NATO,
The Hague, and Brussels.

To Unions, peace organizations, Anti-war groups, Anti-Zionism
groups, Jews against Zionism, Jewish voice for Peace, Veterans
organizations, The pentagon, Justice department, Police
organizations, Chiefs of Police, Sheriffs organizations,
Universities and Professors, Talk shows, Meet the Press,
This week, GMA, CNN, Jack Cafferty, Anderson Cooper,
Larry King, Lou Dobbs, and to student organizations, and
Campus media news papers.

To all political party headquarters, and directors.

To Jimmy Carter, and other past political figures.
Jimmy Carter being the only person to reply. Other then a
pr-printed reply with acknowledgement of receiving the message.
To reply later. (LATER HAS LONG BEEN UPON US)

I would think that past officials and staff would step up and
tell the truth about what they saw, heard, witnessed, knowing
none of it has been good for the American people, and was & is
a crisis for AMERICA.
They owe it to the American people. The thing stopping them
is the fear in their hearts, and the lead in their asses. They
would rather die to save an image, than to help protect
democracy for their own families future generations.

The biggest violators are republicans, then many Democrats.

Using the Churches by taking a stand against abortions,
gay marriage, single parenting, and moral values. When the
largest amount of such is committed with-in such religious
organizations under an umbrella of SECRECY. (maybe)
Starting with priest & ministers.
Churches that now are corporations investing in murderous
wars not the communities they get tax exemptions from.

Please become informed. Open your eyes to the Crisis at hand!

Go to and GOOGLE

1. Ronald L. Waldron

2. Fight Terrorism at home & Abroad

3. www. universal-peace.com

Thank you for reading my messages.

Ronald L. Waldron Bless you and yours

Ronald L. Waldron
August 4, 2013
Reply

STEPPED ON, TRAMPLED ON, AND NOW IGNORED,
OUR CONSTITUTION & BILL OF RIGHTS.

History

The Constitution of the United States: The Bill of Rights

Source: The source for this transcript is the National Archives and Records Administration.

Note: The following text is a transcription of the first 10 amendments to the Constitution in their original form. These amendments were ratified December 15, 1791, and form what is known as the “Bill of Rights.”

Amendment I

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

Amendment II

A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.

Amendment III

No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.

Amendment IV

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

Amendment V

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.

Amendment VI

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.

Amendment VII

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.

Amendment VIII

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

Amendment IX

The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Amendment X

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
Note: The capitalization and punctuation in this version is from the enrolled original of the Joint Resolution of Congress proposing the Bill of Rights, which is on permanent display in the Rotunda of the National Archives Building, Washington, D.C.

Original Constitution
Bill of Rights

Ronald L. Waldron
August 13, 2013
Reply

CRISIS IN AMERICA

To: ALL OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, ALL MEMBERS OF GOVERNMENT AND MEDIA, ALL THOSE WHO DESIRE PEACE IN THE WORLD, ALL ZIONIST, AGENCY, ORGANIZATION, THAT IS DESIGNED TO HARM AMERICA, AMERICANS, AND TRUE DEMOCRACY .., ALL TRUE TORAH JEWS THAT PRACTICE THEIR TRUE FAITH, AND DESIRE TRUE PEACE IN THE WORLD.

Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad

Google the above, become informed, we are in crisis, we all
have to get involved. At least read the last 6-8 post.

Google this name. (Ronald L. Waldron)
Go to : http://www.universal-peace.com (Home)

Apr 19, 2013 – Compared with last year, the joint wealth of the 165 Zionist billionaires has grown substantially.

The Zionist Billionaires Who Control Political Discourse

Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house,
Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, the internet, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, and religious leaders.

America is in big trouble, and there’s hell to pay. That’s my conclusion, based on careful analysis and evaluation of the clear and present danger which confronts us. Swindlers are in charge of this country, and not ordinary swindlers either. These greedy crooks are devil-men, murderous in nature, determined to pull the plug on our freedoms and liberties.

Sadly, many years of steady media indoctrination, moral decay, and political compromises by the people have made it possible for America to reach this great crisis point. Taken over completely by Zionism, The Russian Zionist Mafia and Israel in charge.

Any question in people’s minds that this grand conspiracy to murder America is anything but Jewish surely is answered simply by observing the names of the greedy criminals. There are no Smiths, Johnsons, Rileys, Jones, Jacksons, and Adams among them.

Israel’s & AIPAC’s Vicious Band of Zionist Criminals Are Stealing America Blind and Now Threaten Our Very Lives.

OH! how well I know. What can we or any one else do about it. To begin with International organizations that have
warned us for the last sixty years.

PLEASE FORWARD THIS MESSAGE TO THOSE WHO REALIZE SOMETHING IS REAL WRONG

Ronald L. Waldron
August 18, 2013
Reply

Some JFK Probe Files Still Sealed ??

Five decades after President John F. Kennedy was fatally shot and long after official inquiries ended, thousands of pages of investigative documents remain withheld from public view. The contents of these files are partially known — and intriguing — and conspiracy buffs are not the only ones seeking to open them for a closer look.

Some serious researchers believe the off-limits files could shed valuable new light on nagging mysteries of the assassination — including what U.S. intelligence agencies knew about accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald before Nov. 22, 1963.

It turns out that several hundred of the still-classified pages concern a deceased CIA agent, George Joannides, whose activities just before the assassination and, fascinatingly, during a government investigation years later, have tantalized researchers for years.

“This is not about conspiracy, this is about transparency,” said Jefferson Morley, a former Washington Post reporter and author embroiled in a decade-long lawsuit against the CIA, seeking release of the closed documents. “I think the CIA should obey the law. I don’t think most people think that’s a crazy idea.”

Morley’s effort has been joined by others, including G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel for a House investigation into the JFK assassination in the 1970s. But so far, the Joannides files and thousands more pages primarily from the CIA remain off-limits at a National Archives center in College Park, Md.

Others say the continued sealing of 50-year-old documents raises needless questions in the public’s mind and encourages conspiracy theories.

“There is no question that in various ways the CIA obfuscated, but it may be they were covering up operations that were justifiable, benign CIA operations that had absolutely nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination,” said Anthony Summers, a British author whose sequel to his JFK book “Not In Your Lifetime” will be released this year.

“But after 50 years, there is no reason that I can think of why such operations should still be concealed,” Summers said. “By withholding Joannides material, the agency continues to encourage the public to believe they’re covering up something more sinister.”

To understand the attention to the Joannides files, it’s necessary to go back to 1963 and to review what’s known about Oswald that put him on the CIA’s radar.

It’s also important to recall the differing conclusions of the two official investigations of the JFK killing – one denying any conspiracy, the other suspecting one – and how much or how little cooperation investigators received from CIA officials, including Joannides himself.

Oswald was a loner and an enigma even to those closest to him. He was “as difficult to understand as anyone I’ve studied in 35 years as a professional historian,” said David Kaiser, whose 2008 book, “The Road To Dallas: The Assassination of John F. Kennedy,” drew on tens of thousands of documents released in the 1990s.

Still, plenty was learned about Oswald after the shooting in Dallas. And, it’s now clear, he was not unknown to the U.S. government before that.

Assassination investigators learned that Oswald had formed a group in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 that ostensibly supported Cuban leader Fidel Castro (Oswald was the only local member) and had been involved in a street altercation with anti-Castro demonstrators that was captured by a local television station.

Pamphlets Oswald had in his possession bore an address of a local anti-Castro operation connected to a former FBI agent with ties to organized crime, investigators discovered. That and other information has led researchers to believe that Oswald may have been part of a counterintelligence operation to discredit the group he had joined, the Fair Play For Cuba Committee, and that the street scene was a setup.

If so, who would have overseen such an operation?

Declassified documents show that Joannides, while based in Miami, was the CIA case officer for the anti-Castro Student Revolutionary Directorate (DRE), the group involved in the street fracas with Oswald.

What did this all add up to, if anything? Official investigations of the Kennedy assassination were not able to provide complete answers.

The Warren Commission, which concluded in 1964 that Oswald acted alone and was not part of a conspiracy, was never told about the CIA’s possibly relevant anti-Castro activities, despite the fact that former CIA director Allen Dulles was a Warren Commission member.

Warren Commission staff counsel Burt Griffin, now a retired judge, calls it “an act of bad faith” by the CIA.

“I think they had an obligation to tell the chief justice (Earl Warren, commission chairman) about that, and then that decision would have been his and the commission’s to make,” Griffin said.

In separate interviews with The Associated Press, Griffin and fellow staff counsel David Slawson stood by the Warren Commission’s conclusions.

Each pointed to a series of personal rejections behind Oswald’s deadly action: Weeks after he made an unsuccessful attempt in Mexico City to get a visa to Cuba, his wife Marina rejected his attempts to reconcile their rocky marriage. It was during Oswald’s visit, the night before the shooting, to the suburban Dallas home where his wife and two young daughters were staying that he packed up his disassembled Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to take to work the next day, the Warren Commission determined. That next morning, he removed his wedding ring, left his money with his wife, and departed to carry out the assassination.

“If she had taken him back,” Slawson said, “he wouldn’t have done it.”

More complex and sinister theories about his motivation have been offered, of course, some flowing from the release in the 1990s of previously classified documents.

Kaiser, the historian, has postulated that Oswald, long seen as a devout leftist, was in fact being manipulated by right-wing and mob elements in his final months and that his visit to the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico City in the fall of 1963 was part of an attempt to reach Cuba and kill Castro. Release of documents held by those governments could be revealing, Kaiser said.

By the time the House Select Committee on Assassinations convened in the mid-1970s to probe the Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. killings, other congressional investigations had exposed the CIA’s activities in the early 1960s, including plots to assassinate Castro.

Those revelations would be overshadowed, however, by the House committee’s JFK conclusion: That sound impulses recorded on the microphone of a Dallas police officer amounted to evidence of a shot from the infamous “grassy knoll” in Dealey Plaza, and thus of an additional gunman besides Oswald firing from a building window.

Kennedy, the committee’s final report said in carefully tempered language, was “probably assassinated as the result of a conspiracy. The committee is unable to identify the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy.”

Subsequent analyses have cast doubt on the acoustic evidence, and the issue is considered unresolved.

That evidence was, of course, only part of the mountains of material considered by the committee, some of it from the CIA. And the CIA’s liaison to the committee was none other than George Joannides, by then retired from the agency.

Blakey, the committee’s chief counsel, recalled how the CIA brought in Joannides to act as a middleman to help fill requests for documents made by committee researchers. “He was put in a position to edit everything we were given before it was given to us,” Blakey said.

But Blakey didn’t learn about Joannides’ past until Morley unearthed it in files declassified years later.

“If I’d known Joannides was the case officer for the DRE, he couldn’t have been liaison; he would have been a witness,” Blakey told The Associated Press.

Blakey added: “Do I think I was snookered, precisely like the Warren Commission was? Yes.”

Which brings us back to the still-secret investigative files – about 300 pages of which relate to Joannides.

First, some background:

Certain files held by the Warren Commission and House Select Committee were originally ordered sealed, for privacy, security and other considerations, well into the 21st century.

Decades passed before public pressure spurred by Oliver Stone’s 1991 film “JFK” changed that.

Congress passed the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992, which established the Assassination Records Review Board, or ARRB, to carry out release of records related to the assassination. As a result, about five million pages of documents have been released and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration in Maryland.

But the review board agreed to withhold about 1,100 records – each record comprises 1-20 pages – that are considered to contain information about confidential sources or methods or have national security implications.

The JFK Act required all records to be released by 2017, but it left some wiggle room for agencies to petition to have records withheld if disclosure would compromise “military defense, intelligence operations, law enforcement, or conduct of foreign relations.”

It is unknown whether the CIA will try to keep some documents classified past 2017; if it does, that may only increase Morley’s resolve.

“You have to wonder what is so important in a 50-year-old document,” he said. “I’ve come to the conclusion that they’re guarding something big, and that has stiffened my determination.”

A CIA spokesman, Ned Price, said the agency has complied with the law in releasing documents and the archives center “has all of the Agency’s documents and files on the Kennedy assassination. Price didn’t comment on the Joannides material specifically, citing Morley’s lawsuit.

“The classified information contained in the files remains subject to the declassification provisions of the Act,” he said.

Meanwhile, the documents sit in metal boxes on shelves in “a big room that’s temperature- and humidity-controlled,” said Martha Murphy, the Archives’ chief of special access and Freedom of Information Act requests.

Among those are the Joannides files. An index created by the CIA and provided to The Associated Press by Morley describes many of the files as containing information on Joannides’ travel, training and personnel evaluations as well as memos pertaining to the CIA’s interactions with the House Select Committee on Assassinations.

Morley’s interest dates to the 1990s when he covered the newly-formed ARRB. He filed suit for the Joannides documents in 2003 and has pried loose several hundred pages since then.

A federal judge dismissed the case in 2010. But in June, a federal appeals court overruled a lower court that had denied Morley’s request to be reimbursed for attorneys’ fees. “Records about individuals allegedly involved in President Kennedy’s assassination serve a public benefit,” the decision said.

Morley does not suggest the Joannides files point to agency involvement in the assassination itself, but more likely that their release would show the CIA trying to keep secret its own flawed performance before the assassination.

“The idea that Lee Harvey Oswald was some unknown quantity to CIA officers was false,” Morley said. “There was this incredible high-level attention to Oswald on the eve of the assassination.”

Assuming that Oswald fired the fatal shot, he said, “These top CIA case officers are guilty of negligence.”

Blakey isn’t optimistic about getting all of the documents from the intelligence agency.

“They held stuff back from the Warren Commission, they held stuff back from us, they held stuff back from the ARRB,” he said. “That’s three agencies that they were supposed to be fully candid with. And now they’re taking the position that some of these documents can’t be released even today.

“Why are they continuing to fight tooth and nail to avoid doing something they’d promised to do?”

Millions of people around the globe know. The cover-up of
President Kennedy’s death has been and always will be to
protect AIPAC, Mossad, and Israel.

We know Kennedy died because he would not give Israel
Nuclear war heads, which Johnson freely gave to them
after taking office. Also being Catholic was also a part of it.

Covered up the same as the USS Liberty, 911, The pentagon
theft, the Iraq lies, we the people know only Washington is
an ally to Israel and atrocities they commit.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 20, 2013
Reply

CRISIS IN AMERICA
Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad

Google the above, become informed, we are in crisis, we all
have to get involved. At least read the last 6-8 post.

Google this name. (Ronald L. Waldron)
Go to : http://www.universal-peace.com (Home)

Nazi Propaganda was Based on What Zionists Said

Zionism and Anti-Semitism
We implore and beseech our Jewish brethren to realize that the Zionists are not the saviors of the Jewish People and guarantors of their safety, but rather the instigators and original cause of Jewish suffering in the Holy Land and worldwide. The idea that Zionism and the State of “Israel” is the protector of Jews is probably the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the Jewish People. Indeed, where else since 1945 have Jews been in such physical danger as in the Zionist state?!

Jews are enjoined by their religious laws to be loyal to the country of which they are citizens. Ever since the destruction of the holy Temple in Jerusalem and the exile of the Jewish People some two thousand years ago, we have been enjoined to be scrupulously loyal to the countries we reside in. One of the great biblical prophets, Jeremiah, in chapter 29 of his book proclaimed G-d’s message to all the exiled; verse seven reads, “Seek out the welfare of the city to which I have exiled you and pray for it to the Almighty, for through its welfare will you have welfare.” This has been a cornerstone of Jewish morality throughout our history to this very day.

Torah-true Jews wish to live in peace and harmony with their neighbors in every country among the community of nations, including in historic Palestine. They deplore acts and policies of violence carried out by those who, misusing the name of Israel our forefather, have substituted the ideal of chauvinist nationalism for the eternal values of the Torah, the eternal divinely bestowed inheritance of the Jewish people.

It has been the age-old intention of Zionism to intentionally stir up anti-Semitism anywhere possible, and even more commonly, to take advantage of any Jewish suffering anywhere in order to enhance its cause Indeed, hatred of Jews and Jewish suffering is the oxygen of the Zionist movement, and from the very beginning has been to deliberately incite hatred of the Jew and then, in feigned horror, use it to justify the existence of the Zionist state – this is, of course, Machiavellianism raised to the highest degree. Thus, the Zionists thrive on hatred and suffering of Jews, and seek to benefit thereby through keeping Jews in perpetual fear, causing them to ignore the true nature of Zionism, and instead to consider the Zionist state is their salvation.

ANTI-SEMITISM BY POLITICAL ZIONISM

Ronald L. Waldron
August 30, 2013
Reply

Pressure Mounts on Security Council to Rein in Israel:

UNITED NATIONS, Jan 6 2011 (IPS) – Calls are growing for a swift international response to the situation in the Middle East, as Israel continues to build new settlements in Palestinian territories with increased military actions against civilians.

However, there is no sign that the 15-member Security Council intends to take any immediate measures to rejuvenate the stalled peace process led by the U.N., the United States, the European Union and Russia.

Last week, the Palestinian envoy Riyad Mansour sent a letter to U.S. ambassador Susan Rice, who was then president of the Security Council, in which he described the current situation in Palestine as “grave” and said it required “urgent attention and serious action” by the international community, including the Security Council.

The letter, which was also sent to U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the president of the General Assembly, mentioned in detail the Israeli settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territories. Mansour said the situation in and around Occupied East Jerusalem was “most severe”.

Mansour said this was being done “for the direct purpose of altering the demographic composition, character and legal status of its Palestinian inhabitants through forced evictions, home demolitions, revocation of residency rights, and other measures in flagrant violations of international and the past Security Council resolutions.”

The Palestinians have also been circulating a draft resolution that would declare Israel’s settlement building in East Jerusalem to be illegal. Every one knows the Middle East problems have been manifested by Israel, and the USA support of their atrocities.

On Wednesday, as Israeli troops killed two more Palestinians near the Gaza border, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat reiterated his position that the parties involved in the peace process – the Quartet comprising the U.N., U.S., Russia and the European Union – must take firm decisions.

For their part, the Israelis are insisting that instead of involving the international community for a negotiated peace, they would rather hold direct talks, a condition that is highly unlikely to be accepted by the Palestinian leadership which is more focused on gaining wider international support for the legitimacy of their struggle.

The Palestinians enjoy overwhelming diplomatic support in the 192-member U.N. General Assembly. The scene in the Security Council chamber is somewhat different, where over the years, the U.S. has repeatedly blocked resolutions that were either in support of the Palestinians or against Israel.

Sources told IPS that last week the chief Palestinian diplomat had met Ambassador Rice, but failed to get a clear response for a possible Security Council resolution to halt Israeli settlements. “It’s very clear that at the moment the U.S. is not ready for any Council resolution on a settlement freeze,” said a diplomat who did not want to be named.

However, it may not be so easy for the U.S. to continue its unconditional support for Israel. Pressure for change in the U.S. policy on Israel appears to be growing, despite the fact that the so-called Israel lobby is still far more powerful in the U.S. than any other interest group.

Last month, for example, Human Rights Watch called for Washington to stop giving aid to Israel in an amount equivalent to the costs of its spending in support of settlements, and to monitor contributions to Israel from tax-exempt U.S. organisations that violate international law.

Aware that the U.S. is Israel’s largest weapons supplier, Amnesty International has called for an arms embargo on Israel. Considering the wider support for the Palestinians on the international level, the noted U.S. intellectual and political analyst Noam Chomsky thinks that a shift in U.S. policy on Israel may not be impossible.

But “to break the logjam,” he writes in a recent article run by the New York Times Syndicate, “it will be necessary to dismantle the reigning illusion that the U.S. is an ‘honest broker’ desperately seeking to reconcile recalcitrant adversaries, and to recognize that serious negotiations would be between the U.S.-Israel and the rest of the world.”

In his view, “If U.S. power centers can be compelled by popular opinion to abandon decades-old rejectionism, many prospects that seem remote might become suddenly possible.”

At the U.N., when IPS asked about the secretary-general’s response to the letter, spokesman Martin Nesirky said: “The SG pays close attention to what is happening in the Middle East. This particular topic was taken to the Security Council. Now it’s up to the Council [to take action].”

THE AMERICAN PEOPLE NEED TO DEMAND, AND WILL DEMAND DRASTIC CHANGE IN USA POLICY. NO MORE FREE RIDE FOR ISRAEL.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 7, 2013
Reply

SYRIA OR ANOTHER ISRAELI SMOKE SCREEN.

We the AMERICAN people have gotten used to the after-math of atrocities, seeing pictures, videos, and the alike,
how ever , we also are sick and tired of the false flag operation and the atrocities world wide from Israel.

The assassinations, the lack of release of information regarding JFK, MLK, and RFK. attack on the US Liberty,
911 and false information, attacks on all their neighbors. The stealing of Jewish Identity, AIPAC and involvement
in our election process, banking process, education process, control of our food chain, government.
all federal regulation agencies starting with HOME LAND SECURITY.

ENOUGH, IS ENOUGH. TRUST for Washington is gone for-ever. TRUST in the Christian religious order is gone for
ever.

WHERE is the true evidence that the chemical attack came from SYRIA instead of another ISRAELI ATTACK.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 9, 2013
Reply

CRISIS IN AMERICA REMAINS:

ISRAEL REMAINS TO BE THE CRISIS:

Israel, given weapons of mass destruction by President
Johnson, after they were denied such by President Kennedy;
need to admit they have nuclear war heads.

The Israeli’s need to sign a non-proliferation agreement,
allow inspections of all facilities, and agree to the 1967
border agreement.

Nothing will be resolved in the middle East, or end the
world wide crisis until such agreements are met .

When Israel agrees to stop the aggressions, agrees to
the inspections. Agrees to international cooperation.
Agrees to the 1967 border agreement. Agrees that
AIPAC is a foreign lobby active in corrupt political
activity with-in the USA, and register such as a foreign
lobby.

The entire World can agree on PEACE4ALL .

Something myself and many others have worked diligently
toward for the last 12-15 years.

Google: Fighting terrorism at home & abroad.

Demand that the letters written to congress.org by
myself all 700+, be reviewed.

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
September 13, 2013
Reply

Children killed, by WHO!!

Syria–1400 people killed 400 children–By WHO??

Palestine–Thousands killed. 1592 children. By Israel!!

Israel–Same period of time. 128 children killed. By Terrorist.

Iraq War: 1,200,000 men, women, and children (civilians)
killed. By–Black-water SE. and USA.
Massive killing. Study done by John Hopkins.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 13, 2013
Reply

President Barack Obama (NOBEL-PEACE PRIZE WINNER)

NO MORE WARS–IT IS TIME FOR PEACE.

Time for any measures needed to bring Israel down to its
size. Enough of the atrocities against its neighbors and
Palestine.

Everyone needs Peace and a quality of life not seen since
1948.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 14, 2013
Reply

New Snowden revelation details vast US intelligence “black budget”

Friday saw yet another exposure of closely guarded US government secrets by whistle-blower Edward Snowden, as the Washington Post published an extensive budget report covering an array of US intelligence agencies. The $52.6 billion budget published by the Post, 178 pages in length, contains a wealth of documentation concerning the finances and activities of the US “intelligence community.” Some of the information in the leaked document is, however, being withheld “after consultation with US officials.”

As the budget document shows, since 9/11 the CIA has metastasized into a global paramilitary operation that kills and tortures people around the planet, carrying out a constant reign of terror and criminality behind the backs of the American people. Funds allocated since 9/11 have financed a massive growth of CIA activities, including the creation of enhanced interrogation programs, secret “black site” prisons, and the use of drones for strike missions by intelligence personnel. As the Post wrote, “The document describes a constellation of spy agencies that track millions of surveillance targets and carry out operations that include hundreds of lethal strikes.”

Billions of dollars are collectively allocated to fund this regime of global lawlessness, without any disclosure to the American people. The US has spent more than $500 billion on intelligence since the 2001 attacks, or over $100 million per day, and the CIA has seen a gigantic growth of its budget over this period. The CIA’s proposed budget for 2013 totaled $14.7 billion, for a 56 percent increase since 2004, while the National Security Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office were to receive over $10 billion each.

The budget contains massive outlays for information collection and processing by the CIA and NSA. The CIA spends $1.7 billion annually on data collection, and runs a joint signals intelligence collection effort with the NSA codenamed CLANSIG. The budget lists 35,000 employees as part of a “Consolidated Cryptologic Program” which brings together surveillance teams from the NSA and the four branches of the military. The NSA will also spend $48.6 million on problems related to “information overload,” that is, on efforts to manage the vast data streams being sucked in on a daily basis by the agency.

The budget also shows large allocations for military-style activities abroad run by the intelligence bureaucracies. US spy agencies will spend $4.9 billion for “overseas contingency operations” in 2013 alone. This will include $2.6 billion for covert operations carried out by the CIA, such as the secret wars the agency is waging in Pakistan and Yemen, and payments to proxy militias such as the Al Qaeda-linked proxy forces fighting against the Assad regime in Syria, including the al Nusra Front.

Staggering quantities of money are being spent to sustain America’s intelligence forces. The NSA itself will receive over $10 billion this year, all of which sustain NSA efforts to spy on the population of United States and of the entire world. Across the United States, schools are being gutted, jobs slashed, and medical facilities shuttered, yet well over $50 billion per a year is dedicated to unconstitutional spying, extra-judicial murder and systematic torturing in a global prison network.

The release of such detailed and comprehensive information about the intelligence budget to the public is unprecedented. As Steven Aftergood of the Federation of American Scientists told the Post, “a real grasp of the structure and operations of the intelligence bureaucracy has been totally beyond public reach. This kind of material, even on a historical basis, has simply not been available.”

This information about the intelligence bureaucracies and their activities has become available only as a result of Snowden’s actions. The danger that its secrets could be revealed by principled opponents of spying such as Snowden has not been lost on the NSA, however, and the documents show repeated investigations of thousands of analysts this year as part of an attempt to avoid “potential insider compromise of sensitive information.”

That an attack on Syria is going ahead anyway despite massive popular opposition is an expression of the domination of the American state by Wall Street and the vast military-intelligence apparatus exhibited in Snowden’s latest release. These forces are determined to attack Syria, and from all appearances they will carry out their bloody plans. Responsibility for launching another neocolonial catastrophe lies with the reactionary social interests that control the US economy and state, the capitalist class and the upper-middle class layers that defend capitalist rule.

These are the same forces that have poured weaponry into Syria to fund opposition militias dominated by Al Qaeda. Today, in the face of overwhelming opposition, they are pressing for a war in which US planes will ride to the rescue of US-backed Al Qaeda fighters on the ground, in the name of upholding “international norms.” And, as the budget document’s assertion makes clear—that operations are “strategically focused against the priority targets of China, Russia, Iran, Cuba and Israel”—operations in Syria are only a prelude to confrontation with the other major powers. Pakistan is also referred to as an “intractable target.”

According to the authoritarian legal doctrines that have gained influence with the growth of the national security state and the financial oligarchy, which derive from the theories of Nazi jurist Carl Schmitt, the existence of exceptional circumstances, such as a terrorist threat, authorizes the state to override all legal protections, such as those guaranteed by the US Bill of Rights. The prevalence of such conceptions only points to the underlying reality: the intelligence bureaucracy and the social forces that control it are effectively above the law, and will tolerate no limits on their power.

It is only a matter of time before these instruments of repression are turned against mass struggles within the United States itself. Faced with the deep crisis of world capitalism, the ruling elites will increasingly seek to rely on war abroad and military-police repression at home in defense of their privileges.
US condemnation of chemical weapons use not applied to Israel

The Obama administration plans military action against Syria under the pretext–totally unsubstantiated–that President Bashar al-Assad’s regime ordered the use of chemical weapons in an attack on a Damascus suburb on August 21. It has described the use of chemical weapons as a “moral obscenity,” such that the United States has a “moral obligation” to punish the country that uses them.

No such moral obligation is invoked against Israel, however, which has the largest stockpile of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons in the Middle East, and is the only state not to have signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. As Foreign Policy web site pointed out on Monday, not only has the US known for decades about Israel’s chemical weapons, it has also kept quiet about them.

But it is not just that Israel possesses a large arsenal of chemical weapons. It has also used them against the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, against Lebanon and Gaza during military assaults in 2006, and during Operation Cast Lead against Gaza in 2008-2009. Such was the evidence against Israel that Tel Aviv was forced, after initially denying accusations by the Lebanese government that it had done so, to admit that it had used phosphorous shells, which cause chemical burns, in its war against Lebanon in 2006.

A protocol to the 1980 Convention on Conventional Weapons bans the use of white phosphorus as an incendiary weapon against civilian populations or in air attacks against enemy forces in civilian areas.

None of this has ever evoked a word of condemnation from Washington or Israel’s European allies, much less a call for Israel to get rid of its chemical weapons, sanctions or a threat of a military assault to defend the victims of Israel’s military might. Indeed, the US has funded Israel’s armed forces to the tune of $3 billion a year for years, and last year voted to increase this support.

In other words, it is entirely legitimate for a US ally to develop, build and use chemical weapons and for Washington to continue to fund Israel’s criminality. The same is not true for its enemies.

The 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits the manufacture, use and transfer of the deadly weapons, but provides no mechanism for enforcing its rules. This is now a task that the US, one of the foremost developers, suppliers and users of chemical weapons from the 1950-53 Korean War onwards, has arrogated to itself as the world’s policeman.

While 189 states have signed and ratified the convention, Israel signed but did not ratify it. Israel is one of just seven countries, along with Burma, Angola, North Korea, Egypt, South Sudan and Syria, which either did not sign and/or ratify the treaty.

Israel also never signed the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention. Its attitude towards both is one of ambiguity.

In 1993, the US Congress Office of Technology Assessment WMD [Weapons of Mass Destruction] proliferation assessment included Israel in its list of countries having undeclared offensive chemical warfare capabilities. Five years later, Bill Richardson, a former deputy assistant defence secretary, said, “I have no doubt that Israel has worked on both chemical and biological offensive things for a long time. There’s no doubt they’ve had stuff for years.”

Israel has a centre for chemical and biological medical research, its top secret Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR), at a secure site in Ness Ziona, 20 kilometres south of Tel Aviv, with another at Dimona in the Negev. Employing hundreds of scientists and technicians, the IIBR is widely believed to have developed chemical and biological weapons, but official censorship prevents any discussion of its activities.

Following the crash in 1992 of an El Al plane carrying nerve gas ingredients from Israel to the US into an Amsterdam residential area, the Dutch daily NRC Handelsblad found “strong links” between IIBR and similar research centres in the US, “close cooperation between IIBR and the British-American biological warfare program,” and “extensive collaboration on BW research with Germany and Holland.”

Since 2001, following the outbreak of the second intifada, there were several documented incidents of Israeli soldiers using an “unknown gas” against Palestinians, particularly during a six-week-long campaign by Israeli military forces in Gaza.

The well-known US film director James Longley happened to be filming in Gaza, Khan Yunis and Rafah during the first major Israeli incursion in the spring of 2001. He immediately filmed the victims. Gaza Strip, his award-winning film, shows very graphically the reality of chemical warfare–the canisters, the doctors, the eyewitnesses, and the awful suffering of the victims, many of whom were hospitalised for days or weeks.

These attacks were to continue for several years. In June 2004, Gush Shalom, an Israeli peace group, reported an incident in the West Bank village of al-Zawiya where 130 patients were being treated for gas inhalation after the Israeli army broke up nonviolent protests against Israel’s security wall. The group said it was not the usual tear gas. It asked, “Now, is this a way of dispersing a demonstration, or is it chemical warfare?”

As the news of these new gases trickled out, international journalists investigated, with BBC Television carrying out a special report in 2003 into Israel’s use of “new, unidentified weapons”. It reported that Israel refused “to say what the new gas was.”

During Israel’s military assault on Gaza in the summer of 2006, doctors reported that dozens of victims had completely burned bodies and shrapnel-type injuries that X-ray machines had been unable to detect.

Lengthy research and analysis of the samples of metals found in the victims’ bodies and examination of the unusual wounds led to the conclusion that the most likely cause was missiles very similar to the US-made Dense Inert Metal Explosive (DIME). Other victims were found to have traces of tungsten, a highly carcinogenic substance.

Israel again used phosphorous shells, whose effects are extremely harmful, in the weeks-long aerial bombardment of the largely unarmed and defenceless civilian population during Operation Cast Lead in 2008-09–the murderous assault on Gaza that resulted in between 1,166 and 1,417 Palestinian deaths, with just 13 Israeli deaths, 4 of them from friendly fire.

The UN fact-finding report, known as the Goldstone Report, reiterated the findings of numerous other respected international studies, confirming Israel’s disproportionate use of force against the Palestinians, and accusations against Israel and Hamas of war crimes and “possible crimes against humanity”, including Israel’s use of phosphorous. It said that Israeli forces were “systematically reckless” in using white phosphorus in built-up areas, citing the Israeli attack on the UN Relief and Works Agency compound in Gaza City, the attack on the Al Quds hospital, and the attack on the Al Wafa hospital.

Far from this resulting in any referral of Israel to the International Criminal Court, Goldstone and his co-authors were subject to an international campaign of bullying, intimidation and vilification of the investigation by Israel, leading Goldstone to make a cringing retraction of his own conclusions. But his three co-authors rejected calls to recant their report or misrepresent its purpose, saying that it would “disregard the rights of Palestinian and Israeli victims to truth and justice”.

It was Israel’s development of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, coupled with its vastly superior military forces, that prompted Damascus to establish its own chemical weapons programme following the capture in 1967 of Syria’s Golan Heights, their subsequent occupation and annexation, and the establishment of Israeli settlements inhabited by 20,000 Israelis.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 24, 2013
Reply

I just took action to hold NBC Political Director Chuck Todd accountable for his outrageous claim that correcting Republican lies isn’t part of his job.

I think you should too!

http://www.credomobilize.com/petitions/tell-nbc-news-correcting-republican-lies-is-part-of-your-job?sp_ref=11100301.4.633.e.0.2&source=mailto_sp

Ronald L. Waldron
October 5, 2013
Reply

Ok, enough of this crap.

Yesterday, a blowhard Republican Congressman from Texas lashed out at a park ranger because the World War II memorial was closed.

Hey. NEWSFLASH: You caused the shutdown. You. Republicans. Boehner. Ted Cruz. The Tea Party.

This crew of right-wingers in Congress shut down the government because of Obama care, plain and simple. Now, they have the nerve to attack innocent bystanders with political stunts. It’s shameless.

But we can’t just watch this happen. It’s up to us to call out every last Republican we can and make sure the American people know exactly who caused this mess.

We’re trying to raise $500,000 to call out as many Republicans as we can. With your help, we’re going to run ads in their home districts so voters know exactly what’s going on in Washington.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 5, 2013
Reply

Publications
The Russell-Einstein Manifesto
Issued in London, 9 July 1955

IN the tragic situation which confronts humanity, we feel that scientists should assemble in conference to appraise the perils that have arisen as a result of the development of weapons of mass destruction, and to discuss a resolution in the spirit of the appended draft.
We are speaking on this occasion, not as members of this or that nation, continent, or creed, but as human beings, members of the species Man, whose continued existence is in doubt. The world is full of conflicts; and, overshadowing all minor conflicts, the titanic struggle between Communism and anti-Communism.
Almost everybody who is politically conscious has strong feelings about one or more of these issues; but we want you, if you can, to set aside such feelings and consider yourselves only as members of a biological species which has had a remarkable history, and whose disappearance none of us can desire.

We shall try to say no single word which should appeal to one group rather than to another. All, equally, are in peril, and, if the peril is understood, there is hope that they may collectively avert it.

We have to learn to think in a new way. We have to learn to ask ourselves, not what steps can be taken to give military victory to whatever group we prefer, for there no longer are such steps; the question we have to ask ourselves is: what steps can be taken to prevent a military contest of which the issue must be disastrous to all parties?

The general public, and even many men in positions of authority, have not realized what would be involved in a war with nuclear bombs. The general public still thinks in terms of the obliteration of cities. It is understood that the new bombs are more powerful than the old, and that, while one A-bomb could obliterate Hiroshima, one H-bomb could obliterate the largest cities, such as London, New York, and Moscow.

No doubt in an H-bomb war great cities would be obliterated. But this is one of the minor disasters that would have to be faced. If everybody in London, New York, and Moscow were exterminated, the world might, in the course of a few centuries, recover from the blow. But we now know, especially since the Bikini test, that nuclear bombs can gradually spread destruction over a very much wider area than had been supposed.

It is stated on very good authority that a bomb can now be manufactured which will be 2,500 times as powerful as that which destroyed Hiroshima. Such a bomb, if exploded near the ground or under water, sends radio-active particles into the upper air. They sink gradually and reach the surface of the earth in the form of a deadly dust or rain. It was this dust which infected the Japanese fishermen and their catch of fish. No one knows how widely such lethal radio-active particles might be diffused, but the best authorities are unanimous in saying that a war with H-bombs might possibly put an end to the human race. It is feared that if many H-bombs are used there will be universal death, sudden only for a minority, but for the majority a slow torture of disease and disintegration.

Many warnings have been uttered by eminent men of science and by authorities in military strategy. None of them will say that the worst results are certain. What they do say is that these results are possible, and no one can be sure that they will not be realized. We have not yet found that the views of experts on this question depend in any degree upon their politics or prejudices. They depend only, so far as our researches have revealed, upon the extent of the particular expert’s knowledge. We have found that the men who know most are the most gloomy.

Here, then, is the problem which we present to you, stark and dreadful and inescapable: Shall we put an end to the human race; or shall mankind renounce war? People will not face this alternative because it is so difficult to abolish war.

The abolition of war will demand distasteful limitations of national sovereignty. But what perhaps impedes understanding of the situation more than anything else is that the term “mankind” feels vague and abstract. People scarcely realize in imagination that the danger is to themselves and their children and their grandchildren, and not only to a dimly apprehended humanity. They can scarcely bring themselves to grasp that they, individually, and those whom they love are in imminent danger of perishing agonizingly. And so they hope that perhaps war may be allowed to continue provided modern weapons are prohibited.

This hope is illusory. Whatever agreements not to use H-bombs had been reached in time of peace, they would no longer be considered binding in time of war, and both sides would set to work to manufacture H-bombs as soon as war broke out, for, if one side manufactured the bombs and the other did not, the side that manufactured them would inevitably be victorious.

Although an agreement to renounce nuclear weapons as part of a general reduction of armaments would not afford an ultimate solution, it would serve certain important purposes. First, any agreement between East and West is to the good in so far as it tends to diminish tension. Second, the abolition of thermo-nuclear weapons, if each side believed that the other had carried it out sincerely, would lessen the fear of a sudden attack in the style of Pearl Harbour, which at present keeps both sides in a state of nervous apprehension. We should, therefore, welcome such an agreement though only as a first step.

Most of us are not neutral in feeling, but, as human beings, we have to remember that, if the issues between East and West are to be decided in any manner that can give any possible satisfaction to anybody, whether Communist or anti-Communist, whether Asian or European or American, whether White or Black, then these issues must not be decided by war. We should wish this to be understood, both in the East and in the West.

There lies before us, if we choose, continual progress in happiness, knowledge, and wisdom. Shall we, instead, choose death, because we cannot forget our quarrels? We appeal as human beings to human beings: Remember your humanity, and forget the rest. If you can do so, the way lies open to a new Paradise; if you cannot, there lies before you the risk of universal death.

Resolution:

WE invite this Congress, and through it the scientists of the world and the general public, to subscribe to the following resolution:

“In view of the fact that in any future world war nuclear weapons will certainly be employed, and that such weapons threaten the continued existence of mankind, we urge the governments of the world to realize, and to acknowledge publicly, that their purpose cannot be furthered by a world war, and we urge them, consequently, to find peaceful means for the settlement of all matters of dispute between them.”

Max Born
Perry W. Bridgman
Albert Einstein
Leopold Infeld
Frederic Joliot-Curie
Herman J. Muller
Linus Pauling
Cecil F. Powell
Joseph Rotblat
Bertrand Russell
Hideki Yukawa

science and technology in the interest of humanity

Copyright © Student Pugwash USA

Ronald L. Waldron
October 10, 2013
Reply

Next Steps on Syria

We helped stop a potentially disastrous U.S. military intervention in the Syrian civil war, but that war rages on. Here is a “peace platform” Peace Action helped craft along with allies* in the very effective ad hoc coalition on Syria we initiated. Your comments on the substance of the platform, and on how to promote it to the media, the public and policy-makers, are most welcome.

A CALL FOR U.S. ACTION FOR PEACE IN SYRIA

1. The U.S. should, first, do no harm. Stand against any U.S. military strikes or any further military intervention in Syria. Support UN decision-making, international law and diplomacy instead of military force.

2. The U.S. should call for an immediate ceasefire by all sides and a comprehensive international arms embargo. Announce plans to stop sending or facilitating any arms to rebel forces or allowing U.S. allies to do so, and urge Russia and Iran to stop sending any arms to the Syrian government.

3. The U.S. should immediately re-open plans with Russia for international diplomatic negotiations towards a political solution in Syria. The talks must include all sides in Syria, including non-violent Syrian civil society, and representatives of Syrian, Palestinian, and other refugees and internally displaced persons forced from their homes in Syria. All key parties to the conflict, including Iran, should be included. The U.S. should also support efforts towards accountability and justice for all war crimes that have been committed in the Syrian war.

4. The U.S. should announce a major increase in refugee and humanitarian assistance coordinated through the United Nations, and call on other countries to increase aid and coordinate through the UN.

5. The U.S. should support the Organization for the Prevention of Chemical Weapons to lead and oversee the transfer of chemical weapons to international control so they may be safely destroyed or removed. The U.S. should support further disarmament efforts by endorsing calls for a Weapons of Mass Destruction-Free Zone throughout the Middle East, with no exceptions.

* Groups working together on Syria:

Peace Action

Pax Christi

Sisters of Mercy

Win Without War

Institute for Policy Studies

Fellowship of Reconciliation

CodePink

Just Foreign Policy

Progressive Democrats of America

American Friends Service Committee

Peace and Justice Resource Center

U.S. Labor Against the War

United for Peace and Justice

Friends Committee on National Legislation

Women’s Action for New Directions
Share this:

Facebook3
Twitter3
Email
LinkedIn
Tumblr
Google
Pinterest
Reddit
Digg
StumbleUpon

Excellent statement. I agree that it should be disseminated everywhere, starting with the media, Congress, President Obama and Secretary Kerry.

Great statement. Concise and to the point. I’ll circulate it locally.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 14, 2013
Reply

We want PEACE 4 ALL
VonVictor Rosenchild
VonVictor Rosenchild·Quantum Computing, Big Data Analyitics & Analysis, Systems Integration & Management, Research & Development

To: Ronald Waldron, Vern Simula, Chris Seo, Darryl R. Smith, Khaled Ali Shtayeh (Naseef), James Roth, Shirley Young, LMSW, Fran Wiedenhoeft, Michael Shea, Alain Rozenkier, Amir Windom

Date: October 14, 2013

Ron:

We gave Wall Street, 13+ Trillion Dollars ($13,000,000,000,000.00) to bail out Multi-Billion Dollar and Multi-Hundred-Million Dollar Financial Institutions. What happened to all that money? Why has not the U.S. Government recovered all that money with interest? That money alone would greatly reduce the U.S. National Deficit. Why cut programs that will help all Americans when both Republicans and Democrats can get the funding needed from the Wall Street Bailout money?

White Collar Crime:

The Government Shutdown, has created and environment where major White Collar Crime can flourish on an order of magnitude and at an exponential rate. Most agencies that provide oversight to prevent White Collar Crime have been shutdown and or bare minimum staff are there, which spells doom for the American People.

The current shutdown, means that White Collar Crime will go unchecked and do to the aftermath of this Government Shutdown, it will be next to impossible for Agencies to catch those that commit major White Collar Crimes to be caught.

U.S. National Security:

Do to the fact that major government organizations, such as the CDC, FEMA, NASA, EPA, etc, are shutdown or have minimal staffing, our nation is at gave risk of being attacked and or placed in grave danger of natural and or human made biological, chemical and nuclear threat. The American people are at threat from more than terrorist.., What about Diseases and Natural Disasters?

The issues of the Government Shutdown are much more important than Obama Care/Universal Healthcare.

Our elected officials, regardless of their party (Republican or Democrat) should be concerned with these first and for most. They are all, placing our nation and the people (Americans) very lives in harms way.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 14, 2013
Reply

ZIONIST: A racist individual who uses Judaism and his/her goal in supporting Israel as an excuse to occupy, control, and subdue an entire group of people.
In America the GROUP is Republicans, and Evangelicals that believe the Zionist propaganda from the Holocaust to their claim that Zionist are the chosen people instead of the “Torah Jews”.

TREASON BY ALL REPUBLICANS HOLDING OFFICE IN WASHINGTON,DC, SENATE AND THE HOUSE.

HELP BY FORWARDING THIS MESSAGE

Ronald L. Waldron
October 17, 2013
Reply

“Imagine If We Were Number One”
by Dr. Laura Finley, Vice President of the Humanity Project

No, not number one in military spending (which we are). Not number one in incarceration rates (which we are as well). What if, instead of these things, the U.S. became hyper-focused on becoming the most peaceful nation on earth? The recently released 2013 Global Peace Index (GPI) placed the U.S.100th out of 162 countries. That’s not so spectacular. The GPI, which is endorsed by a number of Nobel Peace laureates, eminent individuals and renowned academics, considers factors related to both negative peace, that is, the absence of violent conflict, and positive peace, or characteristics of just and humane societies, like ample housing, access to education and gender equality. The GPI’s Positive Peace Index measures attitudes, institutions and structures that either promote or prohibit a peaceful environment.

The 2013 GPI noted that since 2008 110 countries have become less peaceful. The U.S is one of these. The U.S scores particularly poorly in regards to its high prison and jail population, its large and active military, the number of conflicts it is engaged in overseas and the number of combat deaths, its heavy weapons capacity and ease of access to small arms. The U.S. rates moderately on measures related to gender equality, education, and infant mortality. This failure to commit to peace is a global catastrophe, and a costly one at that. The GPI report, available at http://www.visionofhumanity.org, calculates the total economic impact of containing violence to have been $9.46 trillion in 2012. According to the report, cutting the cost of violence in half would be enough to repay all the debts of the developing world, provide for European financial stability and fully fund the Millennium Development Goals. So, what does it take to get to the top, to be a “peace” country? The top ten of the GPI is dominated by small Nordic countries, although New Zealand, Canada and Japan are included as well. Despite being far different geographically and in its population, the U.S can perhaps draw a thing or two from these countries. Despite difficult economic times, Iceland is number one for its low crime rates, its minimal military and its resistance to getting involved in global violent conflict. In general, the high peace countries tend to have, among other qualities, more equitable distribution of resources, greater trust between citizens and more social cohesion. They invest in health and education and seek alternatives to retributive justice. In essence, nations that score high on positive peace tend also to be high on the overall GPI. All is not lost, however. What the GPI does not do is gauge the number and quality of programs to engage and inspire youth to create a better world. And here, I know from personal experience, there is much to be celebrated. The work of great organizations like the Humanity Project is helping make positive peace by empowering young people to treat each other well, to take action to end bullying and to be leaders for social justice. Alas, while there is much to be done at a larger level, here in South Florida we are headed in the right direction.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 17, 2013
Reply

TRUTH COUNTS–Don’t count on getting it

By: Ronald L. Waldron
ISBN 9780557536740
Ronald L. Waldron (Standard Copyright License)
Price: $9.06

Our Occupied Government: Our government has the audacity to DESTROY the hopes and dreams of Americans while supporting the atrocities of Israel. We have full knowledge of the involvement of Israel in the decisions to ATTACK Iraq by presenting false intelligence. We see the money accepted by our officials from a foreign interest lobby. We see the amount of our sons & daughters killed in wars fought for all the wrong reasons. We see our financial system, and media controlled by the Zionist political movement. What we do not witness from our government officials from either political party. A) Moral values. B) Ethics. C) Integrity. D) Accountability. E) Oversight. F) Commitment to American TAX-PAYERS. G) Fiscal responsibility The Israel/Palestine conflict, the lobby crime bosses, Are all finding out that the Truth counts? We look for The day when there is Peace 4 All.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 18, 2013
Reply

Labor Party Constitution
Preamble
We are the working people of the United States.
We are the employed and the unemployed, the native-born and the immigrant.
We are the keepers of the American Dream of equality, opportunity, and fairness.
We do the work of building and sustaining the nation, but we do not enjoy our fair share of the wealth we create.
We make the country run, but we have little say in running the country.
We believe in a country that affirms the dignity of work, the value of community, and the importance of working people and their families to the prosperity of the nation.
We believe in a country where a job is a constitutional right, everyone must be paid a living wage, and no one can be fired unjustly.
We believe in a country where the right to organize a union, to speak freely and to be treated fairly at work is the law of the land and protected by the courts.
We believe in a country where the needs of our families do not have to be neglected because of the demands of our jobs.
We believe in a country where the opinions of others are tolerated, bigotry and discrimination are rejected, and everyone enjoys equal opportunity and the equal protection of the laws without prejudice.
We believe in a country where the hungry are fed, the sick are treated, the homeless are housed, and those who want to learn are educated.
We believe in a country that honors and respects the human rights of workers in all other lands, as well as our own. We believe in a country where taxes are fair.
We believe in a country governed by the people and for the people.

Article I
The name of the party shall be the Labor Party.

Article II
Membership
1. Individual membership shall be open to anyone who agrees to abide by the Constitution of the Labor Party.
2. Organizational membership shall be open to International Unions, locals, districts, lodges or any other designation rendered by an International Union; state federation and central labor bodies; and other organizations deemed worker-supportive by the National Council of the Labor Party. Such unions and organizations shall, by an official act, accept and abide by the Constitution and principles of the Labor Party. The definition of a union shall include any group that carries on collective bargaining, workplace representational activity or concerted activity.

Article III
The National Council: Purpose
1. The National Council shall be the governing body of the Labor Party between Conventions. It shall have full authority to issue policy statements in the name of the Labor Party, consonant with the decisions of the Conventions of the Labor Party; to initiate policy statements consonant with the philosophy of the Labor Party in matters not yet considered by the Convention; and to establish standing and ad hoc committees of the Labor Party.
2. At all meetings of the National Council, no less than one third of its members shall constitute a quorum.
3. Should the position of a member of the National Council become vacant for any reason whatsoever, the organization represented by that individual shall provide a replacement.
4. The membership of the National Council shall reflect the diversity of our respective memberships, and shall be consistent with the principles set forth in the preamble. If, when all requirements set forth in this Article have been met, and the preceding principle is not attained, the National Council is directed to select from the Labor Party membership such persons to serve on the Council who will reflect the diversity of our membership.
5. The National Council must meet at least once a year. The National Council: Representation
6. Each affiliating International Union or its equivalent as defined in Article II, Section 2 of this Constitution shall be entitled to and shall designate a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council provided that at least one percent of its membership has joined the Labor Party.
7. Each affiliating State AFL-CIO Federation shall be entitled to and shall designate a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council, provided that at least 20 percent of its affiliates are members in good standing of the Labor Party.
8. Each affiliating central labor body, and any other equivalent structure, such as district councils, joint councils, etc. shall be entitled to elect a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council, provided that 20 percent of its affiliates are members in good standing of the Labor Party.
9. An affiliating local union with over 2,500 members shall be entitled to designate a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council, provided that at least 500 of its members or one percent of its membership, whichever is larger, are members in good standing of the Labor Party.
10. Each state or multi-state party organization shall be entitled to elect a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council, provided that it has a minimum of 1000 Labor Party members in good standing.
11. Each county party organization shall be entitled to elect a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council, provided that it has at least 1000 Labor Party members in good standing.
12. Worker supportive organizations, as defined in Article II, Section 2, that are national in scope, or for particular reasons are regional in scope, shall be entitled to elect a minimum of one person to serve on the National Council provided that it has at least 500 members or one percent of its members, whichever is larger, Labor Party members in good standing.
13. No individual may represent on the National Council more than one organization as described in this Article.
14. Each affiliating organization, as described in Sections 6 through 12, will be entitled to (1) one vote.

Article IV
Executive Board
1. The National Council shall establish an Executive Board which shall have authority to conduct and administer the affairs and business of the Labor Party between meetings of the National Council, and to issue statements in the name of the Labor Party, subject to report and approval by the National Council.
2. The National Council shall establish the number of Executive Board members.
3. The National Council shall establish and elect officers, define their term of office, duties and procedures for removal, if any. The chief officer shall interpret the Constitution. Any such interpretation may be overruled by a majority vote of all members voting at any meeting of the National Council, the Executive Board or the Convention.
4. Upon prior approval of the National Council, the Executive Board shall have the authority to incur credit and loan obligations as required for the proper conduct of Labor Party affairs. Such undertakings shall be executed by the chief officer and chief financial officer.
5. The Executive Board shall appoint a National Organizer who shall direct the Labor Party’s activity on a day-to-day basis. The National Organizer will act in consonance with the policies and philosophies of the Labor Party as adopted by the Convention.
6. The Executive Board shall establish departments to carry out the work of the Labor Party and shall appoint the necessary staff who shall be responsible to the National Organizer. The Executive Board shall establish an annual operating budget for the purposes of day to day operations, including but not limited to establishing salaries, benefits, etc. for the National Organizer and staff, subject to prior approval of the National Council.
7. Members of the National Council and the Executive Board shall receive no salary from the Labor Party.

Article V
Structure
1. The Labor Party shall be national in scope and can include national, state, county, city, district, precinct, parish, ward and/or any other equivalent structures.
2. The National Council shall have the power to issue or revoke party charters, subject to appeal to the Grievance and Appeals Committee of the Convention as established in Article VIII, Section 3.
3. The purpose of the state party organization and its subordinate bodies/chapters is to: (a) organize members, and promote the activities and policies of the Labor Party in its appropriate jurisdictions; (b) elect delegates to Labor Party convocations.
4. Each state party organization shall establish its own by-laws, which shall establish the number of officers and their duties. By-laws adopted by state party organizations shall be consistent with this Constitution and be submitted to the National Council for approval. All elections shall be conducted under rules consistent with those last published by the National Council governing the selection of convention delegates. Only members of working age shall be eligible to vote.
5. The state party organization shall issue or revoke charters to subordinate bodies/chapters as defined in Section 1 of this Article. Charters issued or revoked by state party organizations are subject to review by the National Council. The National Council retains the right to abrogate the issuance of such charters if such issuance violates any section or intent of this Constitution, subject to appeal to the Grievance and Appeals Committee of the Convention as established in Article VIII, Section 3.
6. Each subordinate body of a state party organization shall follow the same procedures as stated in Section 4 of this Article.

Article VI
Finances
1. Dues, application fees and other charges set forth in this Article shall be submitted directly to the national office on a timely basis as established by the Executive Board.
2. Dues for individual membership shall be $20.00 per year. Dues for unemployed members, retirees and members earning less than $10.00 per hour shall be $10.00 per year. Striking and locked out workers shall pay no dues.
3. Affiliation fees for International Unions as defined in Article II shall be $10,000 per year.
4. Affiliation fees for state labor federations shall be $1,000 per year.
5. Affiliation fees for central labor bodies shall be $500 per year. This amount may be modified downward by the National Council in case of hardship.
6. Affiliation fees for unions, locals, districts, councils, lodges and other equivalents shall be as follows: 100 members and under – $50 per year 101 – 500 members – $100 per year 501 – 2500 members – $250 per year 2501 – 5000 members – $500 per year. 5001 & above members – $1,000 per year
7. Each state party/chapter organization may establish a dues structure for its membership separate from the dues structure set forth in this Article.
8. The Executive Board shall institute audits of state party organizations and their subordinate bodies whenever it deems appropriate. State party organizations and their subordinate bodies shall keep appropriate financial records in accordance with standard accounting practices. The national Labor Party shall be subject to an annual certified audit and shall keep appropriate financial records.
9. The chief officer, chief financial officer and any employees responsible for financial transactions shall be bonded.
10. The annual certified audit of the national Labor Party shall be made available to any member who makes a written request, at the expense of the member making the request. A one page summary of the annual certified audit shall be published annually in the official publication of the national Labor Party.
11. The Executive Board shall have the authority to reduce or waive an affiliation fee on the grounds of hardship/emergency.

Article VII
Convention
1. The Labor Party shall hold regular conventions or conferences at a time and place designated by the National Council.
2. The National Council may call a special Convention if and when it deems necessary.
3. The Convention shall be the supreme governing body of the Labor Party and shall have final authority in all matters of national policy, program and Constitution.
4. The National Council shall give at least 150-day notice of the date and place of a regular Convention to each union organization and individual eligible to attend the Convention. Notice to individuals may be satisfied by publication of the Convention Call in the official publication of the Labor Party. In the case of a special Convention the National Council shall give at least 30 days notice of the date and place of the Convention.
5. Resolutions for submission to a regular Convention must be submitted to the chief officer, no less than 60 days prior to the Convention date. (a) Resolutions may be submitted by any affiliated organization or member of the Labor Party. (b) The National Council of the Labor Party or the Resolution Committee of the Convention may, with the consent of the Convention, present emergency resolutions to the Convention.
6. Constitutional amendments must be submitted to the chief officer no less than 60 days prior to a regular Convention. Constitutional amendments may be submitted by any affiliated organization of the Labor Party. In order to amend the Constitution a two-thirds vote of the Delegates seated at the Convention is required.
7. The Executive Board shall adopt the appropriate forms for the submission of resolutions and constitutional amendments and distribute them with the call to the Convention. The Resolutions form shall also be published with the Convention Call in the official publication of the Labor Party.

Article VIII
Representation at the Convention
1. Each delegate to a Convention shall be an individual member in good standing of the Labor Party.
2. All members of the National Council shall be delegates to the Convention. The National Council shall apportion the delegate strength to the Convention and adopt the rules for delegate credentials.
3. A Rules Committee, Constitution, Credentials, Grievance and Appeals, Organizing and Resolution Committees shall be appointed by the Executive Board prior to a Convention. Rules developed by the Rules Committee shall be submitted to the Convention for their adoption as the first order of business. Roberts Rules of Order shall apply to all matters not covered by the adopted rules.

LABORPARTY star Email: organizers@thelaborparty.org

Copyright © 2012 Labor Party. All Rights Reserved.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 28, 2013
Reply

The attack on the USS Liberty was deliberate.
letter to bibi

Click here to download PDF version (85KB)

Memorial Day, 2011

Benjamin Netanyahu
Israeli Government
Tel Aviv, Israel

Dear Prime Minister Netanyahu,
Usually I write America’s political and military leaders on Memorial Day and Veterans Day. I try to remind them about the men and women who serve this Country and the obligation that they have in protecting them and honoring their sacrifice. I tell them about protecting our rights and freedoms and not let their ambitions stand in the way of the decisions they make.
I sympathize with the Jewish people with the horrors of World War II.
I also lost relatives during the war to the Nazis. An uncle and a cousin, and two of my uncles were in slave labor camps. I realize that the Jewish people need a homeland. But the size of Israel has changed dramatically since 1948 through the acquisition of lands due to wars. And this is where my sympathy with Israel ends.
USS Liberty

On June 8, 1967 the USS Liberty was cruising in the Mediterranean in International waters ordered to monitor the Israeli-Arab war. In the morning the ship was circled a dozen times by low flying Nord propeller “boxcars” at mast height with Israeli designation. The planes flew at mast height; the men on the ship could see the teeth of the pilots as they smiled. They waved at them. The ship was flying a 4’ x 7’ American flag; it stood straight out on a clear, breezy day. The ship had large letter designation on the bow GTR-5. The attack by unmarked Israeli planes (Israel says the attack was an accident – the ship was an Egyptian horse carrier – less than 1/2 the size of the USS Liberty) commenced in the afternoon in International waters. After the attack with cannon, rockets, napalm and torpedo fire; the torpedo boats came back and machine gunned the life rafts as they were thrown overboard (a war crime according to International Law). 34 men were killed and 171wounded (out of a crew of 291) this day by the Israelis. The men on board the ship call it murder. Captain Ward Boston was given one week to conduct an investigation of the attack. Before he died Ward Boston signed an affidavit stating that the attack on the USS Liberty was deliberate.
Many American intelligence servicemen have come forward stating they overheard the Israelis identifying the ship as American. I do not believe the Israeli government – I believe it is lying.
Rachel Corrie

On Sunday 16 March 2003, Rachel and her fellow ISM volunteers were confronting the drivers of two bulldozers who were in the process of razing Palestinian civilian land and homes. For two hours, Rachel and other ISM activists followed the bulldozers, trying to block their passage and hamper their efforts at destruction. Rachel was clearly identifiable in a bright fluorescent orange jacket and was speaking through a bullhorn when she was brutally run over. Rachel was blamed for her own death. In addition, Rachel was accused of “protecting terrorists”, even though the home she died protecting was that of a Palestinian medical doctor.
The Israeli government could have arrested the activist (peaceful protesting is an American right) and whisked them away to jail. But I believe that the Israeli government wanted to make a statement “not even the American government will protect your rights” if you oppose Israel.
I do not believe the Israeli government – I think it is lying.
Jonathan Pollard—an American Israeli spy

A number of officials strongly suspect that the Israelis repackaged much of Pollard’s material and provided it to the Soviet Union in exchange for continued Soviet permission for Jews to immigrate to Israel. In December, 1985, a month after Pollard’s arrest, William J. Casey, the late C.I.A. director, who was known for his close ties to the Israeli leadership, stunned one of his station chiefs by suddenly complaining about the Israelis breaking the “ground rules.” For your information, the Israelis used Pollard to obtain our attack plan against the U.S.S.R. all of it (the coordinates, the firing locations, the sequences). Casey had then explained that the Israelis had traded the Pollard data for Soviet émigrés. “How’s that for cheating?” he had asked. During Pollards trial, the Justice Department further informed Judge Robinson, in a publicly filed memorandum, that “numerous” analyses of Soviet missile systems had been sold by Pollard to Israel, and that those documents included “information from human sources whose identity could be inferred by a reasonably competent intelligence analyst. Moreover, the identity of the authors of these classified publications” was clearly marked. People have told me that over 100 of the American sources were executed by the Russians. I wonder if any Americans were executed. I believe Israel gave the documents to the Russians which makes Israel more criminally liable then Jonathan Pollard.
Silence

Rabbi Joachim Prinz spoke at the March on Washington on August 28, 1963 with Dr. Martin Luther King. He was the rabbi of the Jewish community in Berlin under the Hitler regime. The most important thing that he learned under those tragic circumstances was that bigotry and hatred are not the most urgent problem. The most urgent, the most disgraceful, the most shameful and the most tragic problem is silence.
What causes the American Congress to be so silent? No matter how much Israel tramples on the rights of Americans, there is hardly a complaint by Congress. As a matter of fact it gets even worse; the Congress is the cheerleader and protector for Israel worldwide. No matter how much damage is done to America’s reputation, no matter how many Americans are murdered; there is Congress leading the cheers. Pat Buchanon calls Congress the “Amen” corner of Israeli policy – he is right.

There is only one explanation for this tragedy – AIPAC and money.
Some say AIPAC spends 2 billion dollars on presidential campaigns.
I understand that if you run for office in America AIPAC wants you to fill out a five page questionnaire. It has nothing to do with American issues, just how you will treat Israel. I understand that between foreign aid, military aid and the free trade agreement Israel gets 25 billion from the USA yearly. I wonder how much of that gets funneled back to the USA to buy the politicians? You have national healthcare, we have none. It would be easy to threaten you with withholding payments. But like I said not even the murders of Americans stops our Congress from putting Israel first.

In Israel, Jewish citizens and rabbis protest against Israel all the time about the brutal treatment of the Palestinians and other matters. In America, if you protest against Israel you are an anti-Semite. It is a shame that during the “Spring Arab Uprising” the American government has no credibility with the Arab people. America is a puppet of Israeli foreign policy in the Mideast with veto power in the UN. And the result will be that Israel will be surrounded by even more hostile governments.

Israel has no desire to make peace. It cares not about the damage it does to America. It only cares about a “Greater” Israel. It will find all sorts of excuses and obstacles to prevent peace from happening.

And finally I resent you dressing down an American President in our White House. It only points further to the fact how our Congress is manipulated through AIPAC. I view those who sell us out to stay in office as Benedict Arnolds and Judases.

Israel is not a friend of the American people,
Remember the USS Liberty,
Remember Rachel Corrie,

Ted G Arens
Manistee, MI
CC: President Obama
Vice President Biden
Congressman Boehner
Secretary of State Clinton
Senator Reid
Secretary Gates
Senator Levin
Senator Pelosi
Senator Stabenow
Congressman Bill Huizinga
Congressman Cantor
Admiral Mike Mullen, Navy
General James Cartwright, Marine Corps
General George Casey, Army
Admiral Gary Roughhead, Navy Ops
General Norton Swartz, Air Force
Vice Admiral Michael Miller, Annapolis Academy

USS Liberty | AGTR-5

Home
$10,000 Challenge
Letter to Bibi
About Us
Statement of Purpose
My Navy League Suspension
Get Involved
Make a Donation
Write Your Congressman
Subscribe to Our
Email Alerts
Liberty Blog
Store
FAQs
Links
Contact Us

Captain William L. McGonagle
Captain William L. McGonagle (1925-1999)
©2008-2013 USS Liberty Veterans Association | Privacy Policy

Ronald L. Waldron
October 28, 2013
Reply

WAKING UP, THE NAME OF THE PARTY, “THE LABOR PARTY”

AMERICANS ARE FINALLY WAKING UP!! WE HOPE IT CONTINUES!!

The name of the party shall be the ” Labor Party”.

Where all our rights will be respected!! Back to AMERICAN our AMERICA!!

WE NEED A DIFFERENT PARTY: “AMERICAN MADE ONLY” PLATFORM. NO DUEL CITIZENSHIP, BORN AND RAISED IN AMERICA, OFFICIALS, APPOINTEES, JUDGES,
FBI, CIA, HOME-LAND SECURITY. REPEAL OF ALL TRADE AGREEMENTS, FOREIGN AID, and DEFENSE CONTRACTS. NO NON-BID CONTRACTS.
PRODUCTS AND PRODUCE MADE IN AMERICA ONLY. NO MORE PORK BARREL. NO MORE OUT_SOURCING JOBS, NO MORE IMMIGRATION UNTIL WE
HAVE LESS THAN 7% UNEMPLOYMENT.

Demand an audit of the FED, and each Federal, agency and state budgets. Prosecute all war crimes and corruption in government.

Our Occupied Government: Our government has the audacity to DESTROY the hopes and dreams of Americans while supporting the atrocities of Israel. We have full knowledge of the involvement of Israel in the decisions to ATTACK Iraq by presenting false intelligence. We see the money accepted by our officials from a foreign interest lobby. We see the amount of our sons & daughters killed in wars fought for all the wrong reasons. We see our financial system, and media controlled by the Zionist political movement. What we do not witness from our government officials from either political party. A) Moral values. B) Ethics. C) Integrity. D) Accountability. E) Oversight. F) Commitment to American TAX-PAYERS. G) Fiscal responsibility The Israel/Palestine conflict, the lobby crime bosses, Are all finding out that the Truth counts? We look for The day when there is Peace 4 All.

Population of Israel today. Just over 8 million. USA AID 3.2 Billion a year. PLUS
NO money collected to benefit USA tax payer. All Deficit spending, pork
spending that does not benefit America at all.

HOW-ever, CIA “Black hole” money involved coming from Israel as long as
Mossad is involved. (Basically in charge).

Also USA taxpayer money comes back threw the (2) foreign lobbies,
registered as American lobbies, AIPAC & J-Street. Campaign funds for
candidates that support Israel which amounts to undisclosed
amounts. It is anticipated to be 325 Million a year, which highly
influences our Federal, State, and some local Elections.
Their having chapters in each State.It is Corruption at all levels.

The Federal taxes collected from each State ends up not being a
benefit to any of the 50 States, all negative do to the deficit spending.

That now puts each AMERICAN in debt $35,000 PLUS.
Of course put the tax breaks to the rich and famous & Corporations,
along with the 165 Zionist BILLIONAIRES and off shore accounts,
which has created the HUGH MESS for middle class & poor Americans.

OUR Unions have also failed, crushed by both present political
parties. Leading up to the fact we need a “Labor Political Party”
American only all the way.

National & International . Regain a checks & Balance system, and
renewed enforcement agencies that will have the power to
investigate & prosecute the corruption presently involved.

INVESTIGATE:

New Snowden revelation details vast US intelligence “black budget” .

US condemnation of chemical weapons use not applied to Israel.

Billions of dollars are collectively allocated to fund this regime of global lawlessness, without any disclosure to the American people. The US has spent more than $500 billion on intelligence since the 2001 attacks, or over $100 million per day, and the CIA has seen a gigantic growth of its budget over this period. The CIA’s proposed budget for 2013 totaled $14.7 billion, for a 56 percent increase since 2004, while the National Security Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office were to receive over $10 billion each.

It was Israel’s development of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, coupled with its vastly superior military forces, that prompted Damascus to establish its own chemical weapons programme following the capture in 1967 of Syria’s Golan Heights, their subsequent occupation and annexation, and the establishment of Israeli settlements inhabited by 20,000 Israelis.

Far from this resulting in any referral of Israel to the International Criminal Court, Goldstone and his co-authors were subject to an international campaign of bullying, intimidation and vilification of the investigation by Israel, leading Goldstone to make a cringing retraction of his own conclusions. But his three co-authors rejected calls to recant their report or misrepresent its purpose, saying that it would “disregard the rights of Palestinian and Israeli victims to truth and justice”.
TO BE CONTINUED I’AM SURE!

Please Forward this message. They have removed me from Linkedin, more montoring, and censorship. Find the TRUTH, this is not a conspiracy theory!!

Ronald L. Waldron
October 30, 2013
Reply

Dear Editor:
Fourteen Characteristics of Fascism :

Letter to the Editor Sent to : INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE

By: Ronald L. Waldron (Jan. 3, 2009)

Does it describe Israel, the USA or both.(A COALITION)
1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottoes, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.
2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.
3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.
4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.
5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.
6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.
7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.
8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.
9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.
10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.
11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.
12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.
13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.
14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.

WE HAVE WITNESSED ALL 14 OVER THE LAST EIGHT YEARS.

2001—2009. Zionist control by AIPAC
___________________________________________________________

2009—2013. Nothing has changed. Still Zionist control.

2014 and 2016: We need “THE LABOR PARTY”,
A party representing our work force, Union & Non-Union workers,
making under $250,000 per year.
A party for the American people, the actual tax-payers.

REMEMBER: Government By the People, for the People?

What can we do? Get involved!
Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
October 31, 2013
Reply

Published on Jan 10, 2013

Eustace Mullins with Daryl Bradford Smith in The French Connection, January 25, 2006.

On Rothschilds, Israel, Woodrow Wilson, Zionism, Bernard Baruch, WWI, WWII, Justice Brandeis, Germany, George Sylvester Viereck, Max Warburg & Max Oppenheimer, Hitler, Palestine, Nazi Zionists, Holocaust, Jewish Homeland, Religion is a perfect smokescreen, Temple Mount, Myron Fagan, Anti-Semitism, Anti Defamation League, Benjamin Freedman, Senator Joseph McCarthy, Ezra Pound, Alger Hiss, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Ku Klux Klan, Racism, Albert Pike, Henry Cabot Lodge, Richard Nixon, Samuel Untermayer, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Barberossa, Iraq, Bush Family, Papacy, Warburgs, The London Connection, Andrew Jackson, Thomas Jefferson, President Calvin Coolidge, The Internet Movement,

The Crash will come as soon as the government stops printing Counterfeit Money, Revolution is on its way.

Eustace Mullins – Secrets of the Federal Reserve

Eustace Mullins “The Secrets of the Federal Reserve” Recorded during a visit to Hawaii around the year 1989, this lecture presents a unique opportunity for you to see and hear this remarkable man lay out the shocking truth about the privately-owned corporation known as the Federal Reserve System.

” The Federal Reserve System is not Federal; it has no reserves; and it is not a system, but rather, a criminal syndicate. It is the product of criminal syndicalist activity of an international consortium of dynastic families comprising what the author terms “The World Order”. The Federal Reserve system is a central bank operating in the United States. Although the student will find no such definition of a central bank in the textbooks of any university, the author has defined a central bank as follows: It is the dominant financial power of the country which harbors it. It is entirely private-owned, although it seeks to give the appearance of a governmental institution. It has the right to print and issue money, the traditional prerogative of monarchs. It is set up to provide financing for wars. It functions as a money monopoly having total power over all the money and credit of the people. ”
-Eustace Mullins

http://conspiracyscope.blogspot.com/

Ronald L. Waldron
October 31, 2013
Reply

AMERICA — From Freedom To Fascism (Full Length Documentary)

Is there a law which requires you to pay the Federal Income Tax? Is the Federal Reserve a part of the United States Government, or is it a private bank owned and operated by multinational corporate interests? Do they have our nation’s best interests at heart? Unless something changes, what does the future of the United States look like?

The answer to all these questions and more in this incredible documentary by legendary filmmaker Aaron Russo (February 14, 1943 – August 24, 2007).

The torch you lit, we will carry. Thank you, Aaron!

Ronald L. Waldron
October 31, 2013
Reply

I was informed today that my life could well be in Danger, WOW!
Some one is out of touch. For 12 yrs. I have been attempting to
get people to realize how we all are in Danger.

How out of touch we are if we allow Zionism to control our
government any longer.

Unite, join & support “THE LABOR PARTY”, Government of
the People, for the people, by the people!

Stay Healthy, informed, and SAFE;

Ron Waldron

Tell me you can feel something is real wrong in Washington, DC,
if so what will you do to help?

Seek the TRUTH The Whole Truth, Nothing but the TRUTH.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 13, 2013
Reply

Israel lobby runs ‘organized crime’, bribes US lawmakers:
___________________________________________________

Israel lobby runs ‘organized crime’, bribes US lawmakers, Most of the Republican Party, and a big % of Democrats. America needs a LABOR PARTY
with the role of, complete reform of government and its policies.

American lawmakers are easily bribed by the all-powerful Israel lobby in the United States which turns huge profits through “organized crime,” a journalist tells Press TV.

Members of Congress in the House and Senate will do anything the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) asks them to, as any member of Congress can be removed by “a massive flood of money that comes in,” Gordon Duff, senior editor at Veterans Today said Tuesday.

And the source of this money comes from organized crime including gambling, illegal drugs, organ theft, prostitution, money laundering and illegal arms, along with misuse of foreign aid monies, he added.

“The profit from this actually bribes members of the American government.”

Although Israel is not directly involved in the negotiations between the Western powers and Iran over the nation’s nuclear energy program, Duff said Israel lobby “dictates US policy on Iran,” in fact all foreign policy.

“AIPAC is one of several front organizations for a large organized crime conspiracy and one of their targets is to make sure that US relations with Iran are kept the way they are,” Duff said.

Iran and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council — the United States, China, Russia, France and Britain — plus Germany held two days of negotiations over Tehran’s nuclear energy program behind closed doors in the Swiss city of Geneva on October 15-16.

Israel, however, condemns diplomacy with Iran, and is instead pushing for more sanctions and threats of military attack.

911 WTCs were exploded in a JOINT Israeli/US deep state operation, 110 story towers turned into dust leaving four stories of rubble at the base only. Both are devils and each now knows enough secrets to destroy the other. All dealings have to be made bearing this in mind.

All these big brothers of the world are shy of talking about zionist nuclear in Israel. They talk only nuisance about the weaker countries and try to force submitting their wills through pressure of sanctions at the cost of human sufferings of the common people. But the rulers remain in power. Look at the nuclear bomb of the North Korea, they don’t care the red eyes of the big brothers.

If N. Korea were in the middle east then its nuclear program would have been used against him because Israel/US are using Iran nuclear program to implement their plan to erect “greater Israel” using destabilization of the regional states based on religious and ethnic divide to partition the regional states. That’s why you see so many “crisis” are constructed by US/Israel using their CIA trained terrorists to paint Muslims as ‘terrorist’ where this words fits US/Israel the best. US is a police state, and Israel an apartheid, racist state.

Imperialism and Zionism are the greatest threat to humanity today.

The Zionists will not let America, Iran or the rest of the world live in peace. Get ready for a big war. The Zionists are finished but they will not go away quietly. They must be put to sleep for once and all; Period!

How can anybody think with all of that incessant banging that hootenanny is beating on the war-drum? It’s non-stop, and loud. It seems no matter what, the Israeli regime will not stop pounding the drum. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom with both hands. The Zionists have the agenda of realizing “greater Israel”, and it is Iran that backs the ‘resistance’ to the genocide that entails. If Iran does not regress to the stone-age, the Israeli are going to see the strengths of Iran & push for war to prevent obstacle to their dream/vision. As we all know Iran has NO INTENTION of returning to the stone age. Hence war is eminent in my opinion. Something has to give and neither side shows signs of that. Look out for FALSE FLAGS to start war (remember 9/11) because it won’t be Iran to start war, it will be the Israelis.

War is their goal, opposing any deal is their agenda.This is exactly what the Zio-New World dictatorship want.Damned if you do,Damned if you don’t…Iran needs a serious deterrent and defensive weapon system to protect itself and teach the rest of the world how to deal with Zionist hegemonic fantasies.

The US government needs to be honest with its own people. Just come out and say it: “The militant zionist lobby has a strangle-hold on American politics … not just on the Iran issue … but in other sectors of the economy, politics, the courts, and media.” The American people need to hear that they are being held hostage by the militant Zionist lobby.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 25, 2013
Reply

CYBER-COP BRINGS ZIONIST ORGANIZED CRIME SYNDICATE TO LIGHT. CAMPAIGN FUNDS TO CONGRESS KEEPS PROSECUTION AWAY.

Subject: Go to: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad.
ccc
TRUTH COUNTS–Don’t count on getting it
By: Ronald L. Waldron
ISBN 9780557536740
Ronald L. Waldron (Standard Copyright License)
Price: $9.06

Our Occupied Government: Our government has the audacity to DESTROY the hopes and dreams of Americans while supporting the atrocities of Israel. We have full knowledge of the involvement of Israel in the decisions to ATTACK Iraq by presenting false intelligence. We see the money accepted by our officials from a foreign interest lobby. We see the amount of our sons & daughters killed in wars fought for all the wrong reasons. We see our financial system, and media controlled by the Zionist political movement. What we do not witness from our government officials from either political party. A) Moral values. B) Ethics. C) Integrity. D) Accountability. E) Oversight. F) Commitment to American TAX-PAYERS. G) Fiscal responsibility The Israel/Palestine conflict, the lobby crime bosses, Are all finding out that the Truth counts? We look for The day when there is Peace 4 All.

His six books, Final Report; What If; Deception; Truth Counts; The House of Treason and Watch Out can be purchased by visiting http://www.amazon.com. LULU MARKETING, AuthorHouse, Barnes & Noble.
Available at: Amazon.com, Barnes & Noble, AuthorHouse, and LULU Marketing.

Go to: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad.
Check out the last 10-15 messages, Thanks.

Please forward this message.

Thank you for your courtesy;

Ron

NOW is the time for LABOR PARTY:

AMERICA, AND AMERICANS DESERVE BETTER THEN WHAT WE HAVE GOTTEN FROM EITHER PARTY FOR THE LAST FIFTY YEARS.
DO NOT RE-ELECT ANY CANDIDATE PRESENTLY IN OFFICE.

WE NEED THE “LABOR PARTY” — AMERICAN WORKERS UNITE, UNION & NON-UNION , FORMING A POLITICAL PARTY WITH OUT FOREIGN LOBBY INFLUENCE.

PAST VICTIMS REMEMBER: FIRE-FIGHTERS, FIRST RESPONDERS, POLICE OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AT TRADE CENTER. ( 911 A ZIONIST ATTACK)
MILITARY PERSONNEL, MILITARY FAMILIES, OUR SONS & DAUGHTERS KILLED, DISABLED BY A PREEMPTED WAR
CAUSED BY FALSE INFORMATION AND FALSE-FLAG OPERATIONS OF ISRAEL.
NAVY & MARINE VICTIMS OF THE ISRAELI “:ATTACK”: ON THE USS LIBERTY.
ASSASSINATION OF JFK, AND TOO MANY OTHERS TO LIST.
CHARACTER ASSASSINATION OF ANYONE SPEAKING OUT AGAINST THE OCCUPIERS OF PALESTINE, USA
GOVERNMENT, MILITARY COMPLEX, MEDIA, WALL STREET, BANKING, UNIVERSITIES, FOOD CHAIN, GAMBLING,
ILLEGAL DRUGS, PROSTITUTION, TRADE AGREEMENTS, and FOREIGN POLICIES. ALL NOW CONTROLLED BY ZIONIST, AIPAC, MOSSAD,
ISRAEL’S MACHINE.
11-24-13. 60 minutes: REPORTS that ZIONIST Billionaires, have contributed Billions to Election Campaigns to cut all entitlements. Spend all
on Israel’s atrocities in the Middle East. Presently destroying America and the American dreams. Republicans are completely disconnected from the
people. Democrats falling in right behind, all do to unwarranted support for ZIONISM. Listen to the actual Jewish people. NOT-IN-OUR-NAME,
THE JEWISH VOICE FOR PEACE , A LIST OF RABBI’S, and on & on. The people that have suffered the most from HITLER and the ZIONIST
that supported and financed him.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 1, 2013
Reply

This month we got another taste of what a diplomatic success looks like. Thanks to Secretary of State Kerry’s hard work, Iran and the international community are back on a diplomatic path that could prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon without resorting to military force. As we head into the New Year, we are doing everything we can to get behind these efforts and back Kerry in his other endeavor–to help Israel and the Palestinians reach a historic peace agreement.
Israel will have to agree to the 1967 peace AGREEMENT and the borders that were set at that time. The illegal occupation has to end.
The occupation of USA congress will end, it will end by the voice of the American people. Not the present corrupt system and present officials. The majority of Americans will INSIST that all officials,
elected or appointed will be American, NO more DUEL citizens
with-in our government.

WATCH THE VOTE!!

Ronald L. Waldron
December 4, 2013
Reply

The Most Corrupt State Governments in the United States:

1. Georgia 2.South Dakota 3. Wyoming 4. Virginia 5. Maine 6. South Carolina 7. North Dakota 8. Michigan 9. Tennessee 10. Alabama

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT , AIPAC, and organized crime:

Washington, DC is an easy place to be Jewish these days.There
are some 200,000 Zionist Jews living in the area, making this the
seventh-largest Jewish community in North America … No
one would dispute that area Jews are disproportionately
represented in the upper echelons of law, politics, medicine,
science, journalism, accounting, education, and other professions.

No election in modern America, would be thought complete without the domestic politicians, down to the ranks of mayors and city council members, rushing to appear before Z. Jewish organizations to reaffirm their fealty. While some Jewish agencies have persistently denied the existence of a Jewish vote,” says Stephen Isaacs, “just as persistently the politicians have pandered specifically to ‘Zionist’ interests and issues. The pandering has been especially observable since 1948, when the state of Israel was created.”

By 1956, American Secretary of State John Foster Dulles complained that I am aware of how almost impossible it is in this country to carry out a foreign policy not approved by the Jews.On another occasion, long before Jews had built their modern political machine, he complained about the “terrific control the Jews have over the news media and the barrage which the Jews have built up on Congressmen … I am very much concerned over the fact that the Jewish influence here is completely dominating the scene and making it almost impossible to get Congress to do anything they don’t approve of. The Israeli Embassy is practically dictating to Congress through influential Jewish Zionist people in the country.”

In 1984, Admiral Thomas Moorer, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, complained that
“I’ve never seen a President — I don’t care who he is — stand up to the Zionist. They always get what they want. The Israelis know what is going on all the time. I got to the point where I wouldn’t write anything down. If the American people understood what a grip these people have got on our government, they would rise up in arms.”

A distinction must be made, between ethnicity, which enriches American life and culture, and organized crime & ethnic interest groups, which sometimes press causes that usually derogate from the national interest. American elected politicians, adds the senator, have been subjected to recurrent pressures from what has come to be known as the Israel lobby. (AIPAC)

NOW from 2000 and a Court appointed president under Zionist
control, we have an urgent crisis in AMERICA.

We need to demand reform. We as American’s no longer have
faith in any politician or political party. Republican or Democrat.

We need to rid ourselves of the existing Republican & Democrat congress. A rating of less than 9%, lowest rating ever. No way of reform due to the corruption involved.

We need a complete new AMERICAN party. “THE AMERICAN LABOR PARTY” WITH jobs the #. one issue, complete reform next is the agenda. No lobby control of any member.
STAND UP and be counted. Make your votes count.

Most corrupt cities: New York, Chicago, Las Vegas, Houston,
Miami, Atlanta, Los Angeles, Philadelphia. On & On.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 4, 2013
Reply

THE RISE OR FALL OF AMERICA DEPENDS ON YOU & I, VOTE AGAINST ZIONISM.

President Dwight D. Eisenhower warned that the Israeli lobby AIPAC, should not be registered as an American lobby, it is a completely foreign lobby with foreign interest ONLY.

Jewish money in Washington D. C. was even crucial in the very founding of the modern state of Israel. They were key fundraisers for Harry Truman’s Presidential campaigns; they were also Zionists. Going against the will of his own State Department, Truman followed the Zionist line in supporting a 1947 United Nations vote for the partition of Palestine into Jewish and Arab sections. Afterwards, said long time Democratic activist and brother-in-law of John F. Kennedy, Stephen Smith: “Two million dollars went aboard the Truman campaign train in a paper bag, and that’s what paid for the state of Israel.”

John F. Kennedy had a strongly negative reaction in 1960 to the conditions Jewish contributors demanded for their donations to his presidential campaign (their “initial” contribution was $500,000). Seymour Hersh notes a conversation Kennedy had with a friend, newspaper columnist Charles L. Bartlett:
“‘As an American citizen Kennedy was outraged,’ Bartlett recalled,
‘to have a Zionist group come to him and say: We know your
campaign is in trouble. We’re willing to pay your bill, if you’ll let
us have control of your Middle East policy.’ Kennedy, as a
presidential candidate, also resented the crudity with which he’d
been approached. ‘They wanted control,’ he angrily told Bartlett.”

They knew they had Vice president Johnson in their pocket, we all know what happened next.
Kennedy assassinated, Johnson, AIPAC, Mossad, and Israel were in bed together. Johnson followed the Zionist policies, and happy to do so. Of course the financial benefits were fantastic
for Johnson. How ever the long term results for America have been catastrophic.

NOW, we have had all the false flag operations of Israel, 911, WMD, USS liberty, Terrorist groups supplied and armed to provoke unrest and fear around the World. Armed to harm any anti-Zionist
movement.

Nizar Abu Zayyad
December 10, 2013
Reply

–
MUST WATCH-Sabra & Shatila Criminals 2013

Sabra & Shatila Criminals 2013
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obwzVuTourE

Most of you hear about Sabra and Shatila Massacre but not all of you know what really happened there or who are the real criminals who did the massacre, in this video there are information published for the first time!! The video exposes the perpetrators of the massacre of Sabra and Shatila and publish their pictures, their names and whereabouts.
Please share the film with your friends in order to spread the truth and expose the criminals and bring them to trial.

Nizar Abu Zayyad
Film Director & Producer

Ronald L. Waldron
December 18, 2013
Reply

WHEN, will America’s government listen to what American’s have to say, instead of foreigners or duel citizens with FOREIGN interest.

WATCH: Campaign contributions both sides of the Isle in coming elections. Notice the changes in regulation !!

Let Israel know that non compliance with international law, WILL result in sanctions and military might as well as any other terrorist regime.
Look at the mess THEY have put us in. Do you want more of the same?

Moreland Commission:

On July 2, 2013, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo appointed the “Commission to Investigate Public Corruption” under the Moreland Act and Executive Law Section 63(8) to probe systemic corruption and the appearance of such corruption in state government, political campaigns and elections in New York State.

Only one other Governor has shown an interest in going after the corruption of public officials. Governor Bobby Jindal of Louisiana. We thank him for
such. We find IT appalling, not one Senator, congressman, staffer, President, media personality, past or present have come forward regarding
the corruption with-in our government. ALL certainly do have knowledge of it. WHY NOT? Is it the fear of? Or their involvement with it? That being the
Syndicate of AIPAC, Mossad, Israel, now chartered in all 50 States. They are involved with local, State, and Federal elections. Representatives
head the Home Land Security ORGANIZATION, members are appointed with in all of our government agencies including the pentagon, and our
Presidents Cabinet. Known for their retaliation against any opposition against their AGENDA.
PLEASE FORWARD MESSAGE———“THE AMERICAN LABOR PARTY COMING SOON”

WILL THE REAL CHOSEN PEOPLE PLEASE STAND UP AND BE COUNTED!! IT CERTAINLY IS NOT THE ZIONIST.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 18, 2013
Reply

MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL, AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR.

PLEASE STAY SAFE & HEALTHY.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 3, 2014
Reply

History of Double Agents, Criminal activity, AIPAC’s friends ?

The real message is that Israel’s interests come first. And if the US military does not take action in Syria, then this will be read as a victory by Iran, thus putting Israel at risk.

Crime pays well when granted immunity, or official pardons.
Investigate all such cases for the
last 30 to 40, years and the connections. Al;ways involves
Israel’s interest !
AIPAC lobbyists press Congress for war on Syria

Dr Sarah Marusek
Wednesday, 11 September 2013 10:29

While France and Russia are busy engaging in last minute diplomacy to prevent a US strike against Syria, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) is deploying hundreds of activists in the US capital to win over Congressional support for the strike.

AIPAC is considered to be the most powerful organization in the Israel Lobby, wielding incredible influence. Last Saturday, an AIPAC source confirmed to Reuters that, “We plan a major lobbying effort with about 250 activists in Washington to meet with their senators and representatives” to push for a wide-scale military operation against Syria.

Indeed the pro-war lobby is now in high gear. On Monday, The Washington Post published a widely read op-ed by Stephen J. Hadley, who served as National Security Adviser in the George W. Bush administration and is also a loyal friend of AIPAC.

In his op-ed, Hadley calls upon “Every American committed to preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon” to “urge Congress to grant President Obama [the] authority to use military force against the Al-Assad regime in Syria.” Hadley also recommends an operation “robust enough to erode the Syrian regime’s military advantage.”

Of course what is at stake here is not protecting the lives of Syrians or Americans, but Israel’s interests. Back in 2005, when he addressed AIPAC’s National Summit, Hadley affirmed that the main aim of the US plan to spread democracy in the Middle East was to make the region “a safer neighbourhood for Israel.” He also stated that the US would never “ask Israel to take risks with its security to suit US purposes or US politics.”

So although Hadley pays lip service in the op-ed to US interests, the real message is that Israel’s interests come first. And if the US military does not take action in Syria, then this will be read as a victory by Iran, thus putting Israel at risk. And just in case his strong words are not enough to provoke the desired reaction among American readers, the online article features a photograph of Iran’s newly elected President Hassan Rouhani raising his hand up in the air, as if about to give a “high five” in celebration of victory.

In making his case, Hadley tells us that President Al-Assad has “repeatedly and flagrantly crossed a US ‘red line’ by using chemical weapons against his own people.”

But what is Stephen J. Hadley’s track record on making such authoritative claims?

Well, ten years ago Hadley also told us with certainty that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. Back then he belonged to the White House Iraq Group and was the person responsible for allowing the forged intelligence claims that Hussein had purchased yellowcake uranium powder from Niger to be included in former President George W. Bush’s 2003 State of the Union Address, only months before the US-led invasion of Iraq.

The Sunday Times also reported that Hadley was the person responsible for leaking information about the identity of CIA agent Valerie Plame to American journalist Bob Woodward in 2003, a leak that sparked a national scandal. In the US it is an offence to reveal the identity of a covert agent. The leak endangered the lives of Plame as well as her foreign intelligence sources. It also hurt America’s ability to gather intelligence.

Unfortunately Woodward never revealed his source, but CIA officer Richard Armitage eventually confessed to the crime. Of course, Armitage was never tried. The only prosecution that resulted from the investigation into the leak was against Lewis “Scooter” Libby, top aide to former Vice President Dick Cheney, who was indicted for lying to FBI agents and the grand jury. However his sentence was later commuted by Bush.

It is widely thought that Plame was exposed because she is the wife of Joseph Wilson, “the former US ambassador sent to Niger to investigate [the] disputed claims that Saddam Hussein was trying to purchase uranium yellowcake for the manufacture of nuclear weapons.” Wilson had concluded that the claims were false, so this was the Bush administration’s payback. Intelligence officials, including Hadley, purposely ignored Wilson’s report, discredited him and his wife, and allowed the president to cite the false intelligence claims in order to justify the illegal war against Iraq.

Hadley was promoted in 2005 when he replaced Condoleezza Rice as Bush’s National Security Advisor. Two years later, he was subpoenaed in the federal espionage case against Americans Steven J. Rosen and Keith Weissman, both former AIPAC lobbyists, and Larry Franklin, who worked in the Department of Defence. The Washington Times reports that the lobbyists were “accused of receiving classified information from a now-convicted Pentagon official and relaying it to an Israeli official and the press. The information included details about the Al-Qaeda terrorist network, US police in Iran and the 1996 bombing of the Khobar Towers dormitory in Saudi Arabia.”

The FBI had been watching Rosen and Weissman for some time, and its agents were able to turn Franklin in order to collect the necessary evidence to prosecute the lobbyists. Part of the plea bargain deal was that Franklin would plead guilty, but his 12 years sentence would be reduced to 100 hours of community service and 10 months in a halfway house.

According to The Washington Post, at the time the case “transfixed much of official Washington because of its potential to criminalize the exchange of sensitive information among journalists, lobbyists and policy analysts.” Rosen himself believed that “the case was politicized and pushed by government officials ‘who have an obsession with leaks… and an obsession with Israel and the theory that it spies on America’.” He was right about the case being politicized, but for the wrong reasons.

Thus it is not surprising that the subpoenas were never enforced, because the case against Rosen and Weissman was dropped by the Obama administration in 2009.

Fast-forward to the present day, and the conviction of army private Bradley Manning on charges of espionage for leaking information about US war crimes to Wikileaks becomes an even greater travesty of justice. According to The Guardian, the technical reason given for why the case against Rosen and Weissman was dropped is that the prosecution had “to prove not only that the accused pair had passed classified information but that they [also] intended to harm the US in doing so.” These are difficult charges to prove in any court of law. In fact, they are the same charges that Manning was found innocent of. But for Manning, these charges were related to treason, not to espionage. For Rosen and Weissman, the bar for espionage was obviously much higher.

Such blatant double standards in the US legal system are a gross injustice. And especially considering that in leaking the information, Manning was trying to serve America’s moral interests by sparking “a broader debate on the role of the US military and to make Americans aware of the nature of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan,” as Al Jazeera American reports, whereas Rosen and Weissman were only seeking to help Israel.

It is obvious that the case was dropped not because the lobbyists were innocent of espionage, but because the trial would have disclosed classified information about how Israel controls US foreign policy, exposing in detail Washington’s Israel-first strategy. Incidentally, The Guardian revealed that during the case one member of Congress was also caught on tape “telling an Israeli agent that she would pressure the justice department to reduce spying charges against the two former AIPAC officials” in return for an esteemed committee position. However an FBI probe into the exchange was dropped by the Bush administration.
The role of American politics in the US legal system is clearly reinforcing the power and privilege of the Israel Lobby. So while Manning is serving a 35-year jail sentence, Armitage, Rosen, Weissman and Franklin all walk free. And then, of course, there is Hadley, who may not be a leaker but is still a liar, like Libby. It seems that the role of American politics in the US media is also clearly reinforcing the power and privilege of the Israel Lobby. Why else would Hadley, a proven liar, be given a platform in one of the nation’s most respected newspapers to present the case for yet another illegal US war?

“From late 1973 until April of 1975, Theodore Shackley, Thomas Clines and Richard Armitage disbursed, from the secret, Laotian-based, Vang Pao opium fund, vastly more money than was required to finance even the highly intensified Phoenix Project in Vietnam. The money in excess of that used in Vietnam was secretly smuggled out of Vietnam in large suitcases, by Richard Secord and Thomas Clines and carried into Australia, where it was deposited in a secret, personal bank account….”

In Tehran, Armitage, set up a secret “financial conduit” inside Iran, into which secret Vang Pao drug funds could be deposited from Southeast Asia. According to Daniel Sheehan: “The purpose of this conduit was to serve as the vehicle for secret funding by Shackley’s “Secret Team,” of a private, non-CIA authorized “Black” operations inside Iran, disposed to seek out, identify, and assassinate socialist and communist sympathizers, who were viewed by Shackley and his “Secret Team” members to be “potential terrorists” against the Shah of Iran`s government in Iran.”

“From late 1973 until April of 1975, Theodore Shackley, Thomas Clines and Richard Armitage disbursed, from the secret, Laotian-based, Vang Pao opium fund, vastly more money than was required to finance even the highly intensified Phoenix Project in Vietnam. The money in excess of that used in Vietnam was secretly smuggled out of Vietnam in large suitcases, by Richard Secord and Thomas Clines and carried into Australia, where it was deposited in a secret, personal bank account….”

Ronald L. Waldron
January 6, 2014
Reply

3 days ago, WOW—Just wonder how, who and who???

About 21,700 results (0.14 seconds)

Search Results

NBCNews.com (blog)

Police seize 3 tons of meth in south China village

Los Angeles Times-by Julie Makinen-Jan 4, 2014

Use and production of crystal meth has been rising rapidly in China. A study published in November by the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime …

Chinese police launch cinematic raid on rural “meth village”
Telegraph.co.uk-Jan 3, 2014

China Raids Meth Village Using Helicopters, Speedboats And …
Huffington Post-Jan 3, 2014

China embraces ‘Breaking Bad’? Three tons of crystal meth seized …
Blog-NBCNews.com (blog)-Jan 4, 2014

Camouflage-clad police arrest 182 people in dramatic raid on …
In-Depth-National Post-Jan 3, 2014

Police Raid ‘Fortress’ of Drug Production in South China
Blog-New York Times (blog)-Jan 3, 2014

►►
ITN

Telegraph.co.uk

New York Times (blog)

National Post

Yahoo News UK

BBC News

Ronald L. Waldron
January 6, 2014
Reply

Vice President Joe Biden to visit Gov. Cuomo in Albany:

The possibility that if the Moreland Commission comes up in any
conversation, we certainly are hopeful the Vice President will
support Gov. Cuomo, and of course be transparent.

Of course a full and complete investigation will be conducted,
by which of the agencies not infiltrated by Mossad already ?

In my opinion, we will see another false flag operation out of , or
orchestrated by Israel and our congress.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 6, 2014
Reply

FOUR years ago, nothing changing. Think again !!

Ronald L. Waldron says:
January 15, 2010 at 11:56 pm

Please investigate and report on the activities of these lobbies, and the real influence on State, Local, and Federal government. Our alliance with Israel is immoral, corrupt and unconstitutional.

While many have looked into the effect of U.S. foreign policy on the Israeli/Palestinian conflict in general, the role of U.S. policy in internal Palestinian politics and the current divide between the two largest parties in the Palestinian political spectrum has been under discussed. What role has U.S. policy played in the inter-Palestinian divide? Does this help or hurt the long-term stated goal of American policy? Is it time for the US to reevaluate its policy based on these effects? While economic conditions have improved in the West Bank, the conditions in Gaza continue to worsen after months of siege, devastating attacks and incursions. Largely, economic conditions in the Occupied Territories are greatly controlled by outside powers – most directly the Israeli occupation – and the donor nations which contribute aid money. Economic growth, without independence, continues to be tied to a relaxation of restrictions and an influx of donor dollars. Join us for a discussion on the economic conditions in Palestine and their prospects for change in the coming year.

Does humanitarianism delay a political solution to the question of Palestine? With the siege on Gaza and the occupation effecting the population in dramatic fashion and eliminating basic human needs for millions, there is a noticeable shift in the discourse on Palestine; that is a shift away from the struggle for freedom and toward a struggle for survival. If Palestinians are consumed with surviving for just another day they cannot focus on liberating their land. How does humanitarianism reinforce this situation and how can Palestinians avert suspended catastrophe?

ENTER YOUR COMMENT HERE V

Ronald L. Waldron
January 10, 2014
Reply

Governor Chistie:

You, your party bosses, and many from across the Isle in government, accept the campaign funds from AIPAC (Israel).
When you do so, the agenda and terms are also accepted.
Such agreements include appointing the staffers they suggest.
Staffers that are well trained by them, they take care of all
that is necessary to promote their agenda. You are not the only one, nor the last to get caught up in that trap. It is well know
the staffers come with benefits, like friends with benefits.
Exposed by them when their agenda is not followed.
President Clinton, Governor Spitzer, and John Edwards are prime examples of how Israel works and trains their
swallows.

You are portrayed as a Bully, a Bully they used back in
Sept. Now exposed as such because you have ambitions
which conflicts with whom they plan on supporting for
President and Vice President. Thus here comes another
character assassination. (YOU) This time. “MEDIA???”

Recognize the corruption involved in todays politics,
Federal, State, and local with chapters of AIPAC in
every area. Media, Wall Street, Banking, Educational
Institutions, Global Economy, Trade agreements, Food
Chain, and most importantly Home-Land Security,
and the Pentagon. Say nothing about control of
gambling, Drug markets, prostitution, and human
trafficking.

With good reason, the American people are ready for
a revolution. Such being recognized, look at the preparations
being made to contain such. Military agreements with
Canada, and closed military bases made into interment
camps for Americans. (Gentiles)

According to a report by newjerseynewsroom.com, the governor told members of AIPAC’s northeast region that “it may not be fashionable in some of the chancelleries, the foreign ministries, and salons around the world to talk about why America stands with Israel — but that’s no excuse not to be saying [it] and saying it loudly.”

Roger Jacobs, a West Orange attorney and former chair of the Community Relations Committee of Metro West, attended the event and said he was “extremely pleased to hear the governor’s exuberance about Israel.” (That certainly is not
the Agenda of the rest of us.)

TAKE NOTE:

Israel announces plans for 1,400 new settlements in occupied territories.

Gov. Christie to AIPAC:

But, more than that, I want to see New Jersey forming these kinds of win-win partnerships with Israeli startups, companies, universities, and hospitals.

Governor, why not American companies & workers. We are the people that Elected you. The people you tax and spend from.
You are now just another YES MAN for AIPAC, which Americans
are sick and tired of. We will take our governments back, we
thought you would be with us, we thought you were for
New Jersey Voters, Tax payers, workers, you know US Gentiles
that are meaningless to the ZIONIST running everything, BUT
change is on the way. With or with out you we continue.

I was first invited a number of times to come to come to Israel with groups of other governors and elected officials, and I said no each time, not because I didn’t want to come to Israel, but because the first time I went to Israel I wanted it to be in Israel with my wife and my children.

WAKE-UP GOVERNOR, they are not interested in your family,
you are the one to be their “SLAVE Politician” as are the rest
with the free trips. ETC. Presidents, Vice-Presidents, GENERALS,
Senators, Congressmen, Governors, Mayors, and CEO’S.

America, what a crisis we are in. GET INVOLVED NOW.
At least demand prosecution for treason, and VOTE the
bastards OUT!!
America belongs to American’s, TAKE CHARGE!

THIS E-MAIL WAS REFUSED BY THE GOVERNORS OFFICE.
Contact Us

One or more errors were encountered

Use the back arrow on your browser to correct the following:

Your message contained inappropriate content.

David Wildstein, Jewish Chris Christie Aide, Takes Fifth in Hearing on ‘Bridgegate’ Scandal

Ronald L. Waldron
January 17, 2014
Reply

Is Change possible in Israel?

To change Israel we need to change things in Washington DC.
USA foreign policies: No more foreign aid to Israel, no more trade agreements, no more fighting
their wars, no more AIPAC/J-Street lobbies, registered as American instead of foreign.
No more veto’s of UN sanctions on Israel. (67 of them to date) No more duel citizenship candidates in any USA government position.
Audit the fed, Follow all campaign contributions made by Zionist.
Break-up their monopoly & control of media. Remove all mossad from our agencies, Home-land
Security and pentagon.
Let Israel know that non compliance with international law, WILL result in sanctions and military might as well as any other terrorist regime.
We need to insist on inspections of their nuclear weapons, sign a non-proliferation agreement,
the same as Iran has agreed to.
It is little wonder that Israeli spy Arnon Milchan is now so openly boasting about his years spent pilfering American nuclear weapons technology.
President Johnson gave Israel 200-300 war heads shortly after taking office, and the assassination of President Kennedy. President Kennedy had denied such.

DO ALL YOU CAN TO RID WASHINGTON OF THE PRESENT OCCUPIERS.

Allen D. Post
January 18, 2014
Reply

Jews Against Zionism is a group for Jews and others opposed to the Zionist movement and ideology, and to its impact on both Palestinians and Jews. This is not a religious group, not a racist hate group, and not a conspiracy-theory group. JAZ is a political group, committed to coexistence between Palestinians and Israeli Jews.

We believe that the conflict in Palestine cannot be resolved without a return of Palestinian refugees and dismantlement of the Zionist structure of the state of Israel – and that this is impossible in the context of two states and a re-partition of Palestine. We advocate the only approach which can lead to peace with justice in the region: we call for a unitary, secular and democratic Palestine, the return of Palestinian refugees, and full and equal rights for Palestinians, Israeli Jews, and all other people living in the whole of Palestine.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 25, 2014
Reply

The World must know the TRUE Jews.

The world must know that the Zionists have illegitimately seized the name Israel and have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people!

The true Jews remain faithful to Jewish belief and are not contaminated with Zionism.

The true Jews are against dispossessing the Arabs of their land and homes. According to the Torah, the land should be returned to them.

Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.

Neturei Karta oppose the so-called “State of Israel” not because it operates secularly, but because the entire concept of a sovereign Jewish state is contrary to Jewish Law.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 28, 2014
Reply

WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS

WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS

To change Israel we need to change things in Washington DC.
USA foreign policies: No more foreign aid to Israel, no more trade agreements, no more fighting
their wars, no more AIPAC/J-Street lobbies, registered as American instead of foreign.
No more veto’s of UN sanctions on Israel. (67 of them to date) No more duel citizenship candidates in any USA government position.
Audit the fed, Follow all campaign contributions made by Zionist.
Break-up their monopoly & control of media. Remove all mossad from our agencies, Home-land
Security and pentagon.
Let Israel know that non compliance with international law, WILL result in sanctions and military might as well as any other terrorist regime.
We need to insist on inspections of their nuclear weapons, sign a non-proliferation agreement,
the same as Iran has agreed to.
It is little wonder that Israeli spy Arnon Milchan is now so openly boasting about his years spent pilfering American nuclear weapons technology.
President Johnson gave Israel 200-300 war heads shortly after taking office, and the assassination of President Kennedy. President Kennedy had denied such.

DO ALL YOU CAN TO RID WASHINGTON OF THE PRESENT OCCUPIERS.

We want Peace—-Peace4All

Moreland Commission:

On July 2, 2013, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo appointed the “Commission to Investigate Public Corruption” under the Moreland Act and Executive Law Section 63(8) to probe systemic corruption and the appearance of such corruption in state government, political campaigns and elections in New York State.

Only one other Governor has shown an interest in going after the corruption of public officials. Governor Bobby Jindal of Louisiana. We thank him for such. We find IT appalling, not one Senator, congressman, staffer, President, media personality, past or present have come forward regarding
the corruption with-in our government. ALL certainly do have knowledge of it. WHY NOT? Is it the fear of? Or their involvement with it? That being the
Syndicate of AIPAC, Mossad, Israel, now chartered in all 50 States. They are involved with local, State, and Federal elections. Representatives
head the Home Land Security ORGANIZATION, members are appointed with in all of our government agencies including the pentagon, and our Presidents Cabinet. Known for their retaliation against any opposition to their agenda.
PLEASE FORWARD MESSAGE———“THE AMERICAN LABOR PARTY COMING SOON”

WILL THE REAL CHOSEN PEOPLE PLEASE STAND UP AND BE COUNTED!! IT CERTAINLY IS NOT THE ZIONIST.

Jews Against Zionism !!

Jews Against Zionism is a group for Jews and others opposed to the Zionist movement and ideology, and to its impact on both Palestinians and Jews. This is not a religious group, not a racist hate group, and not a conspiracy-theory group. JAZ is a political group, committed to coexistence between Palestinians and Israeli Jews.

We believe that the conflict in Palestine cannot be resolved without a return of Palestinian refugees and dismantlement of the Zionist structure of the state of Israel – and that this is impossible in the context of two states and a re-partition of Palestine. We advocate the only approach which can lead to peace with justice in the region: we call for a unitary, secular and democratic Palestine, the return of Palestinian refugees, and full and equal rights for Palestinians, Israeli Jews, and all other people living in the whole of Palestine.

The world must know that the Zionists have illegitimately seized the name Israel and have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people!

The true Jews remain faithful to Jewish belief and are not contaminated with Zionism.

The true Jews are against dispossessing the Arabs of their land and homes. According to the Torah, the land should be returned to them.

Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.

A New Genome Study Destroys Zionist Claims to Palestine
… by Jim W. Dean, VT Editor … with Snordster

[ Editor’s Note: We first ran this back in March of 2013. I knew this was a good piece, not because it was a new story…it was not.

The pretend-a-jew issue, in regards of the blood line hoax, and the fraudulent claim that “God gave us the land”, had been exposed for quite a while, and of course ignored by mass media.

But we had an Israeli genticist at John Hopkins who chose to be true to his profession and his science, and debunked the myth in a manner that could be used as expert testimony in court. Such days do not grow on trees, although we have a good number of them over a year here at VT.

But hearing this done in a Snordster reading gave me goosebumps the first time I heard it, not having known he had done an earlier one. What had happened is what we calling ‘leveraging’ in the media business, where a different kind of delivery of exactly the same words can attract a whole new batch of readers, which it did.

Our articles get copied a lot arount the planet onto other websites and blogs, so our readership count here is just a fraction of the total for the ones that take off. The only way we have to gauge how much, is to track the Google count on the article title as you get an exact count of how many places it has shown up worldwide.

This posting on VT of Snorster’s reading was up to 70,000 Google hits in about two weeks, a hell of a surprise, and one we were glad to have followed the numbers on. It showed us that even though the mainstream media ignored it, the Internet did not, and many of those we wanted to be aware for it, were. That is how we often measure our success. Did ‘the target’ get the message.

For anyone out there angry at hearing about that, welcome to the real world. It’s been going on forever.

Militant Zionism has always planned to cleanse the Arabs out the Land and try to pull most of the Diaspora Jews there to populate a future super power. When the ink was not dry on Israel’s birth certificate the Zios were launching their WMD programs.

UWE MST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS

Ronald L. Waldron
January 30, 2014
Reply

Corruption has lead to complete failure of our government.

Why our congress has an approval rating of only 9%. They have relied on who they perceive as the worlds best trained intelligence agency. To train, give leadership to our agencies, and work with our military intelligence. That of course being Mossad’s take-over.

Next, how well they have been manipulated by lobbies, again the largest is the foreign lobby,AIPAC.
It not only shows the ignorance of elected officials, but the self-serving agendas of most.
It took just 50 years for our government to be taken over with out any resistance from Washington, DC. It just took money,
campaign funds, personal gifts, trips, vacations, and any other forms of gratuity.

Prosecution of the criminals will not happen, the reason why not, corruption has a solid grip on all agencies including our Supreme Court.

WE need to remove the criminals, and the polarized. Do not re-Elect anyone with over 8 years in office, we the voters will set the term limits ourselves if we have any sense.
No one should have a life time appointment to any position
that has a direct affect regarding our Constitution and its
application.

Congress has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house, Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, education, religious leaders, and now attempting
to control the internet. Thankfully we can communicate with
each other on the world wide web, the only means to expose
the lack of morality, ethics, & integrity in our governments.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 31, 2014
Reply

Biblical misrepresentation by Zionist

Where in all this “Hog-Wash” does it mention that Israel shall
occupy any part of the United States, its government, its media,
its financial institutions, its educational system, its market places,
its military defense system, its laws of the land, or its faith.

Where does God relinquish his son Jesus for them to murder, and to
murder him again upon his return. Where do we find where they shall
break all laws of the lands they were exiled to, or to form the
largest crime syndicate that crosses all borders and to commit every
immoral act humanly possible. Acts that no other could possibly
dream up. To completely demonize the lives of all others.

Now we can certainly separate Zionism from Judaism.
Judaism, the true Torah Jews (Gods chosen people) will inherit
their lands from God with out force, after Zionism and followers
are destroyed.

Where in Gods word do you find that anyone will be raptured out of
the Armageddon. Such belief came in the 1950’s, after Zionism
created and carried out the Holocaust of Torah Jews, that refused
to take part in a forced take over of Palestinian land.

THE END. (Certainly)

Ronald L. Waldron
February 16, 2014
Reply

Scrutinizing Israel role in 2001 anthrax attacks:

In late September 2001, a couple of weeks after 9/11, the United States was struck with what the Bush regime dubbed a “second wave” of terrorism. Letters laced with deadly anthrax spores arrived in the mailboxes of prominent media figures and two American senators. Five people were killed and 17 others were infected.

A concerted effort was made by the Bush regime and the mainstream US media to present the anthrax attacks as the work of the same people who perpetrated 9/11. They were, in a sense, correct, but the people behind 9/11 and the subsequent anthrax fiasco were not members of al-Qaeda or adherents of the Islamic faith.

A very clear and discernible pattern of propaganda was foisted upon the American public following 9/11. Zionists from Israel and the US took a leading role in assigning responsibility for the biggest attack on American soil since Pearl Harbor. Unsurprisingly, the Zionists immediately pointed fingers at all of their Middle Eastern rivals and adversaries, from resistance groups like Hamas and Hezbollah to countries such as Iraq, Iran and Syria.

Israel’s enemies were being portrayed as America’s enemies too. Together, said the Zionists, Israel and America can defeat “the forces of darkness.” Israel’s crude campaign of innuendo and Orwellian projection manifested within a few hours of the 9/11 attacks. Israeli politicians Ariel Sharon, Benjamin Netanyahu, Ehud Barak and Shimon Peres all made public statements calling on the US and other Western powers to initiate a global “war on terrorism,” a term coined by Likudniks in the 1980s.

Israel’s army intelligence service Aman and the former Mossad chief Rafi Eitan trumpeted brazen disinformation shortly following 9/11, alleging Iraqi involvement in the attacks. In August of 2001 the Mossad delivered a propagandist “warning” to the CIA alleging al-Qaeda and Iraq were working together and were plotting terror attacks on major US landmarks. The neoconservatives, who are for all intents and purposes emissaries of the Israeli regime in the US, went straight to work in the op-ed pages of the Washington Post, the New York Times and other Zionist-controlled media outlets, attempting to portray Arabs and Muslims generally as the sponsors of 9/11 and the source of all terrorism in the world.

The same pattern of Zionist deception is apparent with the anthrax attacks. Israel’s partisans immediately mobilized a propaganda initiative to link Iraq and al-Qaeda to the anthrax mailings.

On various occasions [former US] president George W. Bush and vice president Dick Cheney told reporters that al-Qaeda was likely involved in the lethal mailings. The docile mainstream media unquestioningly repeated this unfounded assertion. A stunning piece of disinformation appeared in an Oct. 27, 2001, report in the London Times, alleging that an Iraqi official met with 9/11 patsy Mohamed Atta in the Czech Republic in April 2001. The report went on to suggest that during the rendezvous the Iraqi official gave Atta a flask of anthrax. The origin of this dubious claim was noted in the article: Israeli security sources. The chief of Czech foreign intelligence, Frantisek Bublan, later revealed that this supposed meeting never took place and was nothing more than a propaganda invention of interested parties. “Promoting a so-called ‘Prague connection’ between Atta and [the Iraqi official] al-Ani might have been a ploy by U.S. policymakers seeking justifications for a new military action against…Saddam Hussein,” Bublan told the Prague Post.

When the Iraq/al-Qaeda propaganda narrative fell apart, the FBI targeted two…within the US bio-weapons establishment: scientists Steven Hatfill and Bruce Ivins. The FBI began harassing Hatfill and publicly called him a “person of interest” in the anthrax investigation.

Hatfill vehemently denied the charges and was eventually exonerated. He later sued the FBI and other US government agencies, winning a settlement of more than $5 million in damages. Like Hatfill, Ivins was an unlikely suspect for the anthrax attacks as well.

There was no evidence tying Ivins to the anthrax letters and he had no conceivable motive. The FBI launched an intense campaign of innuendo against Ivins in an effort to convict him in the court of public opinion. Ivins allegedly committed suicide while in a Maryland hospital just before he was set to be indicted and stand trial. How convenient.

Ivins worked at a US bio-weapons facility called USAMRIID in Fort Detrick, Maryland. This is where the FBI claims the anthrax used in the attacks originated. Since there is no evidence that Ivins was involved in the anthrax mailings, there is likewise no reason to believe the FBI’s claim that the anthrax spores used in the letters originated from that facility.

Another curious event took place during the anthrax affair that garnered little attention from the mainstream press for obvious reasons. An Arab-American scientist who worked at the same Fort Detrick facility as Ivins was the victim of an attempted frame-up. Shortly before the first known victim of the anthrax attacks was confirmed, an anonymous letter was mailed to the FBI that attempted to implicate Dr. Ayaad Assaad as a “potential biological terrorist.” The author of the letter claimed to have worked with Assaad previously and alleged that Assaad had a vendetta against the US government, urging the FBI to stop him. The letter prompted the FBI to investigate Assaad. The FBI questioned him in early October 2001 and quickly cleared him of any involvement with the anthrax attacks.

Strangely, the FBI seemed uninterested in finding out who sent the anonymous letter implicating Assaad, even though the contents and timing of the letter were amazingly conspicuous, coming just prior to a real bio-terrorist attack. Assaad suspected the letter-writer was involved in the anthrax mailings and opined that his Arab background made him the “perfect scapegoat.”

One possible source of the frame-up letter was a man named Dr. Philip Zack, a microbiologist and Lieutenant Colonel in the US Army. Zack worked at USAMRIID alongside Assaad in the early 1990s. Zack and other employees at the lab formed a clique called the “camel club” to bully Arab co-workers, particularly Assaad. One day in April 1991 Assaad found a poem in his mailbox written by Zack and other members of the “camel club” which mocked his Arabic heritage. Zack and several of his fellow anti-Arab racists voluntarily left the facility when Assaad informed his superiors of the harassment campaign.

In 1992, anthrax spores, Ebola virus and other deadly pathogens went missing from the Fort Detrick facility. An internal investigation discovered that someone was entering the lab late at night to conduct unauthorized research involving anthrax. The inquiry also revealed that Dr. Philip Zack made an unauthorized visit to the lab on Jan. 23, 1992, at a time when he was no longer working at the facility. Despite Zack’s suspicious past behavior and harassment of Assaad, the FBI made no effort to pursue him as a suspect in the 2001 anthrax investigation.

A very revealing aspect of the whole affair was the fact that the anthrax-tainted letters were made to look like a Muslim who was angry at Israel and the United States authored them. “Death to Israel, Death to America, Allah is Great,” the letters read. Whoever was actually behind the anthrax mailings was evidently attempting to lead authorities to believe a Muslim or group of Muslims was responsible.

So where did the anthrax used in the 2001 attacks come from? Researcher Robert Pate posited a plausible theory in an essay entitled, “The Anthrax Mystery: Solved.” In the paper, Pate suggests Israel is the most likely culprit. According to Pate’s research, Israel had the means, motive and opportunity to secure anthrax spores and deliver them to her targets without being detected. Pate demonstrates that Israel has had a sophisticated chemical and biological weapons program since its inception in 1948. Israel has produced biological agents including anthrax at the Israel Institute of Biological Research (IIBR) in Ness Ziona, located a few miles southeast of Tel Aviv.

“With the help of Jewish scientists from the former Soviet Union,” Pate opines, “Israel’s bio-weapons research has probably surpassed that of all other nations. The Soviet Union’s bio-weapons program had 32,000 scientists and staff working in 40 different research and production facilities. Two thousand of these scientists worked exclusively on the Soviet anthrax program. A significant number of these scientists may have immigrated to Israel and become employed in her bio-weapons programs.”

Pate cites a research paper by Dr. Avner Cohen titled “Israel and Chemical/Biological Weapons: History, Deterrence, and Arms Control” which outlines Israel’s biological and chemical weapons capabilities. Anthrax is certainly in Israel’s biological arsenal. In the paper, Cohen also describes how Zionist militants poisoned Palestinian water supplies with deadly pathogens during the 1948 ‘Nakba,’ wherein Zionist gangs completely destroyed and depopulated more than 500 Arab villages in order to birth…[Israel entity] . Historical examples of Zionist biological warfare noted by Pate, in addition to Israel’s penchant for false flag terrorism against its “allies” such as the Lavon Affair and USS Liberty attack, lead him to believe that Israel was willing and able to commit a biological attack in the US – a classic false flag operation to frame her enemies for political gain.

“A motive for the anthrax attacks would be to blame Arab terrorists or a ‘rogue nation’ for this atrocity and to help launch the United States into war against Israel’s enemies,” writes Pate. “[Israel’s motive] in launching the anthrax attacks would be to bring America into war against Iraq and to remove that country as a potential threat to…[Israel].” As noted earlier, Israeli intelligence contrived a false story to implicate Muslims where they claimed to have observed a meeting between an Iraqi official and alleged al-Qaeda ringleader Mohamed Atta in the Czech Republic in which an exchange of anthrax is said to have occurred. If Israel had nothing to do with the anthrax attacks, then why did they propagate lies with the intent to implicate Iraq and al-Qaeda? American authorities admit that no Muslim or Arab was involved in the anthrax mailings, so who else but Israel and corrupted Americans in the Bush administration could have been behind this obvious false flag?

It can be said without doubt that some members of the Bush administration had foreknowledge of the anthrax attacks. Press reports revealed that White House officials including Bush and Cheney went on a steady regimen of the drug known as Cipro, a powerful antibiotic effective against anthrax infection, weeks before the anthrax-trained letters were first discovered.

The theory that Israel and its accomplices in the Bush administration launched a biological false flag operation as a “second phase” of the overarching 9/11 deception is well within the realm of possibilities regarding 2001’s anthrax attacks in the US. It is certainly far more plausible than the FBI’s flimsy and still-unproven case against Bruce Ivins who conveniently died before any evidence could be aired in the courts.

But it would be foolish to place any hope on President Obama — a committed servant of the Israeli-American empire — to launch a new, independent investigation into any of these troubling matters.

Ronald L:. Waldron
February 25, 2014
Reply

THE GOP: ” THE ROBBING HOODS” Stealing from the poor and giving to the RICH.

Need we say more. They have blocked every bill that would benefit America & Americans and given all to foreign policies, and
foreign aid. They are attempting to take away all entitlements, including cutting Veterans benefits. WHO are their staffers,
advisers, and think tanks. All lobbies that pay, such as AIPAC. Pay for their campaigns, vacations, trips, and retirement funds.
Time for their retirement is NOW. Vote accordingly. Approval rating 9% and dropping.

GOP senators block jobs initiative, 13 are up for reelection. They should become unemployed with no extension.
(whores)
The HOUSE of HORRORS , selling their asses and ours. GOP filibuster, filibuster, and filibuster. Spend only for Israel, and
Global take over. WHAT B—, S—.THEY Follow their corrupt leader of the HOUSE.

GOP leads the corruption in Washington, DC. McConnell, Boehner, Cantor, Lankford, Bachmann, Perry, Ryan, McKinley,
McCain, Cornyn, Hatch, and Graham. They want more WAR profits, 19 Trillion in debt and climbing for us.

MORE than half of congress are millionaires, first time in our history. Are they representing us. H— NO.

R.L.W.

Ronald L:. Waldron
March 2, 2014
Reply

The GOP- Is Corruption, Greed & Lies and The Real Evil Empire: (THE ROB’IN HOODS–STEALING FROM THE POOR AND GIVING TO THE RICH) Part 2

Every working class person needs to VOTE against the right wing republican candidates for the next 20+ years!!

The 2014 and 2016 elections will be known as the MOST IMPORTANT for AMERICAN WORKERS in the history of middle class AMERICA.

Products made in CHINA are now more expensive to make and ship here, then if they were made here in the first place. Say nothing
about the unemployment, poverty, and TAX BURDEN it created here in America, or the quality of the products we get from China.

The Republican Party- Is Corruption, Greed & Lies and The Real Evil Empire:

American jobs were out-sourced by REPUBLICANS, and their corporate partners from 2000–2008. Two endless Wars fought under false
pretenses and false intelligence, false flag operations, and false religious propaganda, from Mossad, Israel, and the foreign lobby AIPAC.
I am trying to post only facts about the corruption and misdeeds of this party. When I define Republican Party I can only think of the words GREED, LIES, IMMORALITY, CORRUPTION, and THEFT of our economy for self-interest. More republican millionaires in office then at anytime
in American history.
Description
The Republican Party- I try to find factual evidence on the greed and corruptions of this party. I truly believe they are responsible for the downfall of our nation and that because of their greed we are at our lowest point since the great depression. Nothing is moral about this party and their method of operation is the same every time they’re in office. Tripling the deficit each time, lowering or… cutting taxes exclusively for the rich while spending like we weren’t making any tax cuts. Our infrastructure and the social programs that this country needs just because it is America and to help keep this economy going but yet they do the same thing every time while the Democratic Party comes up behind them with a broom to try to clean up the mess. I dare any republican to really look at our history since Reagan and educate yourself on what party has the biggest deficits vs which one tries to correct the problem. Look yourself to see what party is the most corrupt and ask yourself is that who we really want to see running our great country? Although they would like to portray themselves as the left hand of God him or herself which because of their actions makes them the biggest hypocrites of all and is completely the opposite of what any God would want us to do. When I think of the Republican Party the first two things I think of is the fall of this great country of ours because of them and then greed, hypocrisy is right behind. Breaking and Entering, corruption, lies is their method of operation. Almost every president who is Republican since their existence has raised the deficit while in office. Since Reagan they have tripled it every time! It’s been the same old story like a yo-yo that when a Democrat gets into office he has to take on the task of clearing that deficit up, dealing with the fact that Republicans think just by lowering taxes things in America will get better which that theory can only be supported by dreams of a Republican. You can’t have business as usual while you’re taking away money from those businesses. How do they run then and that is part of the Republicans plan to make the Democratic Party look bad but it is at the expense of our social programs and the greatness of our nation. They know the Democratic Party will have to raise taxes in order to get the country back to normal and to try to pay the deficit down once again and they play on that to make the Democrat Party look like the bad guy and it’s a vicious circle that just keeps going. Taxes are keeps our great country going and to the rich republican it shouldn’t mean much that such a small fraction of your precious money is going to better our country and to help our citizens but yet they cry if they have to pay that fair share. For some reason they think that by not raising taxes it will appease Americans all the while our country is falling apart? Come on now it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure that out or to see it. But they will lie to you and try to tell you they never raised the deficit it’s all the Democratic Parties fault. Remember part of Reagan’s platform was to take care of the deficit before he got out of office, well, he took care of it alright, and he was the first president who tripled the deficit.Please if you have any information on any corruption within the Republican Party please message me or write me at Ben Scharf, 917 Ontario, Port Huron, Michigan. 48060. Lets get on the right track again and push corruption and The Republican Party out for good! We need to think of this country in the terms of what it will be like not just for us and what we can get out of it while we’re on this planet but for our great, great, great, great grandchildren and theirs.

THINK, what would another WAR they are pushing for with IRAN do to what is left of American values, and reputation around the WORLD.
It now has been so tainted by such incompetence , and disrespect for our own Country and people. LOOK AT OUR VETERANS AND TREATMENT FOR EXAMPLE.

GET OUT AND VOTE AGAINST THEM. YOUNG OR OLD; POOR OR MAKING IT; SICK OR HEALTHY; CHRISTIAN, JEWISH, MUSLIM, OR ANY OTHER BELIEF; BLACK, YELLOW, BROWN, RED, WHITE,OR ANY MIXTURE; WORKING, UNEMPLOYED,DISABLED, OR RETIRED; GAY, STRAIGHT, OR BI;
FEMALE OR MALE; FIGHT FOR YOURSELF, FAMILY, FRIENDS, NEIGHBORS, AND OUR CONSTITUTION; REGISTER AND VOTE.
STANDING TOGETHER MAKES A DIFFERENCE.

THANK YOU FOR YOUR COURTESY READING THIS CORRESPONDENCE ;

Ronald L. Waldron (I’m proud to be a red blooded American, PRESENTLY able to exercise the right of the 1St. Amendment)

QUESTION FOR EACH OF YOU: WHO OWNS THE MEDIA YOU LISTEN TO? (THE SAME FOR EVERY ONE)

Ronald L. Waldron
March 4, 2014
Reply

Is Peace With Israel Now Possible?

Only with John McCain’s Bomb, Bomb, Bomb, blow them to
Kingdom Hell.

President Obama has raised questions about the effectiveness of AIPAC’s tactics and even its role as the unchallenged voice of the pro-Israel lobby in Washington. If AIPAC can lose on Syria and lose on Iran, could it also lose on Israel-Palestine?

On February 3, 2014, The New York Times ran an article that would have been hard to imagine just a few years ago. Under the headline “Potent Pro-Israel Group Finds Its Momentum Blunted,” The Times’ Mark Landler reported that the American Israel Public Affairs Committee’s top legislative priority, a Senate bill to cripple US diplomacy with Iran, had stalled after stiff resistance from President Obama, J Street and mobilized public opinion deeply wary of efforts to gin up another Middle East war. Landler concluded from this political development that the reach of AIPAC’s political power, long an unquestioned assumption in Washington, is now in doubt.

In doing so, the president has raised questions about the effectiveness of AIPAC’s tactics and even its role as the unchallenged voice of the pro-Israel lobby in Washington.

Landler reported that 70 House Democrats have backed a letter supporting Obama’s diplomacy with Iran (you can urge your representative to join that effort here) and that former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also has strongly backed Obama’s Iran diplomacy and opposed AIPAC’s efforts to undermine it.

Strikingly, The Times cited Sen. Christopher Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut, as embodying a trend of lawmakers who are “not worried about bucking AIPAC.” Indeed, Murphy has gone so far as to co-sponsor a petition with MoveOn calling on the Senate to reject AIPAC’s position.

Lander noted that AIPAC’s problems “go beyond Iran,” citing AIPAC’s failed push for war in Syria:

In September, it threw an army of lobbyists behind an effort to win a congressional mandate for Mr. Obama’s threatened military strike on Syria. Facing certain failure in Congress, the president pulled the plug on the effort.

If AIPAC can lose on Syria and lose on Iran, this raises a spectacular question: Could AIPAC also lose on Israel-Palestine?

Secretary of State John Kerry recently infuriated Israeli officials by making the following statement at the Munich Security Conference about threats to boycott, sanction and divest from the Israeli occupation:

Today’s status quo absolutely, to a certainty, I promise you 100 percent, cannot be maintained. It’s not sustainable. It’s illusionary. … You see for Israel, there’s an increasing delegitimization campaign that has been building up. People are very sensitive to it. There are talks of boycotts and other kinds of things.

What Kerry said about “boycott” has become the new normal for the Obama administration and many liberal American Jews who support the two-state solution. The rap goes roughly like this: “Personally, we, the ‘good cop,’ oppose boycotting the Israeli occupation. But if the Israeli government won’t cooperate with US peace efforts, then we won’t be able to stop those ‘bad cop’ boycott people from increasing the Israeli government’s international isolation.” This drives the AIPAC supporters, to whom the idea of any pressure whatsoever on the Israeli government to comply with US policy is totally anathema, absolutely wild. But it’s hard to see what they can really do about it besides helplessly complain.

The administration and its supporters are just saying that the sky is blue. Is AIPAC going to demand that Congress make the administration do more to stop people from boycotting the Israeli occupation

? It’s one thing to insist that the US government mustn’t apply any pressure on the Israeli government to comply with US policy. It would be quite another thing to demand that the Congress require the administration to apply more pressure on other governments and institutions to stop them from applying pressure on the Israeli government to comply with US policy. Who could call for that with a straight face?

Speaking as one of the “bad cops,” I find the rap of the “anti-boycott” good cops kind of funny, in a good way. The official policy of the “good cops” is to denounce me and my friends. But the more we succeed in our efforts, the stronger their case. I guess, in this instance, denunciation is the sincerest form of flattery.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 10, 2014
Reply

Press Release
27 January 2014
Holocaust Conference, Auschwitz
Anti-Zionist Rabbis Call Israeli Ceremony at Auschwitz an Affront to the Memory of the Victims

January 28, 2014 – Berlin

Orthodox Rabbis, holocaust survivors and descendents of survivors, held a press conference in Berlin yesterday in response to a memorial ceremony, held at Auschwitz by 69 Israeli politicians, who warned of rising anti-Semitism in Europe.

The Rabbis found it repugnant that the State of Israel, whose founders refused to rescue Jews while the Holocaust was happening, should be commemorating the Holocaust.

“We survived by hiding in a bunker in Budapest during the Holocaust,” said Rabbi Moshe Dov Beck, 79. “It is well known that the Zionist policy during the Holocaust was that only Jewish bloodshed on a massive scale could help them achieve their state after the war, as a gift from the guilt ridden and sympathetic victors. They provoked anti-Semitism and sabotaged rescue efforts, all for their political goal.”

“As for today’s anti-Semitism, the Israelis complaining is duplicitous, because the existence of the Israeli State and it’s atrocities is largely the cause. And of course it is obvious, that they reap the benefits – more world anti-Semitism, more Jews immigrate to their state”, said Rabbi Dovid Feldman.

“The Zionists want the world to believe that they represent world Jewry and Judaism, that is false,” said Rabbi Yisroel Dovid Weiss. “They accuse everyone who criticizes their vile actions of anti-Semitism, that is also a lie. Unfortunately there are those who hate all Jews because they consider Judaism and Zionism one and the same. Thus Zionists bring danger upon Jews and then they present themselves as the saviors of the Jewish people.”

“The Torah teaches that Jews are in exile by a Devine decree. Jews are required to respect the nations amongst whom they live. The Torah forbids Jews to have their own state. Jews accept the Almighty’s decree and wait patiently for His redemption, without any human intervention. It goes without saying that Jews are forbidden to steal land, kill or expel anyone. Precisely because we experienced the Holocaust, we must learn tolerance and respect for others – not use our suffering as an excuse to oppress others.”

“Subsequently, this Zionist ceremony is nothing less than a brutal affront to the memory of those who perished in the Holocaust.”

For related articles click ———–

The Tragic Irony
NKUSA Delegation to Attend Conference
statement signed by dozens of anti-Zionist Holocaust survivors
Speech by Rabbi Moshe Dov Beck
Speech by Rabbi Yisroel Dovid Weiss
Speech by Rabbi Dovid Feldman
Ten Questions to the Zionists
Zionist Quotes
Knesset Delegation to Auschwitz
You Tube Video below:

Press Conference
Press Conference
Speech at Berlin
Speech at Berlin Holocaust Memorial

Powered by Translate
Click to view list of recent events

Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Facebook Follow us on YouTube
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS AVAILABLE FROM
NETUREI KARTA
TRANSLATE THIS PAGE TO ARABIC
DOCUMENTS IN
OTHER LANGUAGES
Русский
Italiano
Español
Deutsch
Français
PERSIAN
TURKISH
Neturei Karta Russia
Send this page
PRINTING INSTRUCTIONS

To print a picture, RIGHT click on the image then select PRINT PICTURE.
To print a Page, Click FILE then PRINT.
Contact
Neturei Karta
E-Mail Us

Ronald L. Waldron
March 11, 2014
Reply

JEWS NOT ZIONISTS—JEWS OPPOSE ZIONISM

A partial listing of some well-known Orthodox Jewish anti-Zionist groups:

Bene Yoel
Breslov
Brisk
Hazon Ish
Kasho
Krasna
Kretcheniff
Malochim
Munkach
Neturei Karta
Nitra
Pupa
Satmar
Skullene
Slonim (Weinberg)
Toldoth Aharon
Toldoth Avrohom Yitzchok
Tosh
Wiznitz Hassidic sect based in Monsey, NY

A partial listing of some well-known Orthodox Jewish anti-Zionist organizations:

Edah HaCharedith lekol Makhelot Ha’Ashkenazim
Rabbinical High Court for all Ashkenazic communities, Jerusalem

Edah HaCharedith HaSefaradit, Sefaradic Rabbinical High Court, Jerusalem

Hisachduth HaRabbonim DeArtzos HaBris VeKanada – Central Rabbinical Congress of the United States and Canada (CRC)

Yeshivath Ahavath Shalom

A partial listing of some well-known contemporary anti-Zionist Orthodox rabbis:

HaGaon Rav Koppelman – Dean, Talmudical Academy, Lucerne

HaGaon Reb Avruhom Leitner, Spiritual Leader, Chief Rabbi and Dean of Congregation and Yeshivah Binyan Duvid, Brooklyn, NY

HaGaon Reb Yecheskel Roth, formerly Chief Rabbi of Karlesberg, and currently Chief Rabbi of Cong. Yirei Hashem and Dean of the esteemed Rabbinical Judicial Academy for the Advanced, Beth Midrash Le’Horu’eh, Brooklyn NY (Rabbi Roth is (unofficially, however) considered by many as Chief Rabbi and Rabbinic Judge of Boro Park, Brooklyn

A partial listing of some well-known contemporary anti-Zionist Hassidic Leaders:

the Toldos Aharon Rebbe, Grand Rabbi Duvid Kohn

the Toldos Avrohom Yitzchok Rebbe, Grand Rabbi Shmuel Yaakov Kohn

the Munkatcher Rav Shlit”a – Grand Rabbi Moshe Leib Rabinowitz, leader of the international Munkacs Hassidic movement based in Brooklyn NY

A partial listing of some well-known Orthodox anti-Zionist rabbis of past generations:

His Holiness Sidna Baba Sali – ADMoR HaHaham Hakadosh Rabi Yisrael Abu Hasera

Rabbi Elchonon Wasserman

the Brisker Rav, HaGaon Reb Cahyim Soloveitchik

the Brisker Rav, HaGaon Reb Velvel Soloveitchik

the Brisker Rav, Hagaon Reb Moshe Yehudah Leib Diskin

the Chief Rabbi of Jerusalem, HaGaon Reb Yoseph Chayim Sonnenfeld

What Rabbis Have Said in Previous Generations

It would be out of the question to publish all the utterances of Gedolei Yisroel [Torah authorities] during the last century, the period of the emergence of Zionism on the Jewish horizon, because all the Gedolei Yisroel sternly opposed the movement aimed at undermining the Jewish religion and the Jewish essence

[The Torah] forbids us to strive for the reunion or possession of the land by any but spiritual means
Rabbi S. R. Hirsch

Not via our desire did we leave the land of Israel, and not via our power will we come back to the land of Israel.
Rabbi S.D. Schneerson

[Zionists] want a state in order to make Jews into heretics.
Rabbi C. Soloveichik

The Zionists have attacked the center point of Judaism.
Rabbi V. Soloveichik

The root of Zionism is heresy and its branches can hardly be otherwise.

Rabbis over the past Decades Opposing Zionism
Page not found
The requested page “/rabbi_quotes/index.cfm” could not be found.

True Torah Jews
183 Wilson Street,
PMB 162,
Brooklyn, NY 11211
info@truetorahjews.org

What you will not hear from the Zionist owned media, AIPAC,
J-Street, or the Zionist controlled American ? congress.

Rabbi Speak Out

The Rabbis Speak Out

The 100 year record of religious Jewish opposition to Zionism.

READ FREE ONLINE! The Rabbis Speak Out or purchase a paperback copy. ($12.00)
What the Republican Party has/is about ZIONISM!!

Ronald L. Waldron
March 16, 2014
Reply

Latest by Brad Plumer

Ordinary Americans want to cut defense spending far more than is already on the table,

Sequester or no sequester, the 2011 Budget Control Act is expected to rein in the Pentagon’s base budget over the next decade:

Back in May, the Stimson Center unveiled the results of a new survey asking U.S. voters about their views on defense spending. As it turns out, Democratic, Republican and independent voters all want to cut military spending far more severely than the sequester would and far, far more severely than either party has proposed. Congress isn’t likely to pay much attention here, but it’s a reminder that defense cuts tend to be extremely popular.

* Correction: We replaced the original graph in #6 with a better chart from the Congressional Budget Office, which shows military spending shrinking over the next decade under the 2011 Budget Control Act (after adjusting for inflation), not growing as originally stated. Apologies for the error.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 17, 2014
Reply

Israel Is No Ally:

By Philip Giraldi • March 13, 2014

Inside the beltway types and the media constantly refer to Israel as an ally, which it is not. Israeli soldiers have never fought beside American troops and to be an ally you need an actual alliance on paper. No such legally binding document exists between Washington and Tel Aviv. Sycophants in congress are also fond of calling Israel Washington’s best or closest friend in spite of the fact that it does actual damage to the United States through using its considerable access to the government and media to promote policies that are good neither for the US nor for Israel itself. Recalling the expression that a friend does not let a friend drive drunk, one might observe that the United States has been driving drunk for quite some time, dangerous behavior that has to some extent been encouraged by Israel and its many supporters in Washington.

Israel might or might not have been an actual enabler of the disastrous American invasion of Iraq but it is undeniably true that the Pentagon officials who contributed to the “Clean Break” recommendations prepared for Benjamin Netanyahu in 1996 were subsequently behind the rush to war and the forgery of phony intelligence that fed the process. And Iran is Iraq redux. If the Washington goes to war with Tehran in the near future it will not be because Iranians actually threaten America, it will be because Israel and its powerful lobby in the US have succeeded in creating an essentially false casus belli to bring about such action.

Phil Giraldi: Is a former CIA Case Officer and Army Intelligence Officer who spent twenty years overseas in Europe and the Middle East working terrorism cases. He holds a BA with honors from the University of Chicago and an MA and PhD in Modern History from the University of London. In addition to TAC, where he has been a contributing editor for nine years, he writes regularly for Antiwar.com. He is currently Executive Director of the Council for the National Interest .
Congress Must Not Cede Its War Power to Israel

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who once commented that 9/11 was good for Israel, has repeatedly sought to commit the United States to draw red lines that would narrow options for the White House and de facto require it to take military action against Iran. Congress is meanwhile advancing legislation that would commit the United States to intervene militarily in support of a unilateral Israeli attack, meaning that Israel could easily be empowered to make the decision on whether or not the US goes to war.

Nothing relating to Israel is quite like how the US interacts with other countries. Direct grants, forgiveness of loans, charitable exemptions, and Pentagon co-production schemes all contribute to the dollar costs that go to support Israel, measures that are not in place for any other nation. Congress also recently approved by a 410 to 1 vote the United States Israel Strategic Partnership Act which grants to Israel an exemption from the reciprocity mandated by the so-called visa waiver program. Israelis will be able to travel freely to the United States while their government will be allowed to refuse entry to American citizens, a privilege granted to no other visa waiver country. One congressman has even introduced a bill to cut off federal funding for any academic organization that engages in boycotting Israel. Boycotting other countries is apparently okay.

Israel involves itself in American elections, most recently on behalf of Mitt Romney, it has corrupted our congress, its head of government publicly humiliates our own head of state, its government ministers insult and ridicule John Kerry, and its intelligence officers actually provide alarmist and inaccurate private briefings for American Senators on Capitol Hill. No other country interferes in our system in as many ways as Israel.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 19, 2014
Reply

Friends & (American people)

Big news – later today the party formerly know as the GOP is going to vote on a bill that would shut down the government if we don’t bow down to their demand of defunding Obamacare. The bottom line is that this would be a disaster for our country and it would be for one simple purpose – so the Tea Party can claim victory on something they’ve tried over 40 times to repeal.

With only 10 days between the vote and the deadline to keep the government open we have to find a solution. Each minute we delay is one minute closer we are to economic disaster.

We need rapid Response before the vote happens
call, write, scream, or demonstrate, NOW!!

Students, student unions, unions, the unemployed,
the workers of America, Seniors, and the retired.
ALL American voters.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 19, 2014
Reply

The Most Corrupt Members of Congress:

WASHINGTON — A good-government group has cited Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell, of Kentucky, as one of the 26 most corrupt members of Congress, chiding the veteran lawmaker for directing federal funds toward political friends.

The report, The Most Corrupt Members of Congress: Unfinished Business,” was done by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Government (CREW), a nonprofit organized, it says, to promote ethics and accountability in government.

The group said McConnell merits criticism for earmarks inserted into legislation for clients of his former chief of staff, Hunter Bates, in exchange for campaign contributions and for the misuse of his own nonprofit organization, the McConnell Center for Political Leadership at the University of Louisville.

“If as it appears, Sen. McConnell accepted to his campaign and political action committees in direct exchange for earmarking federal funds to clients of Bates Capitol, he may have violated the bribery statute,” the group said.

“Similarly, if he provided legislative assistance in return for contributions to the McConnell Center he may have violated the bribery statute,” it said.

CREW, which released the report last week, describes itself as a non-partisan organization that works to force public officials to act ethically and lawfully and to bring unethical conduct to the public’s attention.

The report marks the fourth consecutive year McConnell has been identified as among the most corrupt members of congress by CREW. No other lawmaker with area ties was cited.

Of the 26 lawmakers cited, 16 are Republicans and 10 are Democrats. The group was founded and is being run by Melanie Sloan who once worked for Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee.

Bates received $320,000 from UPS for lobbying services as of the end of 2006. The UPS PAC contributed $10,000 to the McConnell Senate Committee in 2004 and 2005 and sent $400,000 to the McConnell Center.

VOTE HIM OUT!!

Ronald L. Waldron
March 23, 2014
Reply

My server has now blocked me from sending or receiving E-mail.
Sent mail returned as being undeliverable. Incoming is bounced
back.as full box. It is full of bounced E-mail that I can not delete.

Example follows:

A message was sent to you that was returned to the sender(bounced)
because it would have caused your mailbox quota to be exceeded.

The following is the reason that the message was over quota:

Quota Type: number of messages
Quota Available: 0
Total Quota: 10000

The following is the information on the message that was bounced:

Sender: “=?utf-8?Q?SpeedyBackup?=”
Subject: =?utf-8?Q?Ronald=20L.=20Waldron,=20a=20personal=20offer?=
Size: 7374
Message ID:
Date: Sat Mar 22 20:03:15 2014

Reply-To: newsletters@paretologic.com

The message was bounced from the following folder:

INBOX (amount of E-mail in my inbox 3212, not near 10000)

To fix this problem, delete some messages from your mailbox, and contact
the sender to resend the message.

If the size of the message is too big, contact the sender to reduce the
size of the message and resend the message.

I call server, nothing done to correct problem. What was done lasted about
two minutes.

Those of you who can, please pick-up where I left off. Thanks, RLW

Criticize Zionism, Israel, AIPAC, Mossad, USA Congress, and corruption,& occupations.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 23, 2014
Reply

President Jimmy Carter’s Values, Integrity, & Ethics.

Values, Integrity & Ethics with-in our congress,
religious leaders, higher education Institutions
of today have become as much a thing of the past as dinosaurs .

President Carter is one of the greatest presidents
we will ever have as a leader. President Carter and our First Lady of the time, Rosalynn Carter were and are still the number one example of proper human behavior, and activists for PEACE and Human rights for all man kind.

The voters, and Democrats would do well to listen to President Carter, and to read his books,
Regarding Israel/Palestine and PEACE.

Republicans always are ready to go to, or create a
reason to go to WAR.(Regardless of cost in lives of our sons & Daughters, or lost of resources).

Always spending for the benefit of special foreign
interest, or the very rich contributors to their
campaigns.

PLEASE assist in getting such messages out there,
I’m unable to do. Due to the CENSORSHIP I experience.

We all would be better off if the Republican Party
becomes another DINOSAUR of the past. Along
with their corruption, arrogance and arrogant
Zionist allies. (Remember the LIES & DECEPTIONS of
the PAST –2000-2008 most recent)

Ronald L. Waldron
March 30, 2014
Reply

Censorship:
Censorship I have experienced for a long time now. E-mail, Books, advertising, and postings.
Servers shutting me down on several occasions.
Bell-South: 2000-2003. Waynesville, NC 28786
Alltel: 2003-2005 Jamestown, NY 14701
Time Warner Road Runner: 2005-2009 Jamestown, NY 14701
Windstream :2009–Present Jamestown, NY 14701

Publishers:
AuthorHouse: 2009–Present No promotions as contracted. (Political content)
LuLu.com: 2010–present. No promotions as contracted.
Cambridge Who’s Who: Removed me from international publication. No promotion by
Congress. org.
Donald Trump Jr’s company and international promotion as
promised.
.
I posted at least 800 postings (Political to congress)
Paid $5.85 each at first. Then raised to $8.85 ea, I Paid.
Then the rules changed, could only post free, but to the
congress person from your Zip code area.

Then I wrote to each Senators & Congress [persons E-mail. Then the E-mail changed
and were no longer listed. Did not want to hear from the Public. Only their special
interest groups (With money attached.)

Then to media across the country, no response. Just blocked me out.
How-ever I was successful with alternative & foreign media sources.

International organizations always accepted and responded to my E-mails.

Peace organizations & minority Groups, always have responded.

Then my out going E-mails registered as sent, but were dropped into a hidden delete box.

I used web page forms, replies were then dropped into a hidden drop box.

Now, all I send out is returned undeliverable. Incoming is bounced/with notice in my
E-mail that MY inbox was full and E-mail to me was bounced. Still that way on
windstream.

Now pages I’m working on disappear. A computer tech checked my phone and computer
to find that my phone has been monitored, and a hidden remote was connected to my
computer with complete control over it. We believe that is a government operation.

My name, address , phone number is listed with all. I have been here for any questions at any time,
or if any was of concern regarding any security issues, I have been available to talk to
about it.

I have been visited by 2 secret service agents, with what seemed to be a Mossad agent with
them. It was regarding an E-mail I forwarded. A threat against our President Obama from the
Israeli PM, Benjamin Netanyahu and Mossad chief.

They couldn’t rationalize that it was a forwarded E-mail sent to me from Israel.

They only grunted in disguised actions, when I stated I had also been threatened on occasions.

Google: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. Google: Ronald L. Waldron

Google: http://WWW.universal-peace.com

The real national security issues: Treason by congress. Republicans and Zionism

Ronald L. Waldron
March 30, 2014
Reply

Oversight. Our rights and liberties have undergone constant erosion since 9/11.

A constant stream of revolutionary new technologies erode existing protections, and greatly expanded powers for our security agencies allow the government to peer into our lives without due process or meaningful oversight. Our rights and liberties have undergone constant erosion since 9/11.

More than a decade later, the websites we browse are tracked, our cell phones log our movements, our Internet communications are being read and stored, and the NSA collects records of all of our calls. Things we once thought could only happen in far-away enemy states or distant dystopias are suddenly happening here in America. Sadly, it is no longer so hard to imagine a world straight out of the mind of Philip K. Dick, with personally-tailored advertisements that follow us online, or maybe even pre-crime predictors that turn us all into suspects when we haven’t done anything wrong.

Protecting Civil Liberties in the Digital Age

Visit http://www.dotRights.org to find out more about how what you do online is (and isn’t) protected >>

The fact is, privacy laws have failed to keep up with emerging technologies. The goal of the Protecting Civil Liberties in the Digital Age initiative is to ensure that expressive, associational, and privacy rights are strengthened rather than compromised by new technology, and to protect these core democratic rights against intrusive corporate and government practices that rely on new technology to invade these rights.

Additional Resources

Time to Rein in the Surveillance State: Recent disclosures have shown that the government is regularly tracking all of the calls of almost every ordinary American and spying on a vast but unknown number of Americans’ international calls, text messages, and emails. The ACLU has been at the forefront of the struggle to rein in the surveillance superstructure, which strikes at the core of our rights to privacy, free speech, and association.

You Are Being Tracked: A little noticed surveillance technology, designed to track the movements of every passing driver, is fast proliferating on America’s streets. Automatic license plate readers, mounted on police cars or on objects like road signs and bridges, use small, high-speed cameras to photograph thousands of plates per minute. An ACLU report, based on thousands of pages of documents we received in response to coordinated, nationwide public records requests, reveals how your movements are being tracked.

Modernizing the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA): Since 1986, technology has advanced at breakneck speed while electronic privacy law remained at a standstill. The outdated Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) allows the government to intercept and access a treasure trove of information about who you are, where you go, and what you do, which is being collected by cell phone providers, search engines, social networking sites, and other websites every day.

Free Future: The ACLU blog Free Future provides news and analysis relating to civil liberties in the digital age.

Cell Phone Location Tracking Public Records Request: In a massive coordinated information-seeking campaign, 34 ACLU affiliates filed over 375 requests in 31 states across the country with local law enforcement agencies large and small that seek to uncover when, why and how they are using cell phone location data to track Americans. What we learned was disturbing.

Allen D. Post
April 3, 2014
Reply

WARNING OF FOUR YEARS AGO. WHERE ARE WE NOW WITH HEROIN IN USA? SAD STATE OF AFFAIRS!!

POSTED ON: FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD.

Ronald L. Waldron says:
January 5, 2010 at 12:21 pm

SHOULD WE TRUST ANYONE IN GOVERNMENT??

Total Contractors, aka Mercenaries, Will be 130,000 to 160,000, in Afghanistan :

They secured the Oil fields of Iraq, now
they will secure the poppy fields of
Afghanistan all for the Organized Crime
syndicate that is controlling much of
our government today.

Where are the companions of the China
cocaine deal presently??

Wouldn’t we destroy the fields other wise??
Do we trust any official this day and age??
Afghanistan now supplies over 90 percent of the world’s heroin, generating nearly $200 billion in revenue. Since the U.S. invasion on Oct. 7, 2001, opium output has increased 33-fold (to over 8,250 metric tons a year).
The U.S. has been in Afghanistan for over seven years, has spent $177 billion in that country alone, and has the most powerful and technologically advanced military on Earth. GPS tracking devices can locate any spot imaginable by simply pushing a few buttons.
Still, bumper crops keep flourishing year after year, even though heroin production is a laborious, intricate process. The poppies must be planted, grown and harvested; then after the morphine is extracted it has to be cooked, refined, packaged into bricks and transported from rural locales across national borders. To make heroin from morphine requires another 12-14 hours of laborious chemical reactions. Thousands of people are involved, yet—despite the massive resources at our disposal—heroin keeps flowing at record levels.

Common sense suggests that such prolific trade over an extended period of time is no accident, especially when the history of what has transpired in that region is considered. While the CIA ran its operations during the Vietnam War, the Golden Triangle supplied the world with most of its heroin. After that war ended in 1975, an intriguing event took place in 1979 when Zbigniew Brzezinski covertly manipulated the Soviet Union into invading Afghanistan.

Behind the scenes, the CIA, along with Pakistan’s ISI, were secretly funding Afghanistan’s mujahideen to fight their Russian foes. Prior to this war, opium production in Afghanistan was minimal. But according to historian Alfred McCoy, an expert on the subject, a shift in focus took place. “Within two years of the onslaught of the CIA operation in Afghanistan, the Pakistan-Afghanistan borderlands became the world’s top heroin producer.”

Soon, as Professor Michel Chossudovsky notes, “CIA assets again controlled the heroin trade. As the mujahideen guerrillas seized territory inside Afghanistan, they ordered peasants to plant poppies as a revolutionary tax. Across the border in Pakistan, Afghan leaders and local syndicates under the protection of Pakistan intelligence operated hundreds of heroin laboratories.”

Eventually, the Soviet Union was defeated (their version of Vietnam), and ultimately lost the Cold War. The aftermath, however, proved to be an entirely new can of worms. During his research, McCoy discovered that “the CIA supported various Afghan drug lords, for instance Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The CIA did not handle heroin, but it did provide its drug lord allies with transport, arms, and political protection.”

By 1994, a new force emerged in the region—the Taliban—that took over the drug trade. Chossudovsky again discovered that “the Americans had secretly, and through the Pakistanis [specifically the ISI], supported the Taliban’s assumption of power.”

These strange bedfellows endured a rocky relationship until July 2000 when Taliban leaders banned the planting of poppies. This alarming development, along with other disagreements over proposed oil pipelines through Eurasia, posed a serious problem for power centers in the West. Without heroin money at their disposal, billions of dollars could not be funneled into various CIA black budget projects. Already sensing trouble in this volatile region, 18 influential neo-cons signed a letter in 1998 which became a blueprint for war—the infamous Project for a New American Century (PNAC).

Fifteen days after 9-11, CIA Director George Tenet sent his top-secret Special Operations Group (SOG) into Afghanistan. One of the biggest revelations in Tenet’s book, At the Center of the Storm, was that CIA forces directed the Afghanistan invasion, not the Pentagon.

Please remember my friend. Ron Waldron

Allen D. Post
April 4, 2014
Reply

Jewish Russian, American organized crime syndicate

Arnold Rothstein was the founding father of American organized crime. He was murdered in 1928. He left a legend and a myth and also a tribe of notorious “boys”: Louis Lepke Buchalter, the first builder of an empire of crimes which produced in 1940 around $2 million a year, Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegal, Dutch Schultz, Abraham Twist Kid Reles, Pep Strauss, Mendy Weiss, Gurrah Shapiro, Red Levine and many others.

They were Jews, criminals and murderers. They also did not hesitate to murder other Jews who dared to challenge them in the underworld. They left a “legacy” to be followed by the Italian “disciples” of Rothstein: Lucky Luciano, Joe Adonis, Louis Capone, Albert Anastasia and many others.

Cohen is an excellent writer and a superb story teller. He conducted research of his own and produced a fascinating account of the life of these criminal Jews. His book: “Tough Jews, Fathers, Sons and Gangsters” (Simon and Schuster, 1998, New York) will stir debate about the “contribution” of Jews to America.

First: Jews do not tend to be only white collar kind of criminals. They can be cruel murderers.

Second, Jews invented organized crime.

Third, Jews were the first ones to describe themselves as businessmen. They turned the crime into business and they built a network of crimes: gambling, prostitution, smuggling, extortion and protection money.

Fourth, sad to say they were the first drug dealers in America, and remain the number one source of hard drugs.

Fifth, they were often “good Jews”. They went to synagogue and they defended Jews against American Nazis and anti-Semites. Now being heavily involved with AIPAC and American government. Hollywood, Vegas, and Media being legal enterprises. Wall Street and Banking being their most recent take overs of free enterprise. Campaign funding of congress yields billions.

These Jews grew up in the Jewish ghettos of America and especially in Brooklyn or Brownsville. As a special tribe, Cohen illuminated, they disappear. Why? Because they sent their children to the colleges, rather than to the streets. The Italians were the ones to develop families or dynasties of organized crime. But it looks as if the Jews taught them the secret art of organized crime.

This is a list of known Jewish-American mobsters and organized crime figures, ranging from the late 19th century to the present day.

Hyman Abrams-Boston. Evsei Agron (died May 1985)-Russian. Israel “Ice pick Willie” Alderman, Hyman Amberg–David Berman nicknamed “Davie the Jew”, Herman “Hyman” Amberg, Morris Kessler, Louis “Pretty” Amberg, Harry Horowitz,

Moses “Moe” Louis Annenberg (February 11, 1877 – July 20, 1942) was a Jewish American newspaper publisher, who purchased The Philadelphia Inquirer, the third-oldest surviving daily newspaper in the United States.[1] in 1936. The Inquirer has the sixteenth largest average weekday U.S. newspaper circulation, and has won eighteen Pulitzer Prizes.[2]

Many more are considered made & apart there of but the list is 96 pages long, thus will not be listed at this time.

Look the list up at: List of Jewish American mobsters–From Wikipdeia, the free encyclopedia

Allen D. Post
April 5, 2014
Reply

SECRET SURVEILLANCE:

Big Brother is watching you, not only from the US and Britain but also from Israel.

Did you know that the Internet giants who said to you, “Trust us, we will never betray your secrets to anyone!” have deceived you and let you down? Did you know that Google has betrayed you to Big Brother? That Microsoft has betrayed you, that Facebook and Apple have betrayed you, that AT&T and Verizon have betrayed you?

All your emails—past, present and future—are there for someone to read. Every day the NSA records trillions of emails and phone calls. Your calls are not only being recorded but sophisticated voice recognition devices enable some geek in a cubicle to pluck your voice out of a million other similar-sounding voices. Your online chats, your calls over Google Voice, Skype, and other voice-over-internet systems, are all on record. Every website you visit, someone knows you’ve been there and how long you’ve lingered on each item.

This is bad enough, but it gets worse.

Not only do the spooks in Utah (NSA) and the spooks in Cheltenham, England (GCHQ), have their tabs on internet users at all times.

Big Brother is watching you, not only from the US and Britain but also from Israel.

Did you know that Israeli security and surveillance company, Verint Systems, has for years had back-door access to all the traffic passing through Verizon? This means that anyone who uses Verizon to access the internet your viewing history is automatically transmitted to Israel.

Snowden told the Guardian recently. “They [GCHQ] are worse than the US.” By ‘worse’ he means better at invading the privacy of people, without any moral qualms or legal constraints.

It is also rumored that the Pentagon is talking about relocating our military command post from Tampa, Florida, to Israel. That a hugh
electronic facility is being build now.

Out of the vast “haystack” of data, it is necessary only to find the “needles”. The government keeps telling us they are not interested in the minnows, only the sharks and the terrorists. Have we been lied to before. Better yet, do we ever hear the truth or see transparency?

Look-up the fourteen characteristics of fascism. Your government is preparing to abandon you, or have they already? Democracy has
already become a thing of the past. YOU just haven’t paid attention enough to it. “YET”!!

Ronald L. Waldron
April 7, 2014
Reply

Jewish Russian, American organized crime syndicate

Arnold Rothstein was the founding father of American organized crime. He was murdered in 1928. He left a legend and a myth and also a tribe of notorious “boys”: Louis Lepke Buchalter, the first builder of an empire of crimes which produced in 1940 around $2 million a year, Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegal, Dutch Schultz, Abraham Twist Kid Reles, Pep Strauss, Mendy Weiss, Gurrah Shapiro, Red Levine and many others.

They were Jews, criminals and murderers. They also did not hesitate to murder other Jews who dared to challenge them in the underworld. They left a “legacy” to be followed by the Italian “disciples” of Rothstein: Lucky Luciano, Joe Adonis, Louis Capone, Albert Anastasia and many others.

Cohen is an excellent writer and a superb story teller. He conducted research of his own and produced a fascinating account of the life of these criminal Jews. His book: “Tough Jews, Fathers, Sons and Gangsters” (Simon and Schuster, 1998, New York) will stir debate about the “contribution” of Jews to America.

First: Jews do not tend to be only white collar kind of criminals. They can be cruel murderers.

Second, Jews invented organized crime.

Third, Jews were the first ones to describe themselves as businessmen. They turned the crime into business and they built a network of crimes: gambling, prostitution, smuggling, extortion and protection money.

Fourth, sad to say they were the first drug dealers in America, and remain the number one source of hard drugs.

Fifth, they were often “good Jews”. They went to synagogue and they defended Jews against American Nazis and anti-Semites. Now being heavily involved with AIPAC and American government. Hollywood, Vegas, and Media being legal enterprises. Wall Street and Banking being their most recent take overs of free enterprise. Campaign funding of congress yields billions.

These Jews grew up in the Jewish ghettos of America and especially in Brooklyn or Brownsville. As a special tribe, Cohen illuminated, they disappear. Why? Because they sent their children to the colleges, rather than to the streets. The Italians were the ones to develop families or dynasties of organized crime. But it looks as if the Jews taught them the secret art of organized crime.

This is a list of known Jewish-American mobsters and organized crime figures, ranging from the late 19th century to the present day.

Hyman Abrams-Boston. Evsei Agron (died May 1985)-Russian. Israel “Ice pick Willie” Alderman, Hyman Amberg–David Berman nicknamed “Davie the Jew”, Herman “Hyman” Amberg, Morris Kessler, Louis “Pretty” Amberg, Harry Horowitz,

Moses “Moe” Louis Annenberg (February 11, 1877 – July 20, 1942) was a Jewish American newspaper publisher, who purchased The Philadelphia Inquirer, the third-oldest surviving daily newspaper in the United States in 1936. The Inquirer has the sixteenth largest average weekday U.S. newspaper circulation, and has won eighteen Pulitzer Prizes.

Many more are considered made & apart there of but the list is 96 pages long, thus will not be listed at this time.

Look the list up at: List of Jewish American mobsters–From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Apalachin Meeting was held at the home of mobster Joseph “Joe the Barber” Barbara in Apalachin, New York on November 14, 1957. The meeting was held to discuss topics including loansharking, narcotics trafficking and gambling along with dividing the illegal operations controlled by the late Albert Anastasia.
100 Members from the United States, Canada and Italy are thought to have been at this meeting. 60 arrest made, several convictions, all
over turned on appeal. Our elustreous

The first time in mob history that government became aware of a National Crime syndicate, A higher degree of leadership, The national
syndicate. A much higher degree of control of Crime Bosses. The Commission. President Kennedy, and Robert Kennedy became aware
of the Jewish involvement. The Russian Jewish Mafia, and Zionist rule, The connection to the Holocaust and return to Israel. Suspected
connection to Hitler and support for Killing of the Torah Jews. Who were opposed to return of Israel by force.
History-Kennedy refused to let Israel have nuclear war heads. Cuban missile crisis. Now Valachi testimony on crime war in 1963.
The Zionist assassinations of: first President John F. Kennedy, the witnesses on the conspiracy for DA Garrison, Robert Kennedy former
Attorney General, and Martin Luther King a friend of the Kennedy’s and civil rights leader. Activist against Drugs and proverty.
The Kennedy’s had taken a stand and created a WAR against poverty and organized crime .
Again history shows how Johnson gave into all for Israel, AIPAC already had a full head of steam, then becoming influential on congress
to today having clearly a dominate factor over the Republican Party, and a good share of Democrats.

Pay no taxes saving billions, for their millions invested in the Campaign funds of those supporting their causes completely.
It is up to us, the people of this great nation to stop the corruption, crimes, and treason by congress. Vote all Republicans
out of office, then the 30% of Democrats involved.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 13, 2014
Reply

+THE ELEPHANT has now become a DINOSAUR

No wonder Kentuckians are ready for new leadership in Washington.

We also know this is true politically in the other 49 states, along with
our anti-Zionist Jewish friends.

Last week, in the wake of Mitch’s unwavering support for tax breaks for companies that ship jobs overseas, the largest employer in Russell County, KY announced they’re shutting down and moving 600 jobs to Honduras. And just Monday, McConnell once again put partisanship before people by refusing to extend unemployment benefits, leaving thousands of Kentucky families without assistance to pay their bills or put food on the table.

Breaking new poll: Alison Lundergan Grimes leads Mitch McConnell, 45 to 44

The new poll is good news – but this race is going to be close all the way until Election Day, considering the amount of campaign funds being given to Mitch McConnell. All from special interest groups foreign & corporate lobbies with no interest for Kentucky.

It is very much a time for change, and a time to retire McConnell, not only Senator McConnell but the Party of corruption
& TREASON needs to go. THE ELEPHANT has now become a DINOSAUR.

BREAKING: House GOP Passes Paul Ryan’s Republican Budget

Ronald L. — It’s official: Moments ago, Speaker Boehner’s Tea Party House passed the most radical budget we’ve ever seen.
The middle-class costs in the Ryan Budget are swift and brutal. This budget takes $40 billion out of the pockets of students paying for college and ends the Medicare guarantee for seniors — then hands new tax cuts to millionaires. It’s a slap in the face to the middle class and a direct attack on President Obama’s agenda.

The next two elections are the most important in the history of the USA. VOTE, VOTE, VOTE. VOTE every Republican out of
office

readiness of sacrifice :

On 03/10/14 11:48 PM, Hanan —- wrote:
——————–
Dear Ronald, good morning to you.
I highly admire your courage, your message to the world is highly appreciated. I know it is very difficult task, the difficulties you faced and your readiness of sacrifice marks the real role of the writers and thinkers and the believers of justice.
All the support,
Hanan

On 03/06/14 3:32 PM, Ronald Waldron wrote:
——————–

lack of morality, ethics, & integrity

Corruption has led to complete failure of our government.

Why our congress has an approval rating of only 9%. They have relied on who they perceive as the worlds best trained intelligence agency. To train, give leadership to our agencies, and work with our military intelligence. That of course being Mossad’s take-over.

Next, how well they have been manipulated by lobbies, again the largest is the foreign lobby,AIPAC.
It not only shows the ignorance of elected officials, but the self-serving agendas of most.
It took just 50 years for our government to be taken over with out any resistance from Washington, DC. It just took money,
campaign funds, personal gifts, trips, vacations, and any other forms of gratuity. (Corruption & Treason against WE the people)

Prosecution of the criminals will not happen,the reason why not, corruption has a solid grip on all agencies including our Supreme Court.

Millions now given freely to campaigns , for Billions in reduced or no taxes to pay, None invested in infrastructure of America, or EPA rules, of FDA approval of products. Out-sourcing of jobs for slave foreign labor. Unfair trade agreements, unnecessary WARS.

No action against the atrocities committed, no one held accountable for their action or inaction. All for SPECIAL Foreign INTEREST .

The transparency is there folks, if you only would look for it. NOT the propaganda of our modern day MEDIA or Organized religion.

WE need to remove the criminals, and the polarized. Do not re-Elect anyone with over 8 years in office, we the voters will set the term limits ourselves if we have any sense.

No one should have a life time appointment to any position
that has a direct affect regarding our Constitution and its
application.

Congress has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house, Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, education, religious leaders, and now attempting
to control the internet. Thankfully we can communicate with
each other on the world wide web, the only means to expose
the lack of morality, ethics, & integrity in our governments.

BUT Now look at the killing of Journalist, the character assassinations , the false flag operations, and the SILENCED Truth.

________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Ron Wal
April 15, 2014
Reply

Hidden US-Israeli Military Agenda: “Break Syria into Pieces”

Of course not the first or last to be completely dismantled. This will continue for complete world dominance.

Tax and spend:

We certainly do not have fair taxation. The spending on Foreign AID , Foreign Defense, the inflated defense budget are things to cut.
The idea of World Bank, Globalization of economy, one government, sounds like fascism to most. A constitution will be developed
with-out democratic principles, what we have been accustom to will be gone, gone, GONE, you will miss it when its GONE!
Americans need to stop it all in their tracks now. Otherwise we will have to comply or die.

Divest from Israel, and all Zionist corruption.
Yet Washington doesn’t listen. It’s still business as usual inside the Beltway. Such foreign interest is fully supported by the Republican
Party. THE ELEPHANT has now become and shall remain a DINOSAUR

A timely article in the Jerusalem Post in June brought to the forefront the unspoken objective of US foreign policy, namely the breaking up of Syria as a sovereign nation state –along ethnic and religious lines– into several separate and “independent” political entities. The article also confirms the role of Israel in the process of political destabilization of Syria. The JP article is titled: “Veteran Kurdish politician calls on Israel to support the break-up of Syria.

One possible ”break-up scenario” pertaining to Syria, which constitutes a secular mufti-ethnic society, would be the formation of separate and “independent” Sunni, Alawite-Shiite, Kurdish and Druze states: “We need to break Syria into pieces,” Abbas said.

“The Syrian Kurdish dissident argued that a federal Syria, separated into four or five regions on an ethnic basis, would also serve as a natural “buffer” for Israel against both Sunni and Shi’ite Islamist forces.”

It is worth noting, in this regard, that the creation of a “Greater Kurdistan” has been envisaged for several years by the Pentagon as part of a broader “Plan for Redrawing the Middle East”.

The US and Israel have embarked on a military adventure, “a long war”, which threatens the future of humanity. US-NATO weapons of mass destruction are portrayed as instruments of peace. Mini-nukes are said to be “harmless to the surrounding civilian population”. Pre-emptive nuclear war is portrayed as a “humanitarian undertaking”.

While one can conceptualize the loss of life and destruction resulting from present-day wars including Iraq and Afghanistan, it is impossible to fully comprehend the devastation which might result from a Third World War, using “new technologies” and advanced weapons, until it occurs and becomes a reality. The international community has endorsed nuclear war in the name of world peace. “Making the world safer” is the justification for launching a military operation which could potentially result in a nuclear holocaust.

Nuclear war has become a MULTI-BILLION dollar undertaking, which fills the pockets of US defense contractors. What is at stake is the outright “privatization of nuclear war”.

The Pentagon’s global military design is one of world conquest. The military deployment of US-NATO forces is occurring in several regions of the world simultaneously.

. This profit-driven military agenda destroys human values and transforms people into unconscious zombies.

NEW BOOK FROM GLOBAL RESEARCH!
Towards a World War III Scenario: The Dangers of Nuclear War

Author: Michel Chossudovsky
ISBN Number: 978-0-9737147-5-3

“Professor Chossudovsky’s hard-hitting and compelling book explains why and how we must immediately undertake a concerted and committed campaign to head off this impending cataclysmic demise of the human race and planet earth. This book is required reading for everyone in the peace movement around the world.”

-Francis A. Boyle, Professor of International Law, University of Illinois College of Law

Ron Wal
April 16, 2014
Reply

Syria: US, Turkey, Israel behind chemical weapons attacks

Assad regime says Turkey was behind Ghouta attack in which hundreds were killed, US knew of attacks, manipulated evidence to justify ‘US aggression against Syria.’

The government of Syrian President Bashar Assad has accused the United States, Turkey, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the rebels fighting to overthrow it, of being responsible for chemical weapons attacks in the country, Syria’s state news agency SANA reported on Tuesday.

In letters to the UN Security Council as well as UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Assad regime cited “reports, studies and documented researches” that allegedly implicate the US and Turkish administrations, as well as several other countries, “whether directly or indirectly in these appalling carnage in Syria, including Khad al-Assal on March 15, 2013.”

These foreign governments, Syria accused, were also responsible for the August 21, 2013 attack that resulted in the death of hundreds of people.

Citing articles and researches into the attacks, including a report by American investigative journalist Seymour Hersh from the London Review of Books magazine, the Assad regime said the Turkish government was responsible for the Eastern Ghouta massacre, as well as several other massacres.

It also accused the US administration of being “privy to the crime and its perpetrators” and “manipulating evidence proving that it was Jabhat al-Nusra who committed it to justify a US aggression against Syria.”

The Assad regime warned that “attempts to cover up such atrocities, leveling unfair accusations against the Syrian government and fabricating excuses will only serve to encourage armed terrorist groups to use these internationally-prohibited weapons time and again and commit more crimes against the Syrian people.”

The letters urged the UN Security Council to “shoulder responsibilities according to its counterterrorism resolutions and demand that countries supporting terrorists with weapons and funds refrain from it,” SANA reported.

Allen D. Post
April 16, 2014
Reply

THE ZIONIST GOAL. ONE BANK, ONE GOVERNMENT, ONE RELIGION, ONE WORLD POWER. The rest are GENTILE SLAVES.

Washington drives the world to war:

World War 111 is fast becoming a reality. The Israeli lobby
has the power in the USA & Canada to provoke a War at
any time they decide to do so. Washington,DC is owned
entirely by Zionist. They are pushing a dialog of reinstating the
draft, along with private military companies from different areas
of the World. Blackwater SE being the lead company.

Former Australian foreign minister exposes Zionist lobby power:
Bob Carr, who served as Australia’s foreign minister in the administration of
former Prime Minister Julia Gillard, recently published a memoir detailing his
experiences on the job. In the book Carr hones in on the Israeli lobby.

When asked by ABC (Australia) reporter Sarah Ferguson how such a small group
of people could wield so much power, Carr mentioned the significant amount of
political campaign donations stemming from Zionist sources as well as the Zionist
lobby’s courting of Australian politicians and journalists by sponsoring all-expenses-paid-for
trips to Israel. Carr accused Gillard of “subcontracting” Australia’s foreign policy vis-à-vis the
Middle East to her wealthy Jewish backers. We experience the same influence as the
USA, Canada, The UK, and who knows how many others. We see the same kinds of
dialog from Israel with Russia, China, the UK and others.

Former American politicians have expressed similar sentiments to Carr’s. Cynthia McKinney,
a former congresswoman from Georgia, said that she was ousted from congress by the Israeli
lobby because of her outspoken support of the Palestinians. She once told an interviewer that 99
per cent of members of the US congress are veritable servants of Zionist interests. Former
congressman Paul Findley wrote a book about the enormous power of Israel’s lobby in the US
entitled They Dare to Speak Out: People and Institutions Confront Israel’s Lobby.

The Zionists, said Traficant, “control both members of the House… and the Senate. They have us involved in
wars in which we have little or no interest.” These Zionist elements “control much of the media [and]
control much of the commerce of the country,” Traficant stressed. The late Helen Thomas, a renowned
American journalist and White House correspondent, echoed Traficant’s perspective, telling an audience
in Detroit that “congress, the White House, Hollywood, and Wall Street are owned by Zionists. No question
in my opinion.” Consequently they own the members of several governments.

ISRAEL has stated in the past that they will use nuclear weapons in defense of their agenda at a time
they feel it necessary.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 17, 2014
Reply

America the voiceless: Voters can’t compete with big campaign cash:

America the voiceless: ARE YOU RED-BLOODED PISSED OFF AMERICANS ACCEPTING THAT?

American public has ‘virtually no influence’ over politics in face of wealthy interest groups, study finds.

Thank You Wilson:
by Wilson Dizard @willdizard

It’s not just your imagination: The influence of money in politics has indeed drowned out the voices of American voters, a new analysis shows, with runaway corporate lobbying and a lack of campaign finance reform to blame for giving much more political weight to the wealthy.

Researchers at Princeton University asked for a change of some sort, they got their way only about 43 percent of the time and Northwestern University compared the public’s influence on 1,779 policy issues between 1981 and 2002, finding that more often than not, the interests of wealthy groups and individuals won out over the demands of the general public. For instance, when 80 percent of the public.

ALL REPUBLICANS ++30% OF DEMOCRATS ARE INVOLVED WITH THE ORGANIZED CRIME ORGANIZATION CALLED (AIPAC). WE CAN PROSECUTE THEM AMERICA..VOTE THEM OUT, VOTE THEM OUT OF OFFICE.

PROSECUTE THE REPUBLICANS FIRST. BY 2016 ” THE AMERICAN LABOR PARTY” WILL BE READY WITH A PLATFORM
WRITTEN BY THE AMERICAN PEOPLE. REPEAL THE TRADE AGREEMENTS , REPEAL CAMPAIGN LAWS, COMPLETE
CHANGE IN TAXES, ALL WILL PAY FAIR TAXES. DO AWAY WITH EXEMPTIONS FOR ALL CORPORATIONS. FAIR EQUAL PAY
FOR ALL. NO MORE FOREIGN AID TO ISRAEL, NO MORE WARS FOR ISRAEL, NO MORE FOREIGN LOBBIES REGISTERED AS
AMERICAN. TAKE CARE OF THE VETERANS WE NOW HAVE, WITH OUT PRODUCING MORE THAT ARE NOT CARED FOR.
PROTECT OUR CONSTITUTION NO CHANGE. RESPECT FOR ALL AMENDMENTS INCLUDING THE 1ST. AND 2ND. !!!@ARA.COM

ENCOURAGE ALL TO VOTE, VOTE, VOTE, REGISTER, REGISTER, REGISTER.

THE ZIONIST GOAL. ONE BANK, ONE GOVERNMENT, ONE RELIGION, ONE WORLD POWER. The rest are GENTILE SLAVES.

Washington drives the world to war:

World War 111 is fast becoming a reality. The Israeli lobby
has the power in the USA & Canada to provoke a War at
any time they decide to do so. Washington,DC is owned
entirely by Zionist. They are pushing a dialog of reinstating the
draft, along with private military companies from different areas
of the World. Blackwater SE being the lead company.

Former Australian foreign minister exposes Zionist lobby power:
Bob Carr, who served as Australia’s foreign minister in the administration of
former Prime Minister Julia Gillard, recently published a memoir detailing his
experiences on the job. In the book Carr hones in on the Israeli lobby.

When asked by ABC (Australia) reporter Sarah Ferguson how such a small group
of people could wield so much power, Carr mentioned the significant amount of
political campaign donations stemming from Zionist sources as well as the Zionist
lobby’s courting of Australian politicians and journalists by sponsoring all-expenses-paid-for
trips to Israel. Carr accused Gillard of “subcontracting” Australia’s foreign policy vis-à-vis the
Middle East to her wealthy Jewish backers. We experience the same influence as the
USA, Canada, The UK, and who knows how many others. We see the same kinds of
dialog from Israel with Russia, China, the UK and others.
WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS

Former American politicians have expressed similar sentiments to Carr’s. Cynthia McKinney,
a former congresswoman from Georgia, said that she was ousted from congress by the Israeli
lobby because of her outspoken support of the Palestinians. She once told an interviewer that 99
per cent of members of the US congress are veritable servants of Zionist interests. Former
congressman Paul Findley wrote a book about the enormous power of Israel’s lobby in the US
entitled They Dare to Speak Out: People and Institutions Confront Israel’s Lobby.
WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS

The Zionists, said Traficant, “control both members of the House… and the Senate. They have us involved in
wars in which we have little or no interest.” These Zionist elements “control much of the media [and]
control much of the commerce of the country,” Traficant stressed. The late Helen Thomas, a renowned
American journalist and White House correspondent, echoed Traficant’s perspective, telling an audience
in Detroit that “congress, the White House, Hollywood, and Wall Street are owned by Zionists. No question
in my opinion.” Consequently they own the members of several governments.

It is nearly 80 Countries that are influenced by lobbies for the benefit of Israel. ( A FOREIGN LOBBY)

ISRAEL has stated in the past that they will use nuclear weapons in defense of their agenda at a time
they feel it necessary.

WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS
Friends of AIPAC & The GOP– The Kochs’ new $3 million attack onslaught has pulled six Senate races into
deadlocked ties — and the Republicans must win exactly six seats to take Senate control.

1) NC: 43-43 2) LA: 44-44 3) AK: 44-44 4) MI: 39-39 5) KY: 43-43 6) GA: 38-38

If that happens get ready for the DRAFT to be re-instated. More WAR on the way…

WE MUST FIGHT ZIONISM TO KEEP OUR FREEDOMS.

STUDENTS, PARENTS, UNIONS, ALL WORKERS, UNEMPLOYED, SELF-EMPLOYED, SICK, UNINSURED, THE YOUNG, THE ELDERLY,
BLACK, BROWN, RED, YELLOW, WHITE, DRUNK, HIGH, OR SOBER, GAY, STRAIGHT, POOR, OR POORER.

TAKE THE COUNTRY BACK, CLOSE FOREIGN BASES, PROTECT OUR BORDERS FROM GOVERNMENT DRUG LORDS, AND
FALSE FLAG OPERATIONS, and all other criminals.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 20, 2014
Reply

DRUG WAR–ANOTHER FALSE FLAG OPERATION FOR YEARS.

Your Government Heroes that peddle DRUGS (cocaine & Heroine), RAISE $$ FOR CLASSIFIED OPS??

While our young people become addicted, over-dosed, committing crimes and ending up in prison, if not that then its
the false flag wars that have killed or injured our troops. Iraqi civilians 1.2 million killed according to John Hopkins report.

It has all been for Zionism, World dominance, and the so called Christians , hood winked for $$, have gone along with it 100%..

Media being the silent partner. May GOD bless you all with what you deserve.
Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad | Peace Action Blog
http://peaceblog.wordpress.com/2007/11/30/fighting-terrorism-at-home-abroad/
Nov 30, 2007 … Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. When we talk about “Real Security through International Cooperation and the Funding of Human Needs” …
The Republican Party and their Big Business partners in Crime. Zionist, AIPAC, Mossad, and Israel organizations..;
More Black Hole Money INVOLVEMENT.(USA & ISRAEL DRUGS INC.)

SECURITY FIRMS & GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS IN THE BILLIONS. WHY?? THEY ARE REWARDED WITH LEGAL CONTRACTS IN RETURN FOR
DOING ILLEGAL SPECIAL OPS FOR THE ( DUEL WORLDS CRIME BOSSES) THAT OFFICIALS CAN’T OPENLY GIVE ANY APPROVAL FOR.

See previous warnings on Afghanistan Poppy Fields & Heroine transported and distributed across America + by WWWWW’s
Who, What, Where, When & Why ??

“From late 1973 until April of 1975, Theodore Shackley, Thomas Clines and Richard Armitage disbursed, from the secret, Laotian-based, Vang Pao opium fund, vastly more money than was required to finance even the highly intensified Phoenix Project in Vietnam. The money in excess of that used in Vietnam was secretly smuggled out of Vietnam in large suitcases, by Richard Secord and Thomas Clines and carried into Australia, where it was deposited in a secret, personal bank account….”
In Tehran, Armitage, set up a secret “financial conduit” inside Iran, into which secret Vang Pao drug funds could be deposited from Southeast Asia. According to Daniel Sheehan: “The purpose of this conduit was to serve as the vehicle for secret funding by Shackley’s “Secret Team,” of a private, non-CIA authorized “Black” operations inside Iran, disposed to seek out, identify, and assassinate socialist and communist sympathizers, who were viewed by Shackley and his “Secret Team” members to be “potential terrorists” against the Shah of Iran`s government .

Ronald L. Waldron
April 27, 2014
Reply

NATIONAL DEBT LEFT FOR THE NEXT GENERATIONS

Debt left to the next generations, because of Foreign Policies, Foreign Aid, Foreign Interest WARS, Foreign lobbies,
Foreign run— Think Tanks, Universities, Congress (House & Senate), Pentagon, Homeland Security, Banks, Wall Street,
out-sourced jobs to foreign countries, food chain, and 65% of corporations.

NOW!! Preparations for more foreign interest WARS. Answer to all things Republican, WAR-and-Defense budget that is more
then all others combined.

National Debt at the end of these presidents term.

Ford——–$1,825,300,000,000—-1976

Carter——$2,789,500,000,000—-1980

Regan——$5,103,800,000,000—-1988

Bush——- $6,337,700,000,000—-1992

Clinton—-$9,817,000,000,000—–2000

Bush——$14,441,400,000,000—- 2008

Obama—$15,811,000,000,000—–2012

Present National Debt: $16,787,451,118,147 == 4/26/2014

Carter Adm. ——— –$964,200,000,000——Regan—-$2,314,300,000,000
Clinton Adm.——– $3,480,000,000,000——Bush-1—$1,234,700,000,000
Obama Adm.——– $1,3,99130,050,000——Bush-2—$4,524,000,000,000
(to date) Total——-$6,435,530,050,569– —-Total—–$8,073,000,000,000

—————————————————————————- Spent on Wars, Banks, Auto Industry & Wall St. Fraud.—
Spent cleaning up the mess left behind by
the Corruption & Republican Foreign Policies.

DRUG WAR–ANOTHER FALSE FLAG OPERATION FOR YEARS.

Your Government Heroes that peddle DRUGS (cocaine & Heroine), RAISE $$ FOR CLASSIFIED OPS??
While our young people become addicted, over-dosed, committing crimes and ending up in prison, if not that then its
the false flag wars that have killed or injured our troops. Iraqi civilians 1.2 million killed according to John Hopkins report.

It has all been for Zionism, World dominance, and the so called Christians , hood winked for $$, have gone along with it 100%..

Media being the silent partner. May GOD bless you all with what you deserve.

Sunday was Easter certainly did not have anywhere near the meaning for the majority of us, as it always did in the past.
Could it be the lack of Morality, Ethics,or integrity. No sign at all from any official that accountability to the 80% of the
American people, other human life, or nations matters . It is just you and the pay-masters at AIPAC.
With no belief what so ever for a Christian holiday.

We will hear more plain lies at Election time, your media friends will cover that OK!!

You Republicans can lie once, twice, three times, religious institutions, & Zionist media have covered many times.
BUT NOW we know not to believe one thing a Republican states, and only 3/4’s of 2/3’s of Democrats.
That is due to more women in the Democrat Party, They may repeat a lie, but don’t seem to make them up.
12 female Senators are Democrat. While 4 female Senators are Republican.
60 Congresswomen are Democrat. While 19 Congresswomen are Republican.
78 Minorities in the House. 72 are Democrats. 6 are Republican. 433 seats.
3 Minorities in the Senate. 2 are Democrats 1 is a Republican. 100 seats.
“Most of the U.S. Senate is comprised of multimillionaires.” Part of the 1%
Median net worth for all senators went up to $2.794 million.
40% of the House are millionaires and 67% of the Senate are . Over 50% of Total.
For the first time in History. Yet the Country is closest ever to Bankruptcy,
(BUT) Not the special interest group..Group’s?
48% of Billionaires in America are Zionist, from the special interest group! or 2%.
73 Democrat congressmen are millionaires out of 261 congressional millionaires.
37 Senate Democrats are millionaires and 30 Senate Republicans are millionaires.

If you base pay on productivity, the pay-gap should be reversed, not equal.

Respectfully,

A past Republican, A past member of
organized religion. A male.
Now A Christian, A Democrat, A peace Activist.
A MAN
Ronald L. Waldron
Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad | Peace Action Blog
http://peaceblog.wordpress.com/2007/11/30/fighting-terrorism-at-home-abroad/
Nov 30, 2007 … Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. When we talk about “Real Security through International Cooperation and the Funding of Human Needs” …

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 2, 2014
Reply

——– Original Message ——–
Subject: Censored, monitored, threatened, shut down by servers, blocked, hidden files, hidden remote control on my computer, More then once
Date: Fri, 02 May 2014 07:30:55 -0400
From: Ron
To: Inactive Minds (YOU)

Six books published & blocked. see web etc. http://WWW.universal-peace.com

700-800 postings on congress.org paid thousands to post previously.

Peace blog. Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad (Ronald L. Waldron & Allen D. Post) That is me.

Sent to International organizations, UN, Hague, Brussels, Nobel Norway. Universities, student organizations,

Cultural organizations. I started after court appointed President year 2000.

Cambridge Who’s Who. Listed first in publication. International distribution to boost distribution. Removed, and
replaced by someone else. ( Donald Trump Jr. involved with that).

I have and do support the Obama administration. Started in 2006 campaigning for him, see first postings 2007
on the peace blog.

Just about all POST were sent to Local, State, national,alternative, university and International media. (print, digital, TV. Radio)

Not one positive response from anyone. Yet Look at what is going on around you all. I do not use foul words in any post,
although I would like to, I sure as —- think it. YET no one responds . SILENCE . Foreign occupation expands quite a distance,
gratuities EVEN further. BUT spell incorrectly and I hear it on the floor of congress. That recognition shows you received
the messages don’t it??

See the following Post of Four Years ago regarding the DRUG MARKET and who is involved. (Big Brother and Ally).

Thank You for YOUR Courtesy?

Ronald L. Waldron

I no longer expect any response, nor do I give a DAM what you have to say. I and many present and future voters
NOW KNOW it is worthless any how !!

It seems the only crime fighters are in the movies or TV falsehood.
WARNING OF FOUR YEARS AGO. WHERE ARE WE NOW WITH HEROIN IN USA? SAD STATE OF AFFAIRS!!

Republicans, AIPAC, CIA, Mossad,Congress, Organized Crime, Organized Religion Investors in violence, Israel, Zionist controlled Media,
and Zionist controlled Universities & Educational institutions can not hold off the TRUTH for ever.
Students, Unions, American workers, VOTERS, TEACHERS, VETERANS, State & Local Police agencies not controlled by Home-Land Security,
like all federal agencies will hold all ELECTED OFFICIALS accountable for their crimes. Vote them out, Get rid of FOREIGN LOBBIES,
Demand campaign reforms, form WATCH groups, get involved. ( Yes I Know, another —ing JOKE)

Ronald L. Waldron

Respond to this comment by replying above this line
New comment on Peace Action Blog

Allen D. Post commented on Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad.

in response to barbpa:

When we talk about “Real Security through International Cooperation and the Funding of Human Needs” it is sometimes hard to understand what that means in terms of our daily lives. On my way home I often pass a family saying hello and usually exchanging brief pleasantries. Normally, the father and sometimes the mother sit on […]

WARNING OF FOUR YEARS AGO. WHERE ARE WE NOW WITH HEROIN IN USA? SAD STATE OF AFFAIRS!!

POSTED ON: FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD.

Ronald L. Waldron says:
January 5, 2010 at 12:21 pm

SHOULD WE TRUST ANYONE IN GOVERNMENT??

Total Contractors, aka Mercenaries, Will be 130,000 to 160,000, in Afghanistan :

They secured the Oil fields of Iraq, now
they will secure the poppy fields of
Afghanistan all for the Organized Crime
syndicate that is controlling much of
our government today.

Where are the companions of the China
cocaine deal presently??

Wouldn’t we destroy the fields other wise??
Do we trust any official this day and age??
Afghanistan now supplies over 90 percent of the world’s heroin, generating nearly $200 billion in revenue. Since the U.S. invasion on Oct. 7, 2001, opium output has increased 33-fold (to over 8,250 metric tons a year).
The U.S. has been in Afghanistan for over seven years, has spent $177 billion in that country alone, and has the most powerful and technologically advanced military on Earth. GPS tracking devices can locate any spot imaginable by simply pushing a few buttons.
Still, bumper crops keep flourishing year after year, even though heroin production is a laborious, intricate process. The poppies must be planted, grown and harvested; then after the morphine is extracted it has to be cooked, refined, packaged into bricks and transported from rural locales across national borders. To make heroin from morphine requires another 12-14 hours of laborious chemical reactions. Thousands of people are involved, yet—despite the massive resources at our disposal—heroin keeps flowing at record levels.

Common sense suggests that such prolific trade over an extended period of time is no accident, especially when the history of what has transpired in that region is considered. While the CIA ran its operations during the Vietnam War, the Golden Triangle supplied the world with most of its heroin. After that war ended in 1975, an intriguing event took place in 1979 when Zbigniew Brzezinski covertly manipulated the Soviet Union into invading Afghanistan.

Behind the scenes, the CIA, along with Pakistan’s ISI, were secretly funding Afghanistan’s mujahideen to fight their Russian foes. Prior to this war, opium production in Afghanistan was minimal. But according to historian Alfred McCoy, an expert on the subject, a shift in focus took place. “Within two years of the onslaught of the CIA operation in Afghanistan, the Pakistan-Afghanistan borderlands became the world’s top heroin producer.”

Soon, as Professor Michel Chossudovsky notes, “CIA assets again controlled the heroin trade. As the mujahideen guerrillas seized territory inside Afghanistan, they ordered peasants to plant poppies as a revolutionary tax. Across the border in Pakistan, Afghan leaders and local syndicates under the protection of Pakistan intelligence operated hundreds of heroin laboratories.”

Eventually, the Soviet Union was defeated (their version of Vietnam), and ultimately lost the Cold War. The aftermath, however, proved to be an entirely new can of worms. During his research, McCoy discovered that “the CIA supported various Afghan drug lords, for instance Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The CIA did not handle heroin, but it did provide its drug lord allies with transport, arms, and political protection.”

By 1994, a new force emerged in the region—the Taliban—that took over the drug trade. Chossudovsky again discovered that “the Americans had secretly, and through the Pakistanis [specifically the ISI], supported the Taliban’s assumption of power.”

These strange bedfellows endured a rocky relationship until July 2000 when Taliban leaders banned the planting of poppies. This alarming development, along with other disagreements over proposed oil pipelines through Eurasia, posed a serious problem for power centers in the West. Without heroin money at their disposal, billions of dollars could not be funneled into various CIA black budget projects. Already sensing trouble in this volatile region, 18 influential neo-cons signed a letter in 1998 which became a blueprint for war—the infamous Project for a New American Century (PNAC).

Fifteen days after 9-11, CIA Director George Tenet sent his top-secret Special Operations Group (SOG) into Afghanistan. One of the biggest revelations in Tenet’s book, At the Center of the Storm, was that CIA forces directed the Afghanistan invasion, not the Pentagon.

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 4, 2014
Reply

Poverty in the USA:

Poverty in the USA sees no color, how ever it is driven by the Republican, Zionist, corporate GLOBALISM movement
that the 2% only sees the 98% as GENTILES, slaves, and a liability to their empires.

Their profit driven wars will only end when they become the target of the oppressed, occupied, victims of their genocides,
when the tide turns against them. They will become isolated behind their walls, and their supply routes are shut off.

When their MEDIA propaganda machines are shut down. When Wall Street drops due to the uncertainty of what comes
next. When what they now call terrorism, becomes out right revolution.

When the “RIGHT” is recognized by the 98% as being the WRONG in the world. Poverty has no borders, the Depression
years proved that, and is about to prove it again.

The infrastructure of the USA has been ignored until all our inter-cities are like War zones. We recognize that no one,
government, corporations, investors will ever spend $$ to fix it. We can see that the next WAR is planned here in the
USA by our so called closest ALLY, blow it all up, take over, then rebuild. The history of most wars of the past.

Accountability will then be recognized, will it be to late. Will ethics, values, integrity ever return.

Over 2000 years it hasn’t in ISRAEL.

We will call it ZIONISM at its best.

Big Brother is watching you, not only from the US and Britain but also from Israel.

Did you know that the Internet giants who said to you, “Trust us, we will never betray your secrets to anyone!” have deceived you and let you down? Did you know that Google has betrayed you to Big Brother? That Microsoft has betrayed you, that Facebook and Apple have betrayed you, that AT&T and Verizon have betrayed you?

All your emails—past, present and future—are there for someone to read. Every day the NSA records trillions of emails and phone calls. Your calls are not only being recorded but sophisticated voice recognition devices enable some geek in a cubicle to pluck your voice out of a million other similar-sounding voices. Your online chats, your calls over Google Voice, Skype, and other voice-over-internet systems, are all on record. Every website you visit, someone knows you’ve been there and how long you’ve lingered on each item.
This is bad enough, but it gets worse. (ASK Mr. Donald Sterling if he has made any enemies in Government, corporate conglomerates,
or NSA) ?? How about the MEDIA?? We know several people have faced character assassination by such.

Some one taped and released the private conversation, there is no excuse for the racist remarks, but neither is there for SECRET SURVEILLANCE.

JUST-IN: The GOP out-sourcing of our economy, has put China’s economy no. 1 in the WORLD over the USA, others soon to be.

The next two elections will be the most important in the history of our DEMOCRACY. Rid ourselves of the GOP.
NO MORE obstructionist, take back the government for the people, and by the people. NOW or gone forever !!

Globalism is just plain—“BULL-CRAP”

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 12, 2014
Reply

Fwd: RUN–HILLARY–RUN SUPPORT HILLARY FOR 2016 WE DRAFT HILLARY

THE POWER, MONEY AND INFLUENCE TO BUY OUT YOUR GOVERNMENT, BY WAY OF ZIONIST CORRUPTION.

WE MUST SAVE OUR BILL OF RIGHTS, CONSTITUTION, AND DEMOCRACY.

CREATE A DEMOCRATIC SENATE & HOUSE FOR PRESIDENT HILLARY CLINTON 2016.

WE CAN NOT AFFORD TO HAVE THESE CRIME BOSSES RUNNING GOVERNMENT ANY LONGER !

Israeli spying on US swept under rug, report claims

The Thursday report followed a Newsweek article two days before that anonymously quoted senior US intelligence officials and congressional staffers who have been privy to information on Israeli spying activities. Staffers called the extent of Israeli espionage “sobering” and “shocking,” far exceeding similar activities by any other close US allies, Israel’s aggressive spying activities in the United States are routinely covered up because of Jerusalem’s powerful connections in Congress.“It has been extensive for years,” an official told the magazine on Wednesday.

NOTE: THE REPUBLICAN PARTY SUPPORTS ZIONISM, AND IS SUPPORTED BY ZIONIST AS SEEN BELOW. AIPAC LOBBY SUPPORT, AS WITNESSED BY ALL, In fact, THAT IS antisemitism.!
THEY WERE THE MURDERERS OF THE TORAH JEWS , 6 MILLION IN THE HOLOCAUST. THEN STOLE THE JEWISH IDENTITY.
THE ACTUAL JEWISH COMMUNITY IS TOTALLY AGAINST ZIONISM!

THE DEMOCRAT PARTY SUPPORTS JUDAISM, THE ACTUAL JEWISH PEOPLE & COMMUNITY. THE TORAH AND TEACHINGS RESPECTED. THEY ARE THE PEOPLE THAT SUFFERED
AND DIED. THEY ARE THE AMERICAN/JEWISH COMMUNITY, AND SUPPORT OUR GOVERNMENT & CONSTITUTION WITH-OUT INFLUENCE OR INTERFERENCE. THEY WANT TO LIVE
IN PEACE, AS WE DEMOCRATS DO. NO MORE WARS, VOTE FOR OUR CANDIDATES. THE TORAH JEWISH COMMUNITY ALSO RESPECTS CHRISTIANITY AND OUR BIBLE & TEACHINGS,
AND A GOVERNMENT BY & FOR THE PEOPLE, NOT CORPORATIONS & CORRUPTION. WE THANK THEM FOR THEIR SUPPORT.

BREAKING: Kochs plan unprecedented $125 million spending spree
Friend — News just broke that the Koch brothers have pledged to spend over $125 million — whatever it takes — to tear down strong Democrats and take over the Senate.

To put that in context, that’s a 25% boost over what Karl Rove spent — $100 million — to support Romney and defeat Obama in 2012. But remember how that worked out for Rove on Election Night?

We don’t have to match the Kochs’ endless spending on the air to stop a Republican Senate takeover — we have a plan to win. The New York Times calls our new Grassroots Victory Project the “largest and most data-driven ground game yet.” Modeled after the Obama campaign, it “runs through 10 states, includes a $60 million investment and requires more than 4,000 paid staff members.”

By midnight, we need 1,500 more committed Democrats on board. If we fall short, we will let the Kochs buy the Senate for the GOP.

ONLY WAY TO BEAT THEM. VOTE THEM OUT. ( working class pay attention)
ARE YOU UNEMPLOYED? WORKING AT MINIMUM WAGE ? PAYING HIGH PAYROLL TAXES ?
ON A FIXED INCOME ? CAN’T MAKE ENDS MEET ? VOTE THEM OUT !!

Just last week, 41 Republican senators blocked even debating an increase to the minimum wage. And Speaker Boehner thinks giving millions of Americans a livable wage is “bad policy.”

THE ELEPHANT has now become a DINOSAUR

International Investigation Required TO INVESTIGATE the corruption — Zionist connection.
America the voiceless: Voters can’t compete with big campaign cash:

America the voiceless: ARE YOU RED-BLOODED, PISSED OFF AMERICANS, ACCEPTING THAT?

American public has ‘virtually no influence’ over politics in face of wealthy interest groups, study finds.

It’s not just your imagination: The influence of money in politics has indeed drowned out the voices of American voters, a new analysis shows, with runaway corporate lobbying and a lack of campaign finance reform to blame for giving much more political weight to the wealthy.

POVERTY IN THE USA AND THE WORLD:

Poverty in the USA sees no color, how ever it is driven by the Republican, Zionist, corporate GLOBALISM movement
that the 2% only sees the 98% as GENTILES, slaves, and a liability to their empires.

Their profit driven wars will only end when they become the target of the oppressed, occupied, victims of their genocides,
when the tide turns against them. They will become isolated behind their walls, and their supply routes are shut off.

When their MEDIA propaganda machines are shut down. When Wall Street drops due to the uncertainty of what comes
next. When what they now call terrorism, becomes out right revolution.

When the “RIGHT” is recognized by the 98% as being the WRONG in the world. Poverty has no borders, the Depression
years proved that, and is about to prove it again.

The infrastructure of the USA has been ignored until all our inter-cities are like War zones. We recognize that no one
government, corporations, investors will ever spend $$ to fix it. We can see that the next WAR is planned here in the
USA by our so called closest ALLY, blow it all up, take over, then rebuild. The history of most wars of the past.

Accountability will then be recognized, will it be to late. Will ethics, values, integrity ever return.

Over 2000 years it hasn’t in ISRAEL.

We will call it ZIONISM at its best.

Demonstrations Against the Violence in Gaza
Protests against the Zionist bombing and invasion of Gaza are being held around the world. As images and reports come in they will be posted on this web site. A protest at Dallas, Tx. To demonstrate Nov. 2-3, 2014.

WE WANT PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST !!

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 17, 2014
Reply

FOREIGN–SPECIAL INTEREST ORGANIZATIONS THAT DOMINATE CONGRESS (THE HOUSE OF TREASON)

THEY CONTROL THE REPUBLICAN PARTY,
AND INFLUENCE MEMBERS OF THE DEMOCRAT PARTY.

CORRUPTION OUT OF CONTROL

All Listings in Jewish Organizations

All4Israel
Alpha Epsilon Pi
America-Israel Cultural Foundation
American Association of Jewish Lawyers and Jurists
American Friends of the Hebrew University
American Israel Public Affairs Committee, AIPAC
American Jewish Committee, AJC
American Jewish Congress, AJCongess
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, JDC
American Jewish World Service
American ORT
American Society for Yad Vashem
American Technion Society
American Zionist Movement
AMIT
Anti-Defamation League, ADL
Association of Jewish Aging Services
Association of Jewish Family & Children’s Services, AJFCA
Berman Jewish Policy Archive
Birthright Israel of North America, Inc.
B’nai Brith International
B’nai B’rith Youth Organization
Call of the Shofar
CAMERA
Center for Russian Jewry
Central Conference of American Rabbis
Central Conference of American Rabbis
Coalition for the Advancement of Jewish Education
Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations
Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany
Conversion to Judaism Resource Center
FEGS
Friends of Israel Disabled Veterans-Beit Halochem
Hadassah
Heritage Foundation for Preservation of Jewish Cemeteries
HIAS
Hillel: The Foundation for Jewish Campus Life, HILLEL
International Association of Hebrew Free Loans
International Association of Jewish Vocational Services
Israel Bonds
J Street
Jewish Agency for Israel, JAFI
Jewish Communal Service Association
Jewish Community Centers Association of North America, JCCA
Jewish Council for Public Affairs, JCPA
Jewish Council for Public Affairs, Washington DC Office
Jewish Education Service of North America, JESNA
Jewish Labor Committee, JLC
Jewish National Fund, JNF
Jewish People Policy Planning Institute (JPPPI)
Jewish Reconstructionist Communities
Jewish War Veterans of the USA, JWV
Jewish Women International
Jewish Women’s Archive
JewishOnes
JTA
JTN Productions
Katrina’s Jewish Voices
Keren Hayesod
KolDor
Lapid: The Coalition for High School Age Programs in Israel
Lubavitch World Headquarters
Maccabi USA/Sports for Israel
March of the Living
MAZON: A Jewish Response to Hunger
Meretz USA
NA’AMAT USA
NACPAC
National Center for Learning and Leadership, CLAL
National Council of Jewish Women
National Council of Young Israel
National Foundation for Jewish Culture, NFJC
National Jewish Coalition for Literacy
National Yiddish Book Center
NCSJ: Advocates on Behalf of Jews in Russia, Ukraine, the Baltic States & Eurasia
Orthodox Union
Rabbinical Assembly
Rabbinical Council of America
Rabbinical Council of America
RAVSAK: The Jewish Community Day School Network
Reconstructionist Federation
Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association
Repair the World
Society for Humanistic Judaism
Stars of David, International
The Abraham Fund
The Jewish Federations of North America
The Wexner Foundation
U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum
Union for Reform Judaism (URJ)
United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
Women’s American ORT
Workmen’s Circle-Arbeter Ring
World Jewish Congress
World ORT Inc.
World Zionist Organization / American Section
YIVO Institute for Jewish Research
Zionist Organization of America

About Us
About JFNA
Israel & Overseas
Washington
Careers/Leadership Center
Annual Report
Our Work
Israel & Overseas
Vulnerable Populations
Jewish Life
Social Action/Advocacy
Youth Programs in Israel
Ways to Give
Annual Campaign
Planned Giving & Endowments
Israel Terror Relief Fund
Young Leadership
Women’s Philanthropy
Young Leadership Cabinet
Communal Advancement
Overseas Giving
General Assembly
Missions
Upcoming Missions
About Missions
Resource Guide
Contact Us
News & Events
Federation News & Contacts
The Federation Connection blog
Events Calendar
Jewish Resources
Jewish Directory

Ronald L. Waldron says:
December 4, 2013 at 10:38 am

THE RISE OR FALL OF AMERICA DEPENDS ON YOU & I, VOTE AGAINST ZIONISM.

President Dwight D. Eisenhower warned that the Israeli lobby AIPAC, should not be registered as an American lobby, it is a completely foreign lobby with foreign interest ONLY.

Jewish money in Washington D. C. was even crucial in the very founding of the modern state of Israel. They were key fundraisers for Harry Truman’s Presidential campaigns; they were also Zionists. Going against the will of his own State Department, Truman followed the Zionist line in supporting a 1947 United Nations vote for the partition of Palestine into Jewish and Arab sections. Afterwards, said long time Democratic activist and brother-in-law of John F. Kennedy, Stephen Smith: “Two million dollars went aboard the Truman campaign train in a paper bag, and that’s what paid for the state of Israel.”

John F. Kennedy had a strongly negative reaction in 1960 to the conditions Jewish contributors demanded for their donations to his presidential campaign (their “initial” contribution was $500,000). Seymour Hersh notes a conversation Kennedy had with a friend, newspaper columnist Charles L. Bartlett:
“‘As an American citizen Kennedy was outraged,’ Bartlett recalled,
‘to have a Zionist group come to him and say: We know your
campaign is in trouble. We’re willing to pay your bill, if you’ll let
us have control of your Middle East policy.’ Kennedy, as a
presidential candidate, also resented the crudity with which he’d
been approached. ‘They wanted control,’ he angrily told Bartlett.”

They knew they had Vice president Johnson in their pocket, we all know what happened next.
THE WARs ON ORGANIZED CRIME, POVERTY, AND ILLEGAL DRUG DISTRIBUTION. STOPPED !

NOW: WE THE AMERICAN TAX-PAYERS SUPPORT “ZIONIST ISRAEL” THEIR OCCUPATION, & FIGHT THEIR WARS.

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 17, 2014
Reply

All the above supporting 2% of the American population, and
8 Million in Israel. Paid for by the 98%, while 47,000,000 that
is FORTY SEVEN MILLION, Americans live below the poverty
level.

HOMELAND SECURITY–A ZIONIST ORGANIZATION.

The top position were all duel citizens with Israel.

WE need an AMERICAN PARTY where America & Americans
are the one and only SPECIAL INTEREST GROUP.

Right now our house of representatives are in reality the

” HOUSE OF TREASON”

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 17, 2014
Reply

Help Make History

America is Ready for Hillary and we need your help to ensure that when she is ready to take up this challenge, we are on the ground ready to help her. Your contributions will help ensure that we have everything we need to reach voters and mobilize support for the person we all know is ready to do the job.

Your contributions of time, knowledge, values, and votes are the desired. Financial contribution by those who can afford to do so and agree with the principle , UNITED we stand for America, and the American people, government BY and FOR us Americans.
KEEP in mind, that the next leaders of DEMOCRACY need to raise up NOW, and support the Democrats running for office in this 2014
election, we need them now, and in preparations for 2016.

Thank You All for your Courtesy in reading and considering my concerns for the future generations to come.

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 18, 2014
Reply

25% Anti-Semitic–NO. 40% Anti-Zionism–Certainly.

AIPAC & others will not make the distinctions between anti-Semitic,
and anti-Zionism in polls or other wise.
People I have talked to are not anti-Semitic against Jewish religion,
a Jewish State that should be run by true Rabbi’s, with the Torah as
part of their constitution. (Religious State).. Like the Vatican in Italy.
Zionism, a political movement for globalization, and world power is
an enemy of the true Torah Jews themselves , a thief of the Jewish
Identity. Anti-Zionism is wide spread.
If a poll was conducted in that way, it would find that the 25% plus
around the world are Anti-Zionism. The Crime syndicate of the World
organized to take control of everything possible.. Governments,
Law & Political Science Education, down to Pre-K. Wall St. Now 48%
of Billionaires in the USA & Canada.
They have not been the Ally, that their Political republican partners
have claimed. The Jewish Faith is well respected, the same for
the faithful Jewish people. The difference between Jewish & Zionism,
is the same as the difference between (Love & Hate)..
Zionism is the most Anti-Semitic organization of all !! Their killers.

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 21, 2014
Reply

Mathematically what is not and has not been possible. — VS. — What is possible with the present time constraints ..

There have been third party candidates for-ever. Each one has found it impossible to pull 35 to 40 % of
the vote. The two party system (Republican–Democrat) stay in power. Zionism continues the control
either way. Each continues attacking the other, filibuster any Bill and nothing gets done for, the American
people or our infrastructure, only foreign interest is served. Israel, China, India, and Mexico.

With the Country split 45-46 % either way.A large % stay home. The stay at home voters made the difference
in the Obama campaign. We brought them out for Obama during the primaries and the Elections.He won but has
been defeated with the broken system. No body has gotten any thing done. Corruption with in the system,
has our congress at a 9% approval rating. China is now number one for economy, stealing from American
corporations, that due to greed out-sourced there in the first place.( Foreign trade, Globalization what
a farce). Big business defended by long term thinkers. Government defeated by listening to foreign think
tanks. WHO has benefited ?? The foreigners.

We need to concentrate on the percentage 5% to 6% to defeat the most corrupt corporate, Zionist influence
party. The most obstructionist party, knock them out NOW. History shows us who promotes the wars and
foreign influence and involvement. I say knock out the republicans NOW. Hold the Democrats accountable,
with no one else to blame.

NOW be building a new viable party for ,America & The American people, an agenda and platform by and for
the American people.

We do not have time & money on our side to do it any other way. It has to be done over the next two elections
or the WAR will be here in America. 47,000,000 Americans below poverty level, Illegal Drugs on every corner
with foreign distribution. ETC ETC. All organized Crime is ISRAEL run today.

If we sit back and don’t do it NOW!! WE America will be living under complete fascism by 2020..

We are darn near it now. Homeland Security Israeli controlled top positions duel citizens, Closed military bases are now interment camps for Americans,contracts signed with foreign countries to bring in their military to squash any uprising.

The fourteen characteristics of fascism we have witnessed after the court appointed Bush and fraud election of 2000.

Remember when most businesses in this Country were private owned successful businesses. When family farms
supported the family very well. When the corner gas station & grocery stores were sucessful.

That was back when no one ever heard of Zionism. When American History was a required subject.

WE baby boomers do. We will get out and support Hillary, a Democrat that can & will win.

We will vote for Democrats NOW 2014. To support an American Agenda. Please think beyond your nose.

After years of chasing,studying and writing, all at my own expense, to no positive results.

I have established more enemies then friends. Receive a number of nasty threats, harassment,

censorship, IRS audits, blocked use of computer. I now will take your advice and retire.

From this time on, the information I retain will go to the highest check offered. That is the

way business is done now-a-days.

My suggestions being worthless, good luck with what ever your endeavors are for the future.

I can foresee another cycle of sitting on thumbs and wishing for a supreme intervention.

That seems to be the weather change, drastic change for drastic measures.

YOU ALL DO AS YOU PLEASE..YOU WILL ANYHOW . GOOD_BUY

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 22, 2014
Reply

Orthodox Jews Demand End to Zionist Atrocities in the Middle East

The brutal and indiscriminate attack upon the people and infrastructure of Lebanon by the Zionist State “Israel” is a crime against all basic standards of decency and humanity.

The excuse given for this murderous invasion was the attack by Hezbollah on the IDF. What this might have to do with the hundreds of thousands of Lebanese innocent men, women and children, who are subjected to an ongoing living hell, is beyond comprehension.

Indeed, this current aggression is only the second chapter of the recent viciousness; the first being the furious reinvasion of Gaza and the onslaught on its civilians and the ruination of its basic human services.

Of course, voices may be heard that the IDF are simply responding. This, of course, ignores the question of the evil, implicit in punishing blameless people for the deeds of others. And it totally ignores the root of the problem, the dispossession and subjugation of the Palestinian people which began in 1948, was expanded in 1967 and continues unabated to this day. The crux of the matter is that beyond the immorality of the Zionist treatment of the Palestinians is the ultimate fact — the ideology of Zionism and ensuing establishment of the Zionist state conflicts with the basic teachings of Judaism.

Zionism is the transformation from Judaism, a G-dliness and spirituality, into a G-dlessness, materialism with nationalistic aspirations. Theodor Herzl and his cohorts, the fathers of this relatively new ideology of Zionism (approximately 100 years), have taken the Almighty out of the equation.

The ultimate establishment of the Zionist State, the fulfilment of the Zionist ideology, takes this blasphemy a step further. The Jewish people were sent into exile by Divine decree. They where then expressly commanded by the Almighty, not to attempt to leave their exilic existence through any human intervention. They were expressly forbidden to create their own state, such as the Zionist state of “Israel”. (Talmud, Tractate Kesuboth, p.111).

The Jewish people are forbidden to oppress another people. The creation of the State of “Israel” came about through, the theft from, subjugation and oppression of, the Palestinian people.

Torah Jewry, therefore, condemns the horrifying suffering inflicted upon both the Palestinian and Lebanese people. Because of all of the above, all attempts to achieve peace and stability for “Israel” are destined to fail. The Creator cannot be defied with impunity.

The Rabbis stated, that the State of “Israel” will result in unending pain, suffering and bloodshed. May the Almighty protect His creations.

The State of “Israel” does not speak in the name of Jews, they have stolen the name “Israel” from the Jewish people. Jews are commanded to be loyal citizens in every country in which they reside.

Zionism and the State of “Israel”, is the main cause of the exacerbation of anti Semitism universally.

The government of the illegitimate State of “Israel”, continually attempts to uproot the Torah and its statutes. They persistently oppress the Torah true Jews who reside in its borders.

We pray that all misery in the Holy Land and Lebanon, shall come to an end and that Zionism, the root of the suffering, continue to fade from Jewish consciousness, to be replaced by the faith of Torah. We shall all witness soon the peaceful dismantlement of the Zionist State “Israel”. May we merit seeing the day when all humanity will serve the Almighty in harmony and peace. Amen

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 23, 2014
Reply

THIS IS A MUST READ–BUYER BEWARE OF THE SHEEPS CLOTHING.

As Chinese-Israeli Relations Enjoy a Second Honeymoon, America Frets

The last time China and the Jewish state drew close, the United States drove them apart. Now there’s even more at stake. THEY HAVE FORMED AN ALLIANCE.

It gets worse, much worse!!
China’s Premier Li Keqiang toasts with Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu during a signing ceremony at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing.
Indeed, Israel has found itself forced to choose between China and the United States at several critical junctures in the recent history of both nations.
Israel and China had to wait until Nixon went to China in 1972 to begin a bilateral relationship.
The two sides quickly found common ground in the sale of Israeli weapons to China; for the next two decades—secretly during the 1980s but with increasing openness after the establishment of official ties in 1992—arms sales defined Sino-Israeli relations. As Israel became China’s second-largest weapons supplier, right-wing Israeli politicians chafing under the U.S.-led peace process .

During the 1990s, U.S. officials accused Israel of illegally providing China with weapons such as the Patriot missile, Lavi jetfighter, and Phalcon airborne radar system. Beijing could emerge as an alternative to Washington. When Netanyahu visited Beijing in 1997, he expressed this sentiment to his hosts by saying “Israeli know-how is more valuable than Arab oil.”

Sino-Israeli relations have rebounded to encompass new forms of commercial, military, political, and cultural exchange. ———–?

THE ISRAEL – RUSSIA ALLIANCE:

Apr 14 2014 @ 1:05pm

The Jewish state’s decision to abstain in the UN on the question of Russia’s annexation of Crimea did not go unnoticed in Washington:
ISRAELIS & RUSSIANS ALLIES? It gives new meaning to the concept – ‘the enemy of my enemy* is my friend’?
BUT Israeli officials say that the Arab Spring has changed Russia’s view of Israel, and now Moscow understands that in the volatile region,the Jewish State is an anchor of stability. Russia for the first time will be docking,
anchoring ships at Israel ports.

vladimir-putin-benjamin-netanyahu-2011-3-24-15-0-29-e1368597194285

“There are things on which we do not agree with Russia, but there is a general understanding that we defend the same principles of Governing and security,” said one official in Jerusalem. “They share our concern over Islamic fundamentalism taking over the Middle East. The Russians realize now more than ever that you can rely on Israel.”

The Russians very loudly publicized the Azov’s visit to Israel, and their decision to mark the victory over the Nazis together with Jewish veterans. “Russia is proud of its connection to this historical event, and wants to remind everyone that we fought on the right side,” read a statement from the Russians. “There is something to be understood from this for the contemporary Middle East. Where we decided to make anchor is a clear statement, both to the Israelis and the entire region.”

China also is developing good relations with Israel. We live in interesting times.

RUSSIA and CHINA RELATIONS:

Vladimir Putin arrived in China on Tuesday set on increasing cooperation after Russia’s relations with the west soured over the Ukraine crisis.

China calls for new security pact with Russia: ?

2 days ago – China is Russia’s most important trading partner and some two-thirds of China’s … This new deal only underscores this critical relationship. ?

Israel and India’s Alliance-For ever more:

Now that our total communications system involves India and Israel. Our patents & corporate Secrets are in the
possession of Israel & China. Consider where the off shore accounts are. Next the value of our currency.
Trillions of debt. Your (House of Treason) has sold us out and have been since 11/63. The set up started 1948.

Israel is not our Ally. Nor is Israel an Ally of anyone. ALL manipulation, let our people run things for you, while
you all stayed in the DARK ! BUT had a party time, Drugs, Gambling, Whores, Trips, Golf, and Conventions.
Lobbies & Think Tanks, advisers, and staffers took care of it all. 9% rating, and them lights are still out.
Why do you think the Zionist will spend Billions to keep their selected people in office, year after year,
the only thing they read is a script placed in front of them.

Check it out, research it. I have from 1966 on. Talked about it to no avail. Told officials 1977-78 that I had alot
more to talk about after a few things were straightened out with in our own Department. Must be
confidential lawyers were also talked to, but some big shots had to make a name for themselves, they did so
at my expense. I tried after years of following things, to come back become a sworn officer again able to do
what I pursued, not on you life . Recently tried again. No again, if fact no reply, all so busy.
Did not want to hear who, what where, when, why, regarding Heroin, and where you all at presently.

Now after fourteen years on the internet, people are becoming aware. A little to late. BUT the party is over.

Another WAR is on its way. THINK YOU MIGHT WANT TO PREPARE. PROTECT THE HOME LAND,
300 BASES OVER SEAS, and even our national guard gets sent over-seas. Terrorist & Spies all over
this country.

There are people in this community, and near by communities that could tell you just how it is in Washington, DC
Hopefully some will, step up to the plate and report to the PEOPLE they represented.. FAT CHANCE OF THAT.

RONALD L. WALDRON
May 25, 2014
Reply

25% Anti-Semitic–NO. 40% Anti-Zionism–Certainly
>
>
> AIPAC & others will not make the distinctions between anti-Semitic,
> and anti-Zionism in polls or other wise.
> People I have talked to are not anti-Semitic against Jewish religion,
> a Jewish State that should be run by true Rabbi’s, with the Torah as
> part of their constitution. (Religious State).. Like the Vatican in Italy.
> Zionism, a political movement for globalization, and world power is
> an enemy of the true Torah Jews themselves , a thief of the Jewish
> Identity. Anti-Zionism is wide spread.
> If a poll was conducted in that way, it would find that the 25% plus
> around the world are Anti-Zionism. The Crime syndicate of the World
> organized to take control of everything possible.. Governments,
> Law & Political Science Education, down to Pre-K. Wall St. Now 48%
> of Billionaires in the USA & Canada.
> They have not been the Ally, that their Political republican partners
> have claimed. The Jewish Faith is well respected, the same for
> the faithful Jewish people. The difference between Jewish & Zionism,
> is the same as the difference between (Love & Hate)..
> Zionism is the most Anti-Semitic organization of all !! Their killers.

————Christian Zionists lobby for US attack on Iran
> Christian Zionists — Christian evangelicals who avow support of Israel based on a belief in Biblical end-times scenarios — are whipping their followers into a fervor in favor of an attack on Iran. In a related development, conservative commentators like former House Speaker Newt Gingrich have been beating the drum for a US attack on Iran, characterizing the current conflict in Lebanon as the start of “World War Three.”
>
> The calls for aggressive action against Iran wouldn’t amount to much more than laugh lines for Comedy Channel newscasts, were it not for the involvement of some highly influential, right-wing Christian evangelical leaders in a new Christian Zionist organization, Christians United for Israel, or CUFI
>
> Religious right groups typically support aggressive foreign policies because of their identification with the REPUBLICAN PARTY and their interest in missionizing where the US intervenes. But CUFI, which recently brought 3,500 citizen-lobbyists to Washington, is advocating confrontation with Iran based on “cherry-picked” Biblical interpretations.
ZIONISM IS NOT RECOGNIZED AS BEING THE JEWISH RELIGION OR JEWISH PEOPLE. IT IS A POLITICAL MOVEMENT.

What is Christian Zionism?

Christian Zionism is a movement within Protestant fundamentalism that understands the modern state of Israel as the fulfillment of Biblical prophecy and thus deserving of political, financial, and religious support. Christian Zionists believe that when all Jews are gathered in Israel, Jesus will reappear; there are varying “end times” scenarios for what follows. (For more, please see the Institute for the Study of Christian Zionism.)

Christian Zionism is an extreme modern apocalyptic movement that shares with Nazi philosophy the paranoid idea that Jews and Judaism are the central actors in the world. Both movements seek the eventual dismantling of the Jewish people and Jewish faith – Nazism by death and Christian Zionism by conversion to Christianity

of a remnant of Jews, who will finally learn their “lesson” from the death of most of the Jewish people at Armageddon (Ir Megiddo); then the “left-behind” remnant is expected to commit apostasy by converting to Jesus worship.

All the Christian Zionists’ expressions of love and friendship (for example, Pat Robertson saying “We love the Jewish people”) — all their farm aid (including red heifers to use in revived temple sacrifices) and help for Russian Jews to immigrate to Israel — are preparations for genocide by remote control.

Rabbi Barry Block of Temple Beth El, located in Christians United for Israel leader John Hagee’s home town of San Antonio, writes for the Jewish Telegraphic Agency that “[Hagee] and his group’s partners hew to a theology that mainstream Americans of every faith reject and often abhor. Even as they speak to large congregations, Hagee and his ilk are repudiated by tens of millions of Christians, including evangelicals, and for good reason. The group’s advocacy for Israel will harm everything we hold dear, as Israel and the Jewish people are tarnished by association.”

Christian Zionism entirely ignores Jewish/Zionist aspirations for normalcy. Zionism was to be a new start for Judaism and the Jewish people living enlightened lives in peace. Instead Christian Zionism encourages the Israeli government and the US Jewish organizational leadership on a path toward

enmity with the Palestinians and disrespect for Islam. In his book End of Days: Fundamentalism and the Struggle for the Temple Mount, Gershom Gorenberg pointed to the triad of Christian, Muslim, and Jewish fundamentalisms goading and threatening each other.

Many Jews are puzzled by Hagee’s Christian Zionism. Many do not understand how it differs from altruistic support of Israel. Nonetheless, they welcome it and its blandishments of friendship in the face of so much opposition to Israel.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 10, 2014
Reply

The older U.S. population is growing rapidly as baby boomers age, and more people are living longer:

The face of aging in the United States is changing dramatically — and rapidly, according to a new U.S. Census Bureau report, commissioned by the National Institute on Aging (NIA). Today’s older Americans are very different from their predecessors, living longer, having lower rates of disability, achieving higher levels of education and less often living in poverty. And the baby boomers, the first of whom celebrated their 60th birthdays in 2006, promise to redefine further what it means to grow older in America.
Impact of baby boomers anticipated. Impact of women anticipated. Impact of young people out of decent jobs anticipated.

Impact of people living at or below the poverty level anticipated. We blame the Republican Party right down the line.

Across this Beautiful Country of ours, we will vote for Hillary in 2016. For Democrats now 2014..

BABY-BOOMERS ARE STANDING UP, OUR SENIORS ARE STANDING UP. WE REMEMBER WHEN !!
On 5/15/2014 1:35 PM, Ron wrote:

The oldest president to assume office was Ronald Reagan (age 69 years, 349 days).
Ronald Reagan set a new record when he was re-elected at 73 years of age.

Hillary Clinton,age 66 years (October 26, 1947).

AGE is only a number. She is a very active ” BABY-BOOMER” and will have the support of the rest of us BOOMERS!

Karl Rove your incompetence shows off once again. Maybe you are the one needing to retire, in fact PLEASE DO!

YES ! HILLARY HAS CRACKED THE GLASS CEILING. NOW !! SHE WILL SMASH IT !

WE, the American voters will help her smash it. RUN–HILLARY–RUN !

RUN–HILLARY–RUN SUPPORT HILLARY FOR 2016 WE DRAFT HILLARY

Experience: U.S. Secretary of State 2009-2013, U.S. Senator 2001-2009,
candidate U.S. President 2008, Attorney Rose Law Firm 1976-1992, Former
Staff Attorney Children’s Defense Fund, Co-Founder Arkansas Advocates
for Children and Families.

Israel’s espionage activities in the United States have “crossed red lines,” angering American intelligence officials, according to a new report.
Israel has done nothing more then anger the “AMERICAN PEOPLE”. The atrocities against all neighbors , continued Human Rights violations
against the Palestinian People, also Arabs, Muslims and Christians living in the occupied territory.
Evidence that Israel is a friend and Ally is certainly lacking from the very beginning . END the Corruption. Divest, Sanction, and Boycott..

Hillary has experienced the Middle East problems. She is dedicated to finding a FAIR settlement for all that have suffered as a result
of Zionist movement and abuses. She has witnessed first hand the discrimination against women, and racial discrimination. She has
and will work hard against both.

She believes in separation of Church & State, but will also protect the right to worship , freedom of religion, or no religion.
OUR Constitution will be protected by her administration. She will adapt a check and balance system of governing, unseen
under Republican control.

With all the problems & situations facing our government right NOW. The most important issue is reform of a broken system,
created by the Republicans in office. Rid ourselves of them, and get down to BUSINESS.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
VOTE FOR PEACE IN THIS WORLD OF OURS. VOTE FOR HILLARY AND DEMOCRATS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 10, 2014
Reply

USS LIBERTY COVER-UP 41 YEARS AGO.

For the last 41 years, Israel’s attack on the USS Liberty has been a taboo topic about which neither the Jewish state nor the US has allowed free and open discussion. Like a paid-off judge in the service of organized crime interests pounding his gavel on the bench, for the last 4 decades Israel and her supporters in the US government have bellowed ‘case closed’ and have raked over the coals anyone–including the survivors of the attack themselves–from arguing otherwise. Realizing the tidal wave of outrage that would occur if the American people were to come of age and lose their innocence in realizing what Israel did in murdering 34 American servicemen 4 decades ago in a premeditated act of war (to say nothing of the cover-up perpetrated by the US government) it has been on the list of forbidden topics……until recently.

Cutting short his trip in Europe the first week of July, recently-appointed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Adm. Mike Mullen flew to Tel Aviv along with an entourage of high-ranking US military personnel and, upon his arrival, rushed to meet with the highest-ranking members of Israel’s military establishment. While this is not unusual (as many such meetings have been taking place as of late) what was unusual was the topic discussed–Israel’s attack on the USS Liberty 41 years ago during the 6 day war and how ‘important’ it was that ‘history not repeat itself,’ given the present tensions existing between Israel and Iran. Considering the subject of that meeting and the well-known cover-up that has taken place these last 41 years, the meeting should have made headline news all over America. Sadly, however, it did not, just another testimony to the fact that America is now officially ‘occupied territory’ every bit as much as Arab Palestine.

The fact that the meeting took place at all is news enough, but what is of even more importance is what can be inferred from the meeting. Given the fact that this brazen 2 hour attack upon the United States has been hushed up these last 41 years, there can be little else to conclude by Mullen’s meeting other than the obvious–That someone from within the intelligence or military apparatus of the United States has looked towards the horizon and concluded that Israel is planning a ‘USS Liberty Pt II,’ meaning an attack on a US ship, most likely in the Persian Gulf, leading to a massive loss of life to be then blamed on Iran. As was intended in 1967 when Israel attacked the Liberty, Americans would be incensed into such a war frenzy that they would demand the ‘obliteration’ (a la Hillary Clinton) of the guilty party, the false identity of which the Jewish media establishment in America would be all too glad to provide. And while all players involved have been tight-lipped about the particulars of this story, what can be concluded nevertheless is that Mullen’s impromptu trip to Israel and subsequent discussion was in effect a stern warning to Israel of ‘Don’t even think about it bubba’.
Those who suspect that Mullen (a company man not cut from the same cloth as the recently ‘retired’ Adm. William Fallon) has been afflicted with a sudden case of patriotic fever should consider this recent news against the more likely backdrop of sheer pragmatism. The sad fact is, patriotism more than likely had little to do with it. The US is having its rear end handed to it in Iraq and Afghanistan and now some in Washington are beginning to realize that they‘ve just put their foot into something nasty with regards to Israel’s dirty wars in the Middle East that will never be finished as long as she exists. With oil and virtually all consumer products skyrocketing in price simultaneous to the US economy going down the drain, some now understand that by signing on as Israel’s pit bull in the Muslim world that America will wind up paying the ultimate price for her devotion to the Jewish state, meaning the complete destruction of her economy and her position as a world power.
South Carolina approves Israel-friendly license plates for private cars » The Republican strong hold for NOW!
Leaving the USS Liberty Crew Behind
Exclusive: Justifying the swap of Taliban prisoners for Sgt. Bergdahl, President Obama cited a principle of never leaving U.S. soldiers behind, but that rule was violated in the shabby treatment of the USS Liberty crew, attacked 47 years ago by Israeli warplanes, writes ex-CIA analyst Ray McGovern.

On June 8, 1967, Israeli leaders learned they could deliberately attack a U.S. Navy ship and try to send it, together with its entire crew, to the bottom of the Mediterranean – with impunity. Israeli aircraft and torpedo boats attacked the USS Liberty, a state-of-the-art intelligence collection platform sailing in international waters off the Sinai, killing 34 of the 294 crew members and wounding more than 170.

The crew of the USS Liberty has been “left behind,” in a figurative as well as a physical sense. There is no way to retrieve the bodies of those washed out to sea through the large hole made by the Israeli torpedo that hit the Liberty amidships, killing 26 of the crew.

There is a way, however, to stop throwing salt in the survivors’ wounds, as every U.S. president since Lyndon Johnson has done in acquiescing to the false narrative that it was all a terrible case of mistaken identity and confusion by Israeli command and control. That salt burns – especially on anniversaries of the tragedy, raising troubling questions about the power of the Israel Lobby and the Israeli government over U.S. politicians.(The Zionist Republicans for sure)

In apparent fear of the Israel Lobby and not wanting to offend the Israeli government, U.S. officials including the Navy have refused to come clean on what happened 47 years ago. The mainstream U.S. media has been a willing partner in this failure to face the facts and demand accountability. We all are aware that Media & Congress are holdings of AIPAC & Israel, and Zionist order.

No Accident, plain & simple cover-up by our own officials.

Here, for example, is the text of an intercepted Israeli conversation, just one of many pieces of hard, unambiguous evidence that the Israeli attack was not a mistake:

Israeli pilot to ground control: “This is an American ship. Do you still want us to attack?”

Ground control: “Yes, follow orders.” …

Israeli pilot: “But, sir, it’s an American ship – I can see the flag!”

Ground control: “Never mind; hit it!”

The Israelis would have been able to glory in reporting “mission accomplished, ship sunk, all crew killed” save for the bravery and surefootedness of then-23 year-old Navy seaman Terry Halbardier, whose actions spelled the difference between the murder of 34 of the crew and the intended massacre of all 294.

Halbardier skated across the Liberty’s slippery deck while it was being strafed in order to connect a communications cable and enable the Liberty to send out an SOS. The Israelis intercepted that message and, out of fear of how the U.S. Sixth Fleet would respond, immediately broke off the attack, returned to their bases, and sent an “oops” message to Washington confessing to their unfortunate “mistake.”

As things turned out, the Israelis didn’t need to be so concerned. When President Johnson learned that the USS America and USS Saratoga had launched warplanes to do battle with the forces attacking the Liberty, he told Defense Secretary Robert McNamara to call Sixth Fleet commander Rear Admiral Lawrence Geiss and tell him to order the warplanes to return immediately to their carriers.

According to J.Q. “Tony” Hart, a chief petty officer who monitored these conversations from a U.S. Navy communications relay station in Morocco, Geiss shot back that one of his ships was under attack. Tellingly, McNamara responded: “President Johnson is not going to go to war or embarrass an American ally over a few sailors.”

Getting Away With Murder

For the Israelis, the tight U-turn by the U.S. warplanes over the Mediterranean was proof positive that the Israeli government can literally get away with murder, including killing U.S. servicemen, and that Official Washington and its servile media could be counted upon to cover up the deliberate nature of the attack.

John Crewdson, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist for the Chicago Tribune, asked McNamara about this many years later. McNamara’s answer is worth reading carefully; he said he had “absolutely no recollection of what I did that day,” except that “I have a memory that I didn’t know at the time what was going on.”

Crewsdon has written the most detailed and accurate account of the Israeli attack on the Liberty; it appeared in the Chicago Tribune, and also in the Baltimore Sun, on Oct. 2, 2007. Read it and you’ll understand why Crewdson got no Pulitzer for his investigative reporting on the Liberty. Instead, the Tribune laid him off in November 2008 after 24 years.

Several of the Liberty survivors have become friends of mine. I have listened to their stories, as Crewdson did. When June 8 comes around each year I remember them. And on special occasions, as when Terry Halbardier was finally awarded the Silver Star for his bravery, I write about them.

The mainstream U.S. media has avoided the USS Liberty case like the plague. I just checked the Washington Post and – surprise, surprise – it has missed the opportunity for the 46th consecutive year, to mention the Liberty anniversary.

On the few occasions when the mainstream U.S. media outlets are forced to address what happened, they blithely ignore the incredibly rich array of hard evidence and still put out the false narrative of the “mistaken” Israeli attack on the Liberty.

And they attempt to conflate fact with speculation, asking why Israel would deliberately attack a ship of the U.S. Navy. Why Tel Aviv wanted the Liberty and its entire crew on the bottom of the Mediterranean remains a matter of speculation, but there are plausible theories including Israel’s determination to keep the details of its war plans secret from everyone, including the U.S. government.

But there is no doubt that destroying the Liberty and its crew was the mission assigned to Israel’s warplanes and torpedo boats. One Navy Admiral with a conscience, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (and before that Chief of Naval Operations) Thomas Moorer, has “broken ranks,” so to speak. Moorer helped lead an independent, blue-ribbon commission to investigate what happened to the Liberty.

The following are among the commission’s findings made public in October 2003:

-That the attack, by a U.S. ally, was a “deliberate attempt to destroy an American ship and kill its entire crew”

-That the attack included the machine-gunning of stretcher-bearers and life rafts

-That “the White House deliberately prevented the U.S. Navy from coming to the defense of the [ship] … never before in naval history has a rescue mission been cancelled when an American ship was under attack”

-That surviving crew members were later threatened with “court-martial, imprisonment, or worse” if they talked to anyone about what had happened to them; and were “abandoned by their own government.”

Doing Justice

Will the USS Liberty survivors ever enjoy the opportunity to know and to tell the real story with all its evil cruelties? Or will silence continue to reign? In a different context, Russian dissident author Alexandr Solzhenitzyn wrote this warning about what silence about evil does to the foundations of justice:

“In keeping silent about evil, in burying it so deep within us that no sign of it appears on the surface, we are implanting it, and it will rise up a thousand fold in the future. When we neither punish nor reproach evildoers, we are not simply protecting their trivial old age, we are thereby ripping the foundations of justice from beneath new generations.” Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago

President Obama, the crew of the USS Liberty has been “left behind” for way too many years. Do the right thing by them. Face down those who warn that you cannot risk Israel’s displeasure. And add more substance to your rhetoric about our “pretty sacred rule” that we do not leave anybody wearing the American uniform behind.

Ray McGovern works with Tell the Word, a publishing arm of the ecumenical Church of the Saviour in inner-city Washington. He served as an Army infantry and intelligence officer and then as a CIA analyst for the next 27 years.
Share this Article:
TIME TO DIVEST FROM, BOYCOTT, and SANCTION.

JFK–RFK–MLK–USS LIBERTY–911–IRAQ–PALESTINE–ON AND ON. OCCUPATIONS EVERY WHERE!!
American Jews nervous about public awareness of Israel regime.
Entire world turning against Israel. THAT MEANS MY JOB IS ABOUT DONE. THANK-GOD!!

Ronald L. Waldron
June 13, 2014
Reply

Years ago Labor was the check & Balance, Why not again ? It ended between 1981–1989. Republican Reaganomics–REMEMBER.

YOU CAN BRING IT BACK.
Across this Beautiful Country vote for Democrats 2014, Hillary in 2016.

YES, HILLARY HAS CRACKED THE GLASS CEILING, NOW SHE WILL SMASH IT— VOTE FOR PEACE IN THIS WORLD OF OURS. VOTE FOR HILLARY AND DEMOCRATS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.

The Elitist , Obstructionist Republican Party has now been divided by the Tea Party creation.

A Labor Party being created would most likely divide the Democrat Party.

I have been in hopes that Union Members would wake up and realize that the Democrat Party has been the labor party all along.

What has happen is the Union Leaders have become as corrupt as the Republican Party. They no longer have been fighting for
you against the Corporate lobbies, they have been accepting the Payola money, and living high on the graft. (Corruption).

They no longer give the support to our Party, they no longer fight against the Foreign Trade agreements. OR to fight along
with the Party against the violations of those trade agreements. They were not there for you when the out-sourcing was done.

Our President, and our Party, and our members of the senate & house, have been fighting a losing battle, WHY.
You sit back, pay you dues, vote once in a while, and never watch the cookie jar, while the cook is away.

The strong lobbies Unions have had, disappeared. Only one strong ,Union leader has Disappeared. Never to be found. Where Chicago, Ill.

There have been some strong mafia figures with-in Unions, they did not disappear, they are now paid by their counter-parts (Zionist-Mafia).

You all still keep them and their proteges, in office. Not just your Union officials, but also any Republican candidate you are encouraged

to vote for.

Now, I ask you. What has any Republican done for you or your Union. We have never seen any.

Democrats have promised, and unable to fulfill such. Where has the obstructions come from. Who has control, when it comes to
filibustering, and voting.

We , you & us, have to start holding Officials at any capacity accountable. Your Union officials, and Government Officials.

In our case it is the Democrat Party that have & will support us. WHEN ? When we fulfill our obligations to vote for them
and support them. ( The one way Street does not work )

I look toward the future, remember the past, and try to do my part. I not only make less then $250,000 a year.

I make less then $25,000 a year.

We all are or should be aware, that no one making less then $250,000 should ever vote for a Republican.

Please support the only party, that given control, will stand up for the working class. NOT just the top 2% that
represent Billionaires, Big Business, and foreign lobbies such as AIPAC.

Thank You for Your Courtesy & Consideration.

Ronald L. Waldron ( A regular Concerned American Citizen and Democrat)

Please join me.

Google: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad A Peace Blog

Also: http://www.universal-peace.com For more information

My motto: Divide and conquer . Helped Divide now lets Conquer, vote Democrat all the way–they will save the DAY.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 15, 2014
Reply

On this date I have spoken with several contacts. None have received E-mails I have sent out. They
have not received E-mail from me since mid May. All were sent at least 10 E-mails. Political in
nature. I’m a political activist. Anti-War–Peace messages.

I send to thousands of people, organizations, and political figures.

My records are kept. Each message is kept in my sent file. Registered there as sent.

I have notified all main stream media, politicians, organizations, and regulators. NO RESPONSE FROM
ANYONE. I’m sure the claim will be that they never received such. Time will tell.

Now, this date we heard the fear attacks, the war drums are beating. The false flag operations are
being designed, or on the ready. More Middle East intel they expect us to believe. Be assured most
will be fabricated again as in the past.

The only thing Zionism and Republicans can do is create another mess to cover the truth.

Watch for the false flag operations. You can count on Israel being in the middle. They will
create more WAR and wear the USA out completely. As if we aren’t there already.

Please vote in 2014 and 2016 for Democrats only. Not that they are beyond out-side interest,
the same special interest. How-ever percentage wise we are ahead, and have a better chance
at recovery with them. A fight for our constitution and principles are better served.

We recognize that WARS are generally involved with religious confrontation. That being the
case. We in America believe in separation of Church & State. That we respect all religions
and each person has a right to practice their belief, or no belief. That is freedom and one
of any Democracy. With that being true, we need to practice the same in our foreign policy.
No other Country is a Democracy or qualifies to ba an Ally, or qualifies for our aid with
out the same practice or principles.

With that said, that leads to my censorship, number one amendment of freedom of speech.
To protect my rights I demand my right to bear arms against intrusion. A matter of Defense
of home and home land.That of course does not give me a right to invade my neighbor.
To steal my neighbors land. To wall him out, take his assets for my own. To create a WAR
with him.

NOR can I or my brothers support a Country or foreign policy that does so. We have a right
to demand Peace, to fight for Peace. To demand an end to the present day violations of WAR,
War crimes, and violation of Human Rights.

Beware of the Media, and the propaganda they love to spread,to place us all in fear again and again.
While the whole time their Zionist owners & Partners BENEFIT FOR ISRAEL ONLY.

Remember Zionism and Zionist are not the chosen People, if any one is at all.

Fact Israel profits from WAR. Arms sales, assets, Drug Trafficking, Gambling, Human Trafficking,
prostitution,Bank fraud, Insider trading, election & Tax fraud. Manipulation of most everything
thought of.

Israel is no friend of anyone, no Ally of anyone, the Anti-Christ whos aim is to claim it all,
or destroy it all.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 17, 2014
Reply

By Ronald L. Waldron on June 17, 2014 – 5:11 pm

Good Bye Eric:

Your friends and partners in crime will join you soon, such as Mitch McConnell.
Call it what you may, but the connections to AIPAC, special interest and out right Treason by
Republicans in general is the cause. It has nothing to do with Judaism but certainly does
regarding Zionism. We Americans want to see peace in the World. Republicans/Zionist keep
beating the WAR drums. We see that as more and more false flag operations for special
interest and not ours.

Thank You for your service, but it is also must be seen as no Thank You.

http://WWW.universal-peace.com

Ronald L. Waldron
June 17, 2014
Reply

By Ronald L. Waldron on June 17, 2014 – 5:11 pm

Good Bye Eric:

Your friends and partners in crime will join you soon, such as Mitch McConnell.
Call it what you may, but the connections to AIPAC, special interest and out right Treason by
Republicans in general is the cause. It has nothing to do with Judaism but certainly does
regarding Zionism. We Americans want to see peace in the World. Republicans/Zionist keep
beating the WAR drums. We see that as more and more false flag operations for special
interest and not ours.

Thank You for your service, but it is also must be seen as no Thank You.
http://WWW.universal-peace.com

el paso land for sale
June 19, 2014
Reply

Hello, Neat post. There’s a problem along with your website in internet explorer,
may check this? IE nonetheless is the marketplace chief and a huge component to
other folks will leave out your fantastic writing because of
this problem.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 24, 2014
Reply

PEOPLE POWER: AMERICANS ARE GOING “BLUE”

All of us grass roots people with out Discrimination regarding sex, race, religion, age, disability, or sexual orientation.

“Washington is broken” – we hear it all the time.

Gridlock and partisanship are clogging the system and making progress on our most important issues nearly impossible. And abuse of Senate filibuster rules is one of the top reasons.
Already this year, Republicans in the U.S. Senate have used the filibuster to defeat a minimum wage hike, the Paycheck Fairness Act and – just recently – Elizabeth Warren’s bill to reduce the interest rate on student loans.

It’s maddening, and an attack on middle class families trying to make ends meet.
Because you and I both know there’s a way to break the logjam, In fact, we’ve done it before.

Late last year, we scored a major victory by fixing the filibuster on nominations. Nominees for important executive and judicial offices shouldn’t be held up by partisan politics. And now, President Obama has successfully been able to fill lots of critical executive posts and judicial seats.

Guess what: We can do it again for ALL our issues.

This is about moving important, progressive policies forward. The gridlock has to end!

We are for
PEOPLE POWER

The Red, White, & BLUE Americans will stand-up for what is right.
The Zionist, Corporate run, obstructionist Republican Party certainly is not it.
The corruption of AIPAC, Zionist Billionaires, Israel controlling Congress must be over.

We the People can beat the controlled MEDIA, WAR MONGERS, TAX Evaders, and the ANTI-AMERICAN LOBBIES , FOREIGN OR DOMESTIC.

WHAT DO WE WANT ? WE WANT YOUR VOTE !

Please vote for your Democrat Candidates,
we will work for you, the American people.

The Republican Party, backed by Neocons, Evangelicals, Most American Churches, and of course Zionist helped create the new Chinese economy, now number one in the world. The out-sourcing of our jobs there, extremely unfair trade agreements. Unenforced terms of such agreements. We have borrowed excessive amounts from them, that it is near impossible to pay the interest alone on.

The American people have not had the benefit of congress working on any solutions to benefit us. The cost of Wars for Israel
has and still may bankrupt us completely. The Fascist governments of China, Russia, and Israel will completely defeat any form
of Democracy if we do not change our foreign policies drastically.

Our republican party officials should be charged with TREASON, prosecuted, incarcerated, and face a firing squad.
With the amount of ramped corruption in Washington, no one will ever prosecute.

HOW-EVER, we the people MUST put them out of office. If you will profit like the Koch Brothers, Sheldon Adleson, or any of the
2% that make up 48% of the Billionaires of this Country. Vote Republican. If you make under $250,000 a year the only chance we
have is to vote Democrat.

Fear of Religion Drives Party Crackdown on Chinese Churches

Chinese Christians are calling the recent wave of forced cross removals and church demolitions a deliberate attack on their faith. China now has the world’s fastest-growing Christian population, an unwelcome development for Communist Party officials who consider any large organized group a direct threat to their control of the country.

“Seek peace and pursue it.”- Psalm 34:15

We Americans, grass roots, need to stop the 2% from being able to buy out our officials, Congress or Labor Bosses.
International, Globalization and we sacrifice all. Come on folks bottom line RE-GROUP we owe it to our-selves, and
our next generations of AMERICANS.

Years ago Labor was the check & Balance, Why not again ? It ended between 1981–1989. Republican Reaganomics–REMEMBER.

YOU CAN BRING IT BACK.
Across this Beautiful Country vote for Democrats 2014-16, Hillary in 2016.

THE NEXT TWO ELECTIONS ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT IN AMERICAN HISTORY. DON’T LET OUR ELECTIONS BE BOUGHT OUT.

YES, HILLARY HAS CRACKED THE GLASS CEILING, NOW SHE WILL SMASH IT— VOTE FOR PEACE IN THIS WORLD OF OURS. VOTE FOR HILLARY AND DEMOCRATS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.

The Elitist , Obstructionist Republican Party has now been divided by the Tea Party creation.

A Labor Party being created would most likely divide the Democrat Party.

I have been in hopes that Union Members would wake up and realize that the Democrat Party has been the labor party all along.

What has happen is the Union Leaders have become as corrupt as the Republican Party. They no longer have been fighting for
you against the Corporate lobbies, they have been accepting the Payola money, and living high on the graft. (Corruption).

They no longer give the support to our Party, they no longer fight against the Foreign Trade agreements. OR to fight along
with the Party against the violations of those trade agreements. They were not there for you when the out-sourcing was done.

Our President, and our Party, and our members of the senate & house, have been fighting a losing battle, WHY.
You sit back, pay you dues, vote once in a while, and never watch the cookie jar, while the cook is away.

The strong lobbies Unions have had, disappeared. Only one strong ,Union leader has Disappeared. Never to be found. Where Chicago, Ill.

There have been some strong mafia figures with-in Unions, they did not disappear, they are now paid by their counter-parts (Zionist-Mafia).

You all still keeping them and their proteges, in office. Not just your Union officials, but also any Republican candidate you are encouraged

to vote for. LOOK, THE CORRUPTION IN WASHINGTON, DC INVOLVES CONGRESS AND LABOR BOSSES YOU NEVER SEE ANYMORE.
WHAT GOES ON NOW THAT THEIR OFFICES ARE IN WASHINGTON, DC ?? From the strongest to the weakest. WHO, WHAT WHERE, WHEN,
AND WHY ?? Check it out, it is your job, your dues, your Country, and your sons and Daughters going into these wars. Jobs gone over-seas.
That would not have happened 25-30 years ago.

Now, I ask you. What has any Republican done for you or your Union. We have never seen any.

Democrats have promised, and unable to fulfill such. Where has the obstructions come from. Who has control, when it comes to
filibustering, and voting.

We , you & us, have to start holding Officials at any capacity accountable. Your Union officials, and Government Officials.

In our case it is the Democrat Party that have & will support us. WHEN ? When we fulfill our obligations to vote for them
and support them. ( The one way Street does not work )

I look toward the future, remember the past, and try to do my part. I not only make less then $250,000 a year.

I make less then $25,000 a year.

We all are or should be aware, that no one making less then $250,000 should ever vote for a Republican.

Please support the only party, that given control, will stand up for the working class. NOT just the top 2% that
represent Billionaires, Big Business, and foreign lobbies such as AIPAC.

Thank You for Your Courtesy & Consideration.

Ronald L. Waldron ( A regular Concerned American Citizen and Democrat)

Please join me. Together WE can do all things called impossible.

Google: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad A Peace Blog

Also: http://www.universal-peace.com For more information

My motto: Divide and conquer . Helped Divide now lets Conquer, vote Democrat all the way–they will save the DAY.
NOW who is it up to ? ALL OF US GRASS ROOTS PEOPLE WITH NO DISCRIMINATION !

WE want peace in the world for all people, we do not want GLOBALIZATION that will bring on one Fascist regime.
Class distinction the Rich and us poor.

” The sun comes up in the East, A new Day is born, BUT yesterday will not be forgotten by its victims”

R.L.W.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 7, 2014
Reply

“USA Voters R going “BLUE”

PEOPLE-POWER–AMERICANS WILL STOP
THE BUY OUT OF “OUR” GOVERNMENT.
WE WILL VOTE “DEMOCRAT” EXCLUSIVELY.
People–Power.—USA Voters R going “BLUE”— We will get RID of the CORRUPTION & Grid-lock of Republicans/Zionist.

This congress has an approval rating of 9%. That being the 2% Zionist Billionaires & Friends, that control 65% of the money,
Pay the lowest tax rates. Invest off shore. R_U sick of it? VOTE Democrat all the way…PROTEST VOTE OR NOT get rid of the
top of corruption, Treason, and obstructionist.. VOTE DEMOCRAT—2014 & 16.

>
>
>
> GOP college chairman slams Tea Party, resigns, and joins the Democrats
>
Maine Gov. LePage denies he discussed executing Democratic leaders. But it’s a weak denial.
> PLEASE DISTRIBUTE, I KEEP GETTING SHUT DOWN BY SERVER ??? CENSORED
>
> MORE TO FOLLOW W/ NETWORK NOW 2m+ AND GAINING..
>
NO MORE WARS–NO MORE FALSE FLAG OPERATIONS–NO MORE SUPPORT FOR GENOCIDE–NO MORE AIPAC LOBBIES.

NO MORE DUEL CITIZENS IN GOVERNMENT WITH FOREIGN INTEREST–NO MORE GLOBALIZATION, OUT-SOURCING, BAD
TRADE AGREEMENTS, UNENFORCED TERMS OF SUCH AGREEMENTS, NO MORE UNFAIR TAXATION, NO MORE TAX EXEMPTIONS.
NO MORE OBSTRUCTIONIST.

WE WANT MORE INVESTMENT IN OUR INFRASTRUCTURE AND ENERGY SOURCES.

VOTE-4-PEACE VOTE BLUE FOR AMERICA’S SURVIVAL
DCCC DEMOCRATS

UNITED WE STAND, DIVIDED WE FALL. STAND
AGAINST THE NOW BROKEN SYSTEM AND ZIONIST
CORRUPTION. YOU AND I HAVE A DUTY TO VOTE,
AND TO VOTE FOR WHAT IS RIGHT FOR AMERICA !!

Ronald L. Waldron
July 27, 2014
Reply

> PLEASE STAND WITH US
>
> UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL–VOTE DEMOCRAT
>>
> Let us Stand United together—-Not Divided and falling further into a Fascist Zionist regime.
>
>
> The Karl Rove-affiliated Super PAC – “Kentuckians” for Strong Leadership – announced that it raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in the past three months. But not one penny of it came from Kentucky, nor does Mitch McConnell do anything for Kentucky.
>
> All foreign interest, foreign policy, and foreign give-a-way. In return more free-bees, and
> Millions for ?? campaigning?
>
> With exactly zero contributions from Kentuckians in the past three months, you better believe that “Kentuckians” for Strong Leadership couldn’t care less about what’s right for Kentucky’s working families.
>
> Mitch and his party have been beholden to these Washington special interest groups for nearly 30 years, and they have forgotten about the Americans they are supposed to be representing.
>
> Please help get rid of the grid lock, vote the corruption out of office.
> No more obstruction, no more WAR, no more foreign lobby control.
>
> United WE stand—Divided WE fall.
>
> We fall victim to the ZIONIST political movement. GLOBALIZATION
>
> ONE BANK, ONE GOVERNMENT, ONE RELIGION, ONE FASCIST REGIME, IT IS THE
> WORLDS LARGEST ORGANIZED CRIME SYNDICATE AT THIS VERY TIME.
>
> They presently have controlling interest in the USA, Canada, UK, and involved in
> eighty nations presently. DO some research, or at least READ the material of those
> who have.GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. Peace Blog
>
> Thank You for Your Courtesy;
>
> Ronald L. Waldron (Concerned Citizen Like Yourself)
> “The Kentucky Republican Party…will spend $715,000
> …part of the $5.2 million that it and Zionist Billionaires for more corrupt Leadership,
> a McConnell super PAC, announced it would blow this summer.”
> 7/4/2014
>
> Kentucky, North Carolina, Georgia, Florida,New Hampshire,Ohio, Minnesota, and
> Texas are States that huge amounts will be spent by corrupt Billionaires to keep
> their people in office. ” Their trained and bought” political puppets.
>
> Don’t take my word for it. RESEARCH it for yourselves. Read.
> GOOGLE: Jewish voice for peace , Jews against Zionism, Rabbi’s against Zionism.
> Look up Torah Jews. They had their identity stolen after the Holocaust . Carried
> out by Hitler, paid for by ZIONIST from Russia at the time.
>
> WATCH OUT, HOUSE OF TREASON, (NOW), TRUTH COUNTS (ARE YOU GETTING IT),
> WHAT-IF? (Middle East Peace), DECEPTION (Is it or Not), FINAL REPORT-(Written First).
>
> Six Books: http://WWW.universal-peace.com
>
> GOOGLE: THE UGLY TRUTH Read–Think. Where do things add up for you, your family, your community, and The generations to follow. Which party is most concerned about the ecology, ecosystem, toxic materials,
> water & air quality World wide. China’s violation of all EPA rules & standards set up for us.
> The infrastructure here in America, not the Middle East. We have no Allies there.
>
> SEE YOU AT THE POLES On November 4, 2014.
>
> We ask you to join us. VOTE DEMOCRAT.
>
>

Ronald L. Waldron
July 27, 2014
Reply

If Americans Knew

Overview | Children | Deaths | Injuries | US Taxes | UN Resolutions | Prisoners | Home Demolitions | Economy | Settlements
More Sharing ServicesShare|Share on facebookShare on emailShare on favoritesShare on print
Subscribe to RSS Feed

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is one of the world’s major sources of instability. Americans are directly connected to this conflict, and increasingly imperiled by its devastation.

It is the goal of If Americans Knew to provide full and accurate information on this critical issue, and on our power – and duty – to bring a resolution.
Please click on any statistic for the source and more information.
Statistics last updated July 25, 2014

Israeli and Palestinian Children Killed
September 29, 2000 – Present

131 Israeli children have been killed by Palestinians and 1,716 Palestinian children have been killed by Israelis since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information)
Chart showing that approximately 12 times more Palestinian children have been killed than Israeli children

Israelis and Palestinians Killed
September 29, 2000 – Present
Chart showing that 6 times more Palestinians have been killed than Israelis.

1,156 Israelis and at least 7,810 Palestinians have been killed since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information)

Israelis and Palestinians Injured
September 29, 2000 – Present

8,600 Israelis and 62,201 Palestinians have been injured since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information.)
Chart showing that Palestinians are injured at least six times more often than Israelis.

Daily U.S. Military Aid to Israel and the Palestinians
Fiscal Year 2013
Chart showing that the United States gives Israel $8.2 million per day in military aid and no military aid to the Palestinians.

During Fiscal Year 2013, the U.S. is providing Israel with at least $8.5 million per day in military aid and $0 in military aid to the Palestinians. (View Sources & More Information)

UN Resolutions Targeting Israel and the Palestinians
1955 – 1992

Israel has been targeted by at least 77 UN resolutions and the Palestinians have been targeted by 1. (View Sources & More Information)
Chart showing that Israel has been targeted by 77 UN resolutions, while the Palestinians have been targeted by 1.

Current Number of Political Prisoners and Detainees
Chart showing that Israel is holding 5,271 Palestinians prisoner.

0 Israelis are possibly being held prisoner by Palestinians, while 6,000 Palestinians are currently imprisoned by Israel. (View Sources & More Information)

Demolitions of Israeli and Palestinian Homes
1967 – Present

0 Israeli homes have been demolished by Palestinians and at least 28,000 Palestinian homes have been demolished by Israel since 1967. (View Sources & More Information)
Chart showing that more than 28,000 Palestinian homes have been demolished, compared to no Israeli homes.

Israeli and Palestinian Unemployment Rates
Chart depicting the fact that the Palestinian unemployment is around 4 times the Israeli unemployment rate.

The Israeli unemployment rate is 5.8%, while the Palestinian unemployment in the West Bank is 22.5% and 27.9% in Gaza. (View Sources & More Information)

Current Illegal Settlements on the Other’s Land

Israel currently has 262 Jewish-only settlements and ‘outposts’ built on confiscated Palestinian land. Palestinians do not have any settlements on Israeli land. (View Sources & More Information)
Chart showing that Israel has 227 Jewish-only settlements on Palestinian land.
More Sharing ServicesShare|Share on facebookShare on emailShare on favoritesShare on print

New infographic and key facts

Since Israel began its latest offensive “Operation Protective Edge” on July 8, 2014, 901 Palestinians and 44 Israelis have been killed. Although the media is largely portraying Israel’s actions as defensive, violence in the region did not begin with the kidnapping and murder of the three Israel settlers on June 12, 2014. Read more

Take action: Call your Congress person at 202-224-3121 and ask them to demand that Israel stop its massacre, attend a demonstration in support of the people of Gaza, and donate to a charity that’s providing immediate aid.
Alison Weir book tour

Alison Weir speaks in a number of cities across the country. Please continue to check the book website for new events and updates!
Against Our Better Judgment: Order on Amazon now!

Alison Weir’s new book has been called ‘a game changer’ and ‘prodigiously documented.’ This quick read (260 pages) delves into history that has been neglected, illuminating the real reasons the U.S. backed the creation of Israel.

Read a review by former U.S. Senator James Abourezk.

Buy the book on Amazon.com.
National Summit to Reassess the US-Israel “Special Relationship”

Broadcast Friday, March 7 on C-SPAN! A diverse panel of experts, including former military and intelligence personnel, examined the relationship between the U.S. and Israel, and the impact of lobbying groups on U.S. policy in the Middle East. Watch the entire program online.
If Americans Knew Videos

Click here to watch more videos by If Americans Knew or order a DVD.
Israel-Palestine: The Missing Headlines

Current news from and about the region largely going unreported by US media – usually updated daily. More
Featured Links

The Origin of the Palestine-Israel Conflict

Media Report Cards

4 Most Common Myths About Israel and Gaza – Debunked

Upcoming Speaking Events

Nakba Packs – educational materials

Ronald Waldron
August 3, 2014
Reply

Should the GOP fight Obama on
Gun Control?

(Vote Now) Urgent Poll – Make your voice heard
Our most important issue for this Election.

The GOP should give every one over the age of 14 an AK-47. Any one else should carry a hand grenade.
We should be able to pick them up, and any ammo needed at you local Church. How-ever any undocumented immigrant should only have pistols, rifles, shot guns, and drones.

Make the NRA your favorite lobby instead of a foreign one. Now that will make us safe from wild animals, and the government.

Just for practice, no one should eat pork, thus make any sow, bore, or piglet you see running down the street a target. A turkey call, and yelling oink, oink, oink is permitted.

Only the SPCA, sexual predators, and GOP members can call out, here piggy, piggy, piggy.

This important message is brought to you by Mitch McConnell,
John Boehner, Carl Rove, and the NRA.

They may keep Congress in secession over the summer on this
issue alone.

Allen D. Post
August 7, 2014
Reply

Israel – our absolute worst enemy! BOYCOTT & DIVEST..

Americans should give-up weapons. BUT give assault weapons to kids in Israel.
WE NEED NEW LEADERSHIP IN THE USA. NO MORE ISRAELI OCCUPATION IN
WASHINGTON, DC. 70% OF OUR BUDGET GOES TO THE PENTAGON. 65% OF
THAT GOES FOR FOREIGN INTEREST.

United we stand–Divided we fall. Republicans partnership with Zionist
AIPAC, Israel, and Zionist Billionaires, The organized international world crime syndicate. VOTE all out of office.

Let’s Stop the War Party from Destroying America!

Thank you for your support of Peace Action Education Fund. By cutting wasteful war and weapons spending we can repair our damaged economy without cutting vital programs like Medicare and Social Security.

It’s shocking that in America, one man can censor what political ads are run on his TV stations.

Stanley Hubbard — a mega-donor to the GOP and a close ally of the Koch brothers — refused to run an ad that criticized Stewart Mills on two Minnesota stations that he owns.

If this decision holds, it would set a dangerous precedent. So we’re teaming up with our partner AFSCME, who helped create the ad, to demand that the stations air our ad

. We can’t let these ultra-wealthy, conservative donors unilaterally decide what goes on TV. That is why we see more of Netanyahu on our TV stations then we do our PRESIDENT. The most TV time Obama has been able to negotiate is on talk shows.
BOYCOTT REPUBLICANS, ISRAEL, AIPAC, ZIONISM AND ANY ORGANIZATION SUPPORTING SUCH ATROCITIES. RELIGIOUS OR OTHERWISE.

VOTE DEMOCRAT. Americans to control our own government and party,
take it back.

Israel is recognized by AMERICAN’S as our worse enemy.

Israel – our absolute worst enemy!

ALAN SABROSKY EXPLAINS THE ANTI-AMERICAN AGENDA ISRAEL’S ZIONISM REPRESENTS, USING 911 AS A TRAGIC EXAMPLE

Alan Sabrosky, a writer and consultant specializing in national and international security affairs, discloses intriguing facts on the implication of Israel in 9/11 events that are by and large unheard of in mainstream media.

Mr Sabrosky also agreed with the following information about Israel, AIPAC and a bought and paid for U.S. Congress:

Are you dangerously stuck in the matrix?In “corruption”

America’s worst enemy: Israel In “corruption”

Israel and our ‘enemies’ that defend it: AIPAC In “corruption”
This entry was posted in corruption, Government and tagged 911, AIPAC, Congress, Israel, WTC 7, Zionism. Bookmark the permalink.
← War veteran explains the politics of war
The expanding Earth and the creation of matter →
Responses to “Israel – our absolute worst enemy!”

Zionism was created by Theodor Herzel and others at the end of the 19th Century, and in that era it was commonplace to be colonialist, to be racist, to be super-nationalist, to adore the nation-state,so the idea of France for the French, Germany for the Germans, and then some state for the Jews. This all formed the basis for Zionism.

Zionism and Judaism are contrary to each other. Because Judaism is universal and humane, and Zionism is exactly the opposite. It is very narrow, very nationalistic, racist, colonialist, and all this. There is no “National Judaism.” There is Zionism and there is Judaism, and they are completely different.

Zionism has nothing to do with Judaism. Because Judaism – a Reform Movement- that is highly, highly ethical. And so, you cannot connect Zionism with “highly ethical.” You can only connect the words “aggressive,” “oppressive,” “stealing,” “robbing” with Zionism. But not “highly ethical.”

The Khazarian Zionists (non-Jewish illuminati) hijacked our governments, currencies, big business, institutions, education, media and minds; got all of us in debt, then collapsed the global economy.

Greedy and ideological Zionists contributed to the growth of the Third Reich via the so-called “Transfer Agreement” – a business arrangement to transfer German Jews to Palestine. In return, German exports would be bought through Zionist entities to ensure the economic growth and wealth of Palestine. Most significant is the success of the 18th Zionist Congress to go against the international boycott movement by suppressing the Revisionists and strong-arming them into abandoning their ideology.

If the boycott had prevailed, Germany may not even exist today and the Holocaust would have never happened.

The facts are clear that Zionists made Hitler’s 3rd Reich possible and ultimately spawned the Zio-Fascist and terrorist State that Israel has now become.

Israeli Zionist leaders continue to indulge in the persecution of Jews by falsely claiming that Zionism is a goal of Judaism. It’s time to make a clear distinction between Judaism and Zionism, also known as Zio-Fascism.

“Our race is the Master Race. We are divine gods on this planet. We are as different from the inferior races as they are from insects. In fact, compared to our race, other races are beasts and animals, cattle at best. Other races are considered as human excrement. Our destiny is to rule over the inferior races. Our earthly kingdom will be ruled by our leader with a rod of iron. The masses will lick our feet and serve us as our slaves.” Menaheim Begin, 6th Prime Minister of Israel.

Does this narrative sound familiar to you? Think Nazi.

The Jewish people has been unique by its identity as a religious entity. Through the centuries its religious character had been a premise agreed upon by Jews and non-Jews alike. Jewish religious and traditional history bears no aspect of racism. Hence, one of non-Jewish origin is capable of being proselytized and attaining the same status as a born Jew. Conversely, one of Jewish birth who does not recognize his being bound to the Jewish Torah, is by Jewish law a heretic, and therefore forfeits his spiritual birthrights as a Jew.

Through the many years that Jews resided in the Holy Land enjoyed tranquil and cordial relations with the non-Jewish population there.

The Zionist movement which was formed at the latter part of the last century, sought to endow the Jews with a nationalistic character which was heretofore strange to them. It sought to deprive them of their historically religious character and offered a nationalistic ideology and the possibility of establishing through political media, a Jewish national homeland.

During the period of the British Mandate, the Balfour Declaration, which recognized the eventual possibility of founding a Jewish national homeland, in Palestine, was affirmed to be the British government. The Jewish Agency, who then was the Chief representative of Zionist interests in the Holy Land, was entrusted with the issuance of visas to the Holy Land, thus resulting in an increased Zionist immigration from various parts of the world, which ultimately succeeded in superceding in numbers, the veteran Orthodox dwellers.

Orthodox Jewry all over the world and the Orthodox Community in the Holy Land in particular, immediately sensed in this stage of Zionist success, the threat of grave danger for the religious future of Jews. The Arab inhabitants began to exhibit open hostility to their Jewish neighbors. The British government failed to distinguish between the Orthodox community, who for generations in habited the Holy Land, and the newly arrived Zionist immigrants.

With the acquisition by the Zionist nationalists of the power to organize communities in Palestine, they formed the Vaad Haleumi Leknesset Yisroel (National Jewish Council Committee). This committee ignored the rights of the Orthodox veteran dwellers who did not recognize this validity of Jewish nationality, and whose identification as Jews was solely with their loyalty to their religious heritage. The religious inhabitants, on the other hand, shuddered at the prospects of spiritual disintegration of World Jewry, with the new rise to power of the Zionist nationalists.

The Orthodox inhabitants actively objected to being subject to the authority of the secularists. They appealed their cause to the League of Nations, who consequently granted them a “Right of exclusion” to the subjugation to the Vaad Haleumi, which rights provided that any Jew wishing not to be incorporated into the Vaad Haleumi, may remain lawfully independent if he so stated his wish in writing. Thousands of Jews did so.

Such was the case until November 1948, when the United Nations finally sanctioned the establishment of a Zionist State. Zionists’ success in finally realizing their goal was due in great measure to their having misled the world into viewing the Zionist cause as the Jewish cause. The formation of the Zionist state resulted in the automatic deprivation of the autonomy heretofore possessed by the Orthodox inhabitants of the Holy Land.

The origins of the UN can be found in the financing of the same Zionist banking families, the Rothschilds, Schiffs, Warbugs, Lazards and Oppenheimers, who have financed strife on this earth for centuries. The UN was created to justify the existence of the Zionist entity as a legitimate nation-state, to put a shroud on its hideous supremacist character; this rings true with the fact that the Security Council never even ratified the resolution which proposed the legitimacy of a Jewish ‘state’ in Palestine. Despite this, and despite the illegal Jewish colonization of Palestine financed by the Rothschild family since the 1880s and the horrible Zionist atrocities of the Nakba in 1948, still the UN recognized this fabricated regime, still gave it a name and a seat. Why? Because its godfathers, the Zionist bankers, wanted it that way. The UN is a tool of international Zionist power.

The same UN that introduced Resolution 661 to Iraq, the treacherous ‘sanctions resolution,’ which crippled Iraq, prepared it for the Zionist invasion of 2003 and murdered over 2 million people by starvation including 800,000 Iraqi children. The same UN that paved the way for the mutilation of Libya, in which at least 100,000 have been mass murdered by NATO and its Israeli-advised rebel thugs. The same UN that now seeks to turn Syria into another Iraq or Libya 2.0.

The Zionists grasped in the acquisition of their new powers, the opportunity to openly disassociate themselves from any identification with Jews as a religion. They systematically began to orient the minds of their generations according to the tenets of Zionist nationalism. Through the Ministry of Religions they employed part of the Rabbinate to assist them in their aims.

The religious Jews who by virtue of their faith, clearly contradicted Zionist nationalism, and who had lived peacefully with their Arab neighbors for generations, became unwillingly identified with the Zionist cause and their struggle with the Arabs. They requested the United Nations that Jerusalem be designated as a defacto international city. They appealed to the diplocatic corps assigned to Jerusalem – but to no avail. They were hence confronted with the choice of either becoming a part of the Zionist State, which diametrically opposed the interests of Jews as a religion, or abandoning the land of which their forefathers were the first Jewish settlers.

Judaism in its correct form is not a religion of hate any more than are Christianity, Islam or Buddhism. Zionism, however, is a secular, geopolitical system of hate…it is NOT a religion. It is a power cult (hiding behind the Jewish faith) of death, greed, lying, avarice and self-aggrandizement which views with contempt and derision all who do not subscribe or submit to its dogma.

Today’s Zionists are largely the descendants of the hideous butchers who slaughtered over 30 million Russian Christians. These are the descendants of the murderous thugs who murdered 1.5 million Armenians and do not want to ‘talk about it’. When US Congress voted to recognize the Armenian genocide, the AIPAC and ADL Zionist gangsters swung into action and forced the cancellations of the Resolution. And the US wonders why Armenia does not trust Zionist Jews and US at all.

These are the conniving, lying, genocidal beasts who wanted Iraq stomped to death by US and UK so Iraqis could not benefit from their own oil and natural gas wealth.

These are the same demented nuclear terrorists in control of 600 thermonuclear WMD who are now trying to force a war with Iran…even though Russia is already on the record saying that ANY attack on Iran will be viewed as an attack on Russian interests.

Zionists are always chattering about ‘peace’ but, in reality, it is the LAST thing they want. Peace is not profitable and is simply not going to pave the way for Zionism to dominate the planet. However, divide and conquer just might. This is even all the more mind-boggling to most clueless Americans who cannot understand how a minority group of Zionists within the world’s total Jewish population of about 15 million can have come to control so much of the Western world.

Long ago, there was a Medieval Kingdom of Khazaria, 652-1016 AD that included part of modern day Russia, Ukraine, and a sliver of what is now Kazakhstan. This area was somewhat interesting in history because when considering the choice of Islam, or Christianity or Judaism the leaders of this ‘empire’ decided to declare themselves Jewish. That was a very odd choice in an area of the world which was predominately Islam and Christian.

The Khazaria Empire could not extend any further south because the Tatars and Turkmen proved to be about as obstinate as the Afghans have been throughout history.

The Khazarian ‘Jews’ are NOT descendants of the 12 Tribes of Israel and their world view and lack of truly, pious spiritual Judaism have created conflict within that religion ever since.
To a great extent, these are our current day Zionist Jews (including Neocons, of course) who have formed a world power banking, extortion cult of war and death that has little or nothing to do with being devout adherents of Judaism. These are the folks who think nothing of breaking the law, lying (Kol Nidre), stealing, graft, corruption, assassination, blackmail, extortion or destroying tens of millions of people to get their way.

Throughout the past century, they have done just that in directly and indirectly liquidating over 100 million people. These soul- less ‘reptilian’ killers obey only the Talmud, not the laws of the lands they live in. This very behavior and ‘ethics’ appear, in fact, in the Talmud as Rabbinical teaching. Most pious Jews of good heart and conscience who follow the Torah know that such is not the way to achieve civilized, enlightened society.

This is, in part, one of the reasons “Jew haters” have often been unable to differentiate between the truly religious descendants of the 12 Tribes of Israel (the ones the Old Testament of the Bible is about) and these squatters and interlopers who came from Central Asia and have, for the most part, taken over their religion and turned it into an evil club of power manipulation, greed, money, war, death and destruction.

Many true Torah Jews are highly-offended at the atrocities these Zionist Khazars Talmudic Jews have inflicted on mankind. From the huge massacre of Russian Christians, to the mass starvation holocaust of 30 million Ukrainians, to the creation of Nazism/fascism of World War II, to the mass slaughter of Christian Armenians, and to the current day blood-lust genocide of Iraq. These Zionist Khazars have made it abundantly clear, to the tune of over 100 million dead, that they have nothing but murderous contempt of Christians and Muslims.

The problem is not ‘the Jews’…the problem is the KHAZAR Jews who are THE power behind Zionist Israel, the UK and US.

Just as the Himalaya Mountains are the geologic division between the continent of Asia and the continent of India, the Caucasus Mountains separate Central Asia and Europe. Geologically and geographically speaking, Georgia is NOT part of Europe.

Georgia was apparently never part of the Khazar empire and was predominately Christian until recent times. Most of what is now Ukraine used to be part of the Khazaria Empire. Georgia – a predominately Muslim, non-European nation that grows steadily more under the control of Khazar Zionist US Jews and their Muslim confederates.

What is going on in Georgia – and the constant provocation of Russia – the Russia has put up with all of the shit from the Zionist West it intends to tolerate.

Georgia is a good place to set up basese to wage covert war and black ops against Russia, which is now geographically sitting on what used to be the Khazaria Empire. That is why there are thousands Israeli and Blackwater mercenaries in Georgia now.

The deep seated hatred of Russia by these Khazars goes back over 1,000 years when Russia crushed their empire and many of them fled to Europe into the areas now called Poland, Romania and Hungary, and Ukraine. Those who remained were under Russian rule for a while but even that changed in about 100 years time.

During the 10th century, the East Slavs were united under Scandinavian overlordship. A new nation, Kievan Rus, was formed by Prince Oleg. Just as the Khazars had left their mark on other peoples, so too did they influence the Rus. The Rus and the Hungarians both adopted the dual-kingship system of the Khazars. The Rus princes even borrowed the title kagan. Archaeologists recovered a variety of Khazar or Khazar-style objects (including clothing and pottery) from Viking gravesites in Chernigov, Gnezdovo, Kiev, and even Birka (Sweden). The residents of Kievan Rus patterned their legal procedures after the Khazars. In addition, some Khazar words became part of the old East Slavic language: for example, bogatyr (“brave knight”) apparently derives from the Khazar word baghatur.

The Rus inherited most of the former Khazar lands in the late 10th century and early 11th century. One of the most devastating defeats came in 965, when Rus Prince Svyatoslav conquered the Khazar fortress of Sarkel. It is believed that he conquered Itil two years later, after which he campaigned in the Balkans. Despite the loss of their nation, the Khazar people did not disappear. Some of them migrated westward into Hungary, Romania, and Poland, mixing with other Jewish communities.

Both the Russians and remaining Khazars had to flee for their lives when the Mongol hordes took over most of Asia under the leadership of Genghis Khan, 1161-1227. Many of these Khazar Jews had no choice but flee with the Russians northeast, and have been a murderous pain to Russia for much of its history since.

Since the conquest of the Khazars by the Russians and the disappearance of the Khazar Kingdom the language of the Khazars is known as Yiddish. for about six centuries the Khazar Jews of eastern Europe have referred to themselves while still resident in their native eastern European countries as “Yiddish” by nationality. Yiddish must not be confused with Hebrew because they both use the same characters as their alphabets. There is not one word of Yiddish in ancient Hebrew nor is there one word of ancient Hebrew in Yiddish.

These were the “Jews” that came into power in 1917 with the Bolshevik Revolution, and Lenin needed their help to topple Tsar Nicholas, the last remnant of the Romanov dynasty. They helped overthrow Tsar Nicholas because he was not friendly to the Khazar Jews. These were the Zionist Jews who murdered 40 million Russians who refused to give up their land or bow down to Bolshevik-Khazarian-Zionism.

In January of 1916 Leon Trotsky(Lev Bronstein) was expelled from France and came to USA. His expenses were paid by a Khazar Jew Jacob Schiff who was head of the New York investment firm Kuhn, Loeb and Company, had raised the capital for large war loans to Japan. It was due to this funding that the Japanese were able to launch a stunning attack against the Russians at Port Arthur and the following year to virtually decimate the Russian fleet. We must remember, that Jacob Schiff was a Khazar Jew and that Khazarian Jews had been persecuted under the Tsarist regime.

When Trotsky returned to Petrograd in May of 1917 to organize the Bolshevik phase of the Russian Revolution, he carried $10,000 for travel expenses, a generously ample fund considering the value of the dollar at that time. Trotsky was arrested by Canadian and British naval personnel, when the ship, on which he was traveling, the S.S. Kristianiafjord, put in at Halifax.

Trotsky was not arrested on a whim. He was recognized as a threat to the best interests of England, Canada’s mother country in the British Commonwealth. Tsarist regime was an ally of England in the First World War. Anything, that would weaken Russia – and that certainly included internal revolution – would be, in effect, to strengthen Germany and weaken England.

In New York on the night before his departure Trotsky had given a speech, in which he said: “I am going back to Russia to overthrow the provisional government and stop the war with Germany.” Trotsky therefore represented a real threat to England’s war effort. He was arrested as a German agent and taken as a prisoner of war.

Immediately telegrams began to come into Halifax from such divergent sources, as an obscure attorney in New York City, from the Canadian Deputy Postmaster-General and even from a high-ranking British military officer, all inquiring into Trotsky’s situation and urging his immediate release. The head of the British Secret Service in USA at the time was Sir William Wiseman, who occupied the apartment directly above the apartment of Edward Mandell House and who had become fast friends with him. Edward Mandell House advised Sir William Wiseman, that US President Woodrow Wilson wished to have Trotsky released. Wiseman advised his government and the British Admiralty issued orders on April 21st, that Trotsky was to be sent on his way.

Trotsky could not have gone even as far as Halifax without having been granted an American passport and this was accomplished by the personal intervention of US President Woodrow Wilson.

Although Khazar Jews have never made up more than 5% of the population of Russia, they played a highly disproportionate and decisive role in the Bolshevik regime, effectively dominating the Soviet government during its early years.

With the exception of Lenin (Vladimir Ulyanov), most of the leading Communists who took control of Russia in 1917-20 were Khazar Jews. Leon Trotsky (Lev Bronstein) headed the Red Army and, for a time, was chief of Soviet foreign affairs. Yakov Sverdlov (Solomon) was both the Bolshevik party’s executive secretary and – as chairman of the Central Executive Committee- head of the Soviet government. Grigori Zinoviev (Radomyslsky) headed the Communist International (Comintern), the central agency for spreading revolution in foreign countries. Other prominent Khazar Jews included press commissar Karl Radek (Sobelsohn), foreign affairs commissar Maxim Litvinov (Wallach), Lev Kamenev (Rosenfeld) and Moisei Uritsky

Lenin himself was of mostly Russian and Kalmuck ancestry, but he was also one-quarter Khazar Jewish. His maternal grandfather, Israel (Alexander) Blank, was a Ukrainian Khazar Jew.

In the Communist seizure of power in Russia, the Khazar Jewish role was very critical.

2 weeks prior to the Bolshevik “October Revolution” of 1917, Lenin convened a top secret meeting in St. Petersburg (Petrograd) at which the key leaders of the Bolshevik party’s Central Committee made the fateful decision to seize power in a violent takeover. Of the 12 men who took part in this decisive gathering, there were 4 Russians (including Lenin), 1 Georgian (Stalin), one Pole (Dzerzhinsky), and 6 Khazar Jews.

To direct the takeover, a 7 person “Political Bureau” was chosen. It consisted of 2 Russians (Lenin and Bubnov), 1 Georgian (Stalin), and 4 Khazar Jews (Trotsky, Sokolnikov, Zinoviev, and Kamenev).

Meanwhile, the Petersburg (Petrograd) Soviet whose chairman was Trotsky, established an 18 member “Military Revolutionary Committee” to actually carry out the seizure of power. It included 8 Russians, 1 Ukrainian, 1 Pole, 1 Caucasian, and 6 Khazar Jews.

Finally, to supervise the organization of the uprising, the Bolshevik Central Committee established a 5 person “Revolutionary Military Center” as the Party’s operations command. It consisted of 1 Russian (Bubnov), 1 Georgian (Stalin), 1 Pole (Dzerzhinsky), and 2 Khazar Jews (Sverdlov and Uritsky).

With the notable exception of Lenin, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Khazar Jewish leaders. Thus Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate, Litvinoff, and the influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of Trotsky or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or Radek – all Khazar Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Khazar Jews is even more astonishing. And the prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the Extraordinary Commissions for Combating Counter-Revolution [the Cheka] has been taken by Khazar Jews.

David R. Francis, US ambassador in Russia, warned in a January 1918 dispatch to Washington: “The Bolshevik leaders here, most of whom are Khazar Jews and 90% of whom are returned exiles, care little for Russia or any other country but are internationalists and they are trying to start a worldwide social revolution.”

The Netherlands’ ambassador in Russia, Oudendyke, made much the same point a few months later: “Unless Bolshevism is nipped in the bud immediately, it is bound to spread in one form or another over Europe and the whole world as it is organized and worked by Khazar Jews who have no nationality, and whose one object is to destroy for their own ends the existing order of things.”

Immediately after the Bolshevik Revolution, many Khazar Jews were euphoric over their high representation in the new government. Lenin’s first Politburo was dominated by men of Khazar Jewish origins

Under Lenin, Khazar Jews became involved in all aspects of the Revolution, including its dirtiest work. Despite the Communists’ vows to eradicate antisemitism, it spread rapidly after the Revolution – partly because of the prominence of so many Khazar Jews in the Soviet administration, as well as in the traumatic, inhuman Sovietization drives that followed. Immensely disproportionate number of Khazar Jews joined the new Bolshevik secret police – the Cheka – and many of those who fell afoul of the Cheka would be shot by Khazar Jewish investigators.

The collective leadership that emerged in Lenin’s dying days was headed by the Khazar Jew Zinoviev, a loquacious, mean-spirited, curly-haired Adonis whose vanity knew no bounds.

Anyone who had the misfortune to fall into the hands of the Cheka stood a very good chance of finding himself confronted with, and possibly shot by, a Khazar Jewish investigator. In Ukraine Khazar Jews made up nearly 80% of the rank-and-file Cheka agents. Beginning as the Cheka, or Vecheka the Soviet secret police was later known as the GPU, OGPU, NKVD, MVD and KGB.

Yakov M. Yurovksy, the leader of the Bolshevik squad that carried out the murder of the Tsar and his family, was Khazar Jewish, as was Sverdlov, the Soviet chief who co-signed Lenin’s execution order.

Khazar Jews were “amazingly” numerous among the personnel of the Bolshevik secret police. The characteristic Khazar Jewishness of the Bolshevik executioners, is most conspicuous in the execution of Nicholas II.

The execution was personally overseen by Yakov Yurovsky who shot the Tsar; the president of the local Soviet was Beloborodov (Vaisbart); the person responsible for the general administration in Ekaterinburg was Shaya Goloshchekin. To round out the picture, on the wall of the room where the execution took place was a distich from a poem by Heine (written in German) about King Balthazar, who offended Jehovah and was killed for the offense.

The whole record of Bolshevism in Russia is indelibly impressed with the stamp of alien invasion. The murder of the Tsar, deliberately planned by the Khazar Jew Sverdlov (who came to Russia as a paid agent of Germany) and carried out by the Khazar Jews Goloshchekin, Syromolotov, Safarov, Voikov and Yurovsky, is the act not of the Russian people, but of this hostile invader.

In the struggle for power that followed Lenin’s death in 1924, Stalin emerged victorious over his rivals, eventually succeeding in putting to death nearly every one of the most prominent early Bolsheviks leaders – including Trotsky, Zinoviev, Radek, and Kamenev. With the passage of time, and particularly after 1928, the Khazar Jewish role in the top leadership of the Soviet state and its Communist party diminished markedly.

For a few months after taking power, Bolshevik leaders considered bringing “Nicholas Romanov” before a “Revolutionary Tribunal” that would publicize his “crimes against the people” before sentencing him to death. Historical precedent existed for this. Two European monarchs had lost their lives as a consequence of revolutionary upheaval: England’s Charles I was beheaded in 1649, and France’s Louis XVI was guillotined in 1793.

In these cases, the king was put to death after a lengthy public trial, during which he was allowed to present arguments in his defense. Nicholas II, though, was neither charged nor tried. He was secretly put to death – along with his family and staff — in the dead of night, in an act that resembled more a gangster-style massacre than a formal execution.

Why did Lenin and Sverdlov abandon plans for a show trial of the former Tsar? Nicholas and his family were murdered because the Bolshevik rulers knew quite well that they lacked genuine popular support, and rightly feared that the Russian people would never approve killing the Tsar, regardless of pretexts and legalistic formalities.

For his part, Trotsky defended the massacre as a useful and even necesssary measure.

“The decision to kill the imperial family was not only expedient but necessary. The severity of this punishment showed everyone that we would continue to fight on mercilessly, stopping at nothing. The execution of the Tsar’s family was needed not only in order to frighten, horrify, and instill a sense of hopelessness in the enemy but also to shake up our own ranks, to show that there was no turning back, that ahead lay either total victory or total doom This Lenin sensed well.”

In the years leading up to the 1917 revolution, Khazar Jews were disproportionately represented in all of Russia’s subversive leftist parties. Khazar Jewish hatred of the Tsarist regime had a basis in objective conditions. Of the leading European powers of the day, imperial Russia was the most institutionally conservative and anti-Khazar Jewish. For example, Khazar Jews were normally not permitted to reside outside a large area in the west of the Empire known as the “Pale of Settlement.”

However understandable, and perhaps even defensible, Khazar Jewish hostility toward the imperial regime may have been, the remarkable Khazar Jewish role in the vastly more despotic Soviet regime is less easy to justify. the Khazar Jewish role in supporting the Bolshevik regime the “historic sin of the Jews.” For example, to the prominent role of Khazar Jews as commandants of Soviet Gulag concentration and labor camps, and the role of Khazar Jewish Communists in the systematic destruction of Russian churches. The Khazar Jews of the entire world supported Soviet power, and remained silent in the face of any criticism from the opposition.

The exaggeratedly enthusiastic participation of the Khazar Jewish Bolsheviks in the subjugation and destruction of Russia is a sin that will be avenged Soviet power will be equated with Khazar Jewish power, and the furious hatred against the Bolsheviks will become hatred against Khazar Jews.

A few weeks after the Ekaterinburg massacre, the newspaper of the fledgling Red Army declared:

“Without mercy, without sparing, we will kill our enemies by the scores of hundreds, let them be thousands, let them drown themselves in their own blood. For the blood of Lenin and Uritskii let there be floods of blood of the bourgeoisie – more blood, as much as possible.”

Grigori Zinoviev, speaking at a meeting of Communists in September 1918, effectively pronounced a death sentence on ten million human beings: “We must carry along with us 90 million out of the 100 million of Soviet Russia’s inhabitants. As for the rest, we have nothing to say to them. They must be annihilated.”

As it turned out, the Soviet toll in human lives and suffering proved to be much higher than Zinoviev’s murderous rhetoric suggested. Rarely, if ever, has a regime taken the lives of so many of its own people.

From 1929 to 1952 21 million Soviet people were repressed. Of these a third were shot, the rest sentenced to imprisonment, where many also died.

From January 1, 1935 to June 22, 1941, 19,840,000 enemies of the people were arrested. Of these, seven million were shot in prison, and a majority of the others died in camp.

It is hard to avoid the conclusion that the post-1934 death toll was well over ten million. To this should be added the victims of the 1930-1933 famine, the kulak deportations, and other anti-peasant campaigns, amounting to another ten million plus. The total is thus in the range of what the Russians now refer to as ‘The Twenty Million’.”

While it is true that the power of the Tsar was absolute, that only a small minority had any significant political voice, and that the mass of the empire’s citizens were peasants, it is worth noting that Russians during the reign of Nicholas II had freedom of press, religion, assembly and association, protection of private property, and free labor unions. Sworn enemies of the regime, such as Lenin, were treated with remarkable leniency.

During the decades prior to the outbreak of the First World War, the Russian economy was booming. In fact, between 1890 and 1913, it was the fastest growing in the world. New rail lines were opened at an annual rate double that of the Soviet years. Between 1900 and 1913, iron production increased by 58%, while coal production more than doubled. Exported Russian grain fed all of Europe. Finally, the last decades of Tsarist Russia witnessed a magnificent flowering of cultural life.

Everything changed with the First World War.

Khazar Jews were behind the Russian revolution. Khazar Jews openly bragged about the Russian revolution and its aftereffects at the time. They gloated.

They were the “financiers” -from Paul Moritz Warburg to Jacob Schiff.

They were the “revolutionaries” – from Ovsei-Gershon Aronovich Radomyslsky Apfelbaum(Grigory Zinoviev), to Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, to Lev Davidovich Bronshtein,(Leon Trotsky), etc.

They were the “bloodthirsty horde” in the NKVD who later became the KGB, led by Lazar Kaganovich who were responsible for liquidating untold millions of innocent Russians, Ukrainians, Hungarians etc.

Even though the churches burned while the synagogues were left standing, Jews deny that they were protected.

Even though priests were murdered or forced to sweep the streets, while Khazar Jewish rabbis were put on a pedestal, Khazar Jews now say they were the ones persecuted.

These were the same Khazar Jews – later called the Trotskyites after exiled Leon Trotsky – who fled for their lives when Stalin came to power and tore that evil out of the heart of Russia to a large extent. Many of them fled to Germany, and UK and the US to seek safety. They are now the Zionist Jews who are causing the most problems in this world.

The Trotskyist myth that a successful national liberation will later unleash ‘the real class struggle’ is false, as the examples of Ethiopia, North Vietnam, Mexico under Cardenas, and Brazil under Vargas bear out. It is a rationalisation for the defence of new ruling classes in the process of formation. As historical evidence shows, those new elites usually become appendages of the already existing state capitalist bloc. To this degree Trotskyism is a variety of vicarious social patriotism.

These are the same people who have pushed all the “hate Russia” crap in the media and in US foreign policy to the point of ad nauseum even after the Cold War ended.

It was this group of Khazar Jews that aided and abetted the formation of Nazism as an ideological counter to what they viewed as ‘un-pure communism’ under Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin who was born in Georgia. Their real axe to grind was Stalin sent them fleeing and had many of them put to death or sent to the gulags of Siberia for orchestrating the slaughter of tens of millions of predominately Russian Orthodox Christians. Stalin was also most displeased that the Trotskyites helped to form Nazism in Germany. That wound up getting another 20 million Russians killed in World War II.

The US Neocons, and those of the UK and Israel, are to a large extent Trotskyites, Zionist Jew or Christian Zionist Sheeple who do not know enough about history and the legacy these Khazarian Jews have left in their path. There are huge differences in the Biblical 12 Tribes and these Khazars who have embedded themselves into Judaism like a tick on a hound dog.

They have been so despicably murderous to Russians that a special word just for them was created – “zhids”.

These people have always had visions of rebuilding the grandeur of their Khazar Empire for over 1,000 years. It is this group of Jewish squatters who pushed the hardest, and in the most evil and deceitful ways, to get the UN, US and UK to establish Israel in 1948.

Most of us Baby Boomers, now age 50-65, have now witnessed 60 years of atrocities by ‘poor little Israel’ and these Zionist Khazar thugs but that was preceded by the colossal atrocities of killing about 50 million Russians, another 55 million killed in World War II, and the list goes on and on.

The part of the Turkic Jews, also known later as Crypto Jews who perpetrated the genocide of 1.5 million Armenian Christians in the early 1900s. The Rothschild and Rockefellers wanted the Armenians out of the way so they could get large amounts of oil from Azerbaijan through Armenia to the Black Sea. Such was the legacy of the Ottoman Empire.

If you want to get a history lesson as to why Ukraine was almost always a sub-district of Russia, check into the Battle of Izmail, named for the Ottoman fort that was conquered by who may be the greatest of all Russian czars, the German-born Catherine the Great.

The Russians have had to defend Russia against the machinations of these Fake Jews for 1,000 years.

Even the famous “Steps of Potemkin” in Odessa, Ukraine (very close to Izmail, Ukraine) are in honor of a paramour of Catherine the Great and his contribution in defending Ukraine and Russia from the Ottoman-Khazarian hordes that were trying to take over Europe and Russia.

These Khazar Jews constitute nothing but psychopathic, warmongering, blood-thirsty evil on feet. They now control the power structure of the US and UK. Part of their deep-seated hatred for Russia goes back 1,000 years when Russia upended their empire and sent them packing. Then Genghis Khan sent many of them and the Russians fleeing when the Mongols arrived in town. Many of the Khazars fled to Turkey and were intimately involved in the formation of the Ottoman Empire, the attempted conquer of Europe, and repeated attacks across the Black Sea at Mother Russia. This was yet another ‘hate Russia’ routine from these cretins.

Chechnya, Russia is just on the other side of those Caucasus Mountains and was part of the Khazaria Empire until Russia crushed it. Russia knows all too well – and remembers all too well – who was behind the Chechnya War that they had to fight twice within the past 20 years.

Ingushetia, Russia is just on the other side of those Caucasus Mountains and was part of the Khazaria Empire until Russia crushed it. Dagestan also used to be part of the Khazaria Empire, and the US has waged covert ops to try to take that area over so they can build a pipeline from Kazakhstan to Georgia to the Black Sea.

These people have plotted and schemed for 1,000 years to get their Khazarian Empire back, and now that the entire world knows that the historical area of Khazaria is sitting on a mother lode of oil and natural gas, they really want it back. They salivate like Pavlovian Dogs and have wet dreams of dollars and shekels about all that oil and natural gas in what used to be their Khazarian Empire, long since dead and gone except in their delusional minds.

Many of the US Zionists who defected to the Republican Party from Democratic Party in 1996, are Russia-hating, Zionist Khazarian Jews. They have now defected back over to the Democratic Party and backing Obama…the sock puppet of the pathological Russia-hating Zbigniew Brzezinsky and George Soros.

Many of the Zionist Jews in power in Israel, the UK and US cannot trace their roots back to the 12 Tribes. Many of the dual citizen, wanted criminals Israel is harboring are Khazarian Jews, not descendants of the 12 Tribes. Many of them are from Russia after Genghis Khan sent both Russian and Khazarians fleeing.

We witnessed Georgia attacking Russian Orthodox Christians in South Ossetia, aided and abetted by the US, Israel and Ukraine.

North Ossetia used to be part of the Khazarian Empire and the North and South Ossetians are ethnically the same people.

There are growing border problems between Ukraine and Russia, both areas formerly part of the Khazarian Empire. Ukraine had the audacity to inform Russia it could no longer park its Black Sea fleet at Sevastopol, Ukraine. The Kiev government is firmly under the control of Zionist Jews, as is the Tbilisi, Georgia regime.

In both Georgia and Ukraine, the dirty hands of George Soros can be found because he has been pushing for ‘White Stream 1 and 2′ pipelines from Georgia to Ukraine as a supply link to the EU to lessen the growing energy might of Russia. George Soros is Hungarian by birth of Khazarian Jew origin.

This entire area that used to be Khazaria is loaded with oil and natural gas and these Khazarian Jews have had an axe to grind with Russia for over 1,000 years.

Zionist Khazarian Jews absolutely have to have the muscle of the United States to pursue these stupid, petty, long-since-dead illusions of grandeur and empire.

During the 1967 War, one of the most daring acts of treachery was committed. It was the attack on an American ship, the USS Liberty, by America’s so-called friend, Israel.

During Israel’s treacherous attack on Egypt, the USS Liberty, an American surveillance ship, was cruising off the coast of Israel monitoring the progress of the attack.

Realizing the USS Liberty was learning and recording Israel’s acts of treachery, Israeli leaders decided to ‘get rid’ of the evidence. Israeli planes and torpedo boats attacked Liberty with the obvious intent of sinking it. If the ship was sunk, thus destroying the evidence, Israel then could blame Egypt for the attack — and the Zionist controlled news-media in America would have given the lie as fact with the intent of turning the American people against Egypt. But, fortunately — bravery on the part of the Liberty crew kept the ship afloat. Israel failed in its act of treachery against America, its ally, but during the attack, Israel killed 34 crew members of the Liberty and wounded 171.

Israel claimed the attack on the Liberty was a case of mistaken identity. But, reports by the surviving crew and other evidence prove the attack by Israel was intentional.

Facts about the attack on the USS Liberty were conveniently omitted by the Zionist controlled American news-media. All that the Zionists told the American people was that Israel had sunk an American ship, but that it was a case of mistaken identity.

The treachery on the part of Israel and the Soviets that led to the 1967 War embittered the Arab people and immediately they began arming with the intent of retaliating for this Israeli treachery and to try and take back the land that Israel had taken from them. By 1973 they were prepared.

Even though several Arab countries were preparing militarily, they were trying to peacefully work out a solution with Israel. But, Israel was assured that their Zionist brethren in America would use their power over the U.S. Government to make sure that the U.S. would support Israel. So, Israel’s leaders continued to maintain a belligerent attitude.

Realizing the hopelessness of further negotiating with Israel’s leaders, Egypt along with Jordan, Syria and Iraq attacked Israel — and they were winning.

With Israel facing defeat, the powerful Zionists in America pulled the strings of their power over the U.S. Government and the U.S. Government officials obeyed their Zionist masters. Massive amounts of U.S. military equipment and arms were airlifted at taxpayer’s expense to Israel to bolster the retreating Israeli forces.

This U.S. aid enabled Israel to turn the tide and emerge victorious. Yes, Israel was saved, but so much U.S. military equipment was airlifted to Israel at that time that the U.S. armed forces were left in short supply and in a weakened position.

U.S. Government officials are so much under the influence of the Zionists that they had alerted the 82nd Airborne Division stationed at Ft. Bragg, N.C. and U.S. troops stationed in Germany for the purpose of being sent to aid Israel, if necessary.

It is pretty sad that to please the Zionist power in America, U.S. Government officials are willing to sacrifice the lives of American boys to save Zionist Israel.

The 1982 attack into Lebanon by Israel further divided the Jewish population of Israel — even within the more militant Zionist Jews there is a split.

The reason given by Israeli leaders for the attack into Lebanon was ‘to root out the Palestine Liberation Army (PLO) and stop their terrorist attacks into Israel. Many Israeli’s have dared speak out and condemn this reason as false. They have pointed out that in an effort to achieve peace with Israel, the P.L.O. had for 11 months refrained from making any attacks on Israel.

The real reasons for Israel’s attack Lebanon were: (And still are, according to the latest headlines).

It is the intention of Israel’s Zionist/Marxist leaders to carry on perpetual war. The attack into Lebanon was merely another phase of Israel’s ‘wars of aggression’ policy.
Water is scarce in the Mideast, especially in Israel. Ever since Israel became a state, it has wanted the waters of the Litani River for use in Israel, and the only way they could get it was to go in and take it militarily.

Israeli leaders and the general population figured the war would last only a few days. But, the Palestinians and other Arabs fought heroically against the Israeli invaders who had far superior equipment. As the months passed without victory, and as more Israeli soldiers were brought home and buried, dissent within Israel spread. In the Israeli military forces, many members resigned or refused to carry out orders because it would have meant killing innocent civilians.

The death of the 250 Marines serving in Lebanon has been blamed on the Arabs. This is as it had been reported by the Zionist controlled news-media in America. But, this has not been proven! In fact, reliable reports coming out of Lebanon indicate the terrorist attack on the American marine base was planned by Israeli military personnel or the Mossad, Israel’s secret service. In that case, who actually carried out the attack is immaterial — Israeli personnel planned and instigated the attack. It is common practice for the Zionist/Marxists to plan a covert act and then get someone else to do the dirty work.

By instigating the attack on the Marine base, the Israeli ‘War Hawks’ had hoped the attack would turn the American people against the Arabs and that America could be drawn into the war and further help Israel in its aggression against the Arabs. Fortunately, the American people didn’t fall for the trap.

A good example of how the Zionists will commit an act of terrorism with the thought of someone else being blamed is the Lavon Affair. In 1954 a group of Israeli’s set off a series of bombings of American institutions in Egypt including the American Embassy. They expected that Egypt would be blamed for the bombings and cause a break in U.S.-Egyptian relations.

Fortunately, Egyptian authorities caught the Israeli agents in the act of setting one of the bombs and the whole Israeli plot was exposed.

Most Americans are not aware of the treacherous Lavon Affair because the Zionist controlled U.S. news-media failed to report it; just as they failed to report the facts surrounding the Israeli shelling of the USS LIBERTY.

There is no doubt that the United States, the ‘golem’ of the international Zionist Power Configuration and Jewish banking interests, is the world leader in terrorism. The US is in no moral position to condemn any government or group in the world until it fesses up to its own blood-soaked history. 100 million Native Americans exterminated. 150 million Africans, many of them Muslims, murdered in the Trans-Atlantic slave trade, which was dominated by Spanish Jews like Aaron Lopez who had an entire fleet of slaveships and financing from the Rothschild family; these Jews, who were of the extremist and now dominant Talmudic-Kabbalistic school of thought, also introduced the Curse of Ham to their Gentile slave-trading brothers, a horrific, racist story concocted and developed by the rabbis in their Talmud which lowered the rank of our brothers and sisters of beautiful black skin to animals. This Talmudic drivel was used to justify the dehumanization of millions of others and in the greater geopolitical sense, it is now being exercised to justify more Zionist aggression on the African continent.

There are many wonderful people of the Jewish faith and heritage who are tired of being used and sacrificed by Zionism and they are doing everything possible to put an end to it all.
THE TRUE JEWS & RABBI’S ARE AGAINST WAR, ISRAEL & AIPAC

Ronald L. Waldron
August 7, 2014
Reply

PLEASE STAND WITH US

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL–VOTE DEMOCRAT
>
Let us Stand United together—-Not Divided and falling further into a Fascist Zionist regime.

The Karl Rove-affiliated Super PAC – “Kentuckians” for Strong Leadership – announced that it raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in the past three months. But not one penny of it came from Kentucky, nor does Mitch McConnell do anything for Kentucky.

All foreign interest, foreign policy, and foreign give-a-way. In return more free-bees, and
Millions for ?? campaigning?

With exactly zero contributions from Kentuckians in the past three months, you better believe that “Kentuckians” for Strong Leadership couldn’t care less about what’s right for Kentucky’s working families.

Mitch and his party have been beholden to these Washington special interest groups for nearly 30 years, and they have forgotten about the Americans they are supposed to be representing.

Please help get rid of the grid lock, vote the corruption out of office.
No more obstruction, no more WAR, no more foreign lobby control.

United WE stand—Divided WE fall.

We fall victim to the ZIONIST political movement. GLOBALIZATION

ONE BANK, ONE GOVERNMENT, ONE RELIGION, ONE FASCIST REGIME, IT IS THE
WORLDS LARGEST ORGANIZED CRIME SYNDICATE AT THIS VERY TIME.

They presently have controlling interest in the USA, Canada, UK, and involved in
eighty nations presently. DO some research, or at least READ the material of those
who have.GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. Peace Blog

Thank You for Your Courtesy;

Ronald L. Waldron (Concerned Citizen Like Yourself)
“The Kentucky Republican Party…will spend $715,000
…part of the $5.2 million that it and Zionist Billionaires for more corrupt Leadership,
a McConnell super PAC, announced it would blow this summer.”
7/4/2014

Ronald L. Waldron
August 9, 2014
Reply

REMEMBER when gentiles were tortured, persecuted, hated, and murdered.
Remember when you were told, or read that Gods chosen people were Jews.

Remember when you were told that the old testament of the Bible was written
by the Jews, for the Jews, and to the Jews, none of it included us gentiles. Gentiles referenced as slaves, vermin, hated by the Jews.

Remember anything about Christ, that the new testament (ONLY) includes all
Gentiles, that Christ was murdered by the Jews. Only Gentiles and those who
accept and repent will be accepted into heaven. Who wrote it?

Remember why the Jews were cast out of Israel according to that same Bible.

The only thing attempting to change the dynamics of it all is Zionism.

Remember hearing or reading about Zionism. Created by criminals in the
1900’s. A political movement of propaganda and a movement of stealing
an Identity that THEY represent Gods chosen people to take control of
the World. Including Banks, media, investments, medical, Law, Governments,
all things belong to them, Joan of Arc Rivers, Queen Shara Palin, the Court Jesters,
Zionist religious leaders, and their paid for Republican Party political machine.

NOW remember this. That was Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow unless we the
people (Gentiles) change it.

HOW–Extermination. (1) Never vote for a Republican again in your life.
(2) Vote only Democrat, but take charge of the party. Labor influenced.
(3) Boycott and divest from Israel completely. Pressure, presure on
alternative media, officials and present disfunctional federal agencies.
Start with getting rid of the Zionist operated Home-Land Security.
(4) Demand that the 77 sanctions past by the UN against Israel be enforced.
(5) Demand that our government QUIT vetoing the sanctions.
(6) Demand that corrupt officials be charged with Treason, and face a firing squad.
(7) Demand that all government officials and employees be natural born
citizens of the USA, with no duel citizenship or foreign interest.
(8) Restructure the taxation policies. No more tax exemptions for any one.
(9) Cut the pentagon budget to no more then 35% of the Budget.
(10) No more foreign aid, foreign influence, or providing their defense.

REMEMBER UNITED–WE STAND–DIVIDED– WE FALL

AMERICA HAS BEEN FOOLED SINCE 1945, DON’T LET IT CONTINUE

Remember when America was the most loved and respected in the World,
Now the most hated because of our miss placed support of our worse enemy.

Remember all the false flag operations of the past. Even the past few weeks,
That is what continues to turn us into a Fascist Country with class distinction
of very poor, with ONE PERCENT very rich.

STOP, LOOK, AND LISTEN. THERE IS A “BIG TRAIN COMING”

DERAIL IT NOW,OR IT’S ALL OVER. THINK ABOUT IT

TRY TO PROVE THIS MESSAGE WRONG. NO ONE CAN !!!

Allen D. Post
August 12, 2014
Reply

Remembering Robin Williams, ‘honorary Jew’

Jewish Journal
A lot of people will be posting their Robin Williams memories. Beyond the hours of laughter he gave me, I have one personal memory of Williams, who was found dead today at his home in Northern California at age 63, an apparent suicide.
Williams was one of the entertainers at the annual banquet for the USC Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation. It was February 17, 2005. Steven Spielberg, who created the Shoah Foundation with the proceeds from his film Schindler’s List, was the host. Williams provided the comedy, Sheryl Crow the entertainment, and the lead speaker and guest of honor was former President Bill Clinton.
My table was next to Williams, who sat beside Crow and her then-husband Lance Armstrong.
A comedy act at a Holocaust event is never easy—that’s a subject for a whole other story—but Williams nailed it. I remember one line from a rapid fire monologue that left him sweating and spent and the crowd in stitches.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” Williams said in a Yiddish accent, “Welcome to Temple Beth Prada. This evening’s meal will be milchidik, fleishadik, and sushidik.”
Williams, born and raised Episcopalian, said on many occasions he considered himself an “honorary Jew.” He certainly played some onscreen, most memorably (for me) as the spiritually lost Everyman in an adaptation of Saul Bellow’s Seize the Day.
Last March, the actor tweeted a picture of himself in a kippa on the set of his sitcom, “The Crazy Ones.”
Williams tweeted: ““Too late for a career change? Rabbi Robin?” The actor’s twitter followers liked the tweet. One man responded “Never too late Rabbi Williams.”
And, not long ago, Williams had this memorable exchange on German TV.
German Interviewer: Mr. Williams, why do you think there’s not so much comedy in Germany?
Williams: Did you ever think you killed all the funny people?
My memory? As the Shoah event went on, I noticed Williams had returned to his seat and remained to the very end, long past the time most headliners duck out. As we all got up to leave, I found myself standing right beside him.
“You were hysterical,” Thank you,” he said.
“And you stayed to the end,” I said.
Williams looked at me with great sincerity.
“This means a lot to me,” he said. “Of course.”
His voice caught me off guard at first, coming from a man who on stage slipped with restless energy from one crazy Hebrew voice to another
Then I realized: the earnest, quiet sincere voice I was hearing—that was his own.
Not as a honorary Jew, but as a gentile, sincere, honest, unassuming, and Trustworthy Man. Not another in the House like him. He certainly will be missed.
God Bless Him. In Jesus name we pray.. Amen

Ron Waldron
August 17, 2014
Reply

WHO’S WHO IN YOUR LEADERSHIP TODAY? WHO SHOULD IT BE?

Christian Zionists embrace the very people who call Jesus “Hitler of Bethlehem”

Zionist, the chosen people of Lucifer, the worlds largest crime syndicate.They
will again face complete condemnation from GOD. The pillars of SALT, and will
again be cast out of Israel.

Spiritual ignorance and Zionist propaganda leads many Churches to condemnation.

By the grace of God, believers in Jesus Christ will not face the condemnation of God.
“We have passed from death to life”

The Bible teaches that every human being will be brought before the judgment throne of God
for an ultimate and decisive judgment . Christ Himself will be the judge.

We are all naturally under the condemnation of God: “Whoever does not believe stands condemned already”

Therefore there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.

Gods condemnation of Lucifer’s people occurred more than 2000 years ago. He has never released
them from that condemnation. Only the false prophets for profits are leading Christians into the
control by the anti-Christ “Zionism”. Political and religious leaders are leading, or are they lazily
following a condemned leader that offers them riches beyond what they EARN by honesty.

Separation of Church & State gives us all the right to worship as we as an individual desire and believe we
should. Zionism is a leader of forcing us to support a religion that is contrary to Christian or Muslim belief.
That by their propaganda using TV, Media, Movies, and the Holocaust all monopolized by Zionism, perpetrated
by them.

How many Christians, Muslims, and any other human beings have been murdered by Zionism since they
came about in Russia in the early 1900’s. Of course that includes the Holocaust of 6 million.

Separation of Church and State does not, and should not , separate us from our responsibility of moral
conduct, integrity, ethics, and sense of fairness. We no longer witness any of that from AIPAC, Israel, or
our influenced political and religious leaders.

The coin chasers are or have bought out Church organizations (Watch the investments on Wall Street).
Bought out our political leaders. ( Watch the campaign donations and to whom).
Bought out Law and Law Universities. ( Look at the chair positions of each)
Gained control of our education system. ( Teachers & Ministers are now robots, teaching by a script
created for them, same message in every Church each Sunday, same lesson plan in each school each
day, that soon can be done by video) The Holocaust message all the time, what is owed to them.

The message should be, not to allow the Zionist to continue such false propaganda, and false flag
operations.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 29, 2014
Reply

Success:

Success, when I first encountered it, was being able to go
Home at night.

Next Success became more of a challenge, and Success turned
to being able to go Home in the Morning.

NOW, Home is at such a distance from reality no one is able
to reach it. YET!!

“PEACE ON EARTH”

Ronald L. Waldron

Our right to vote——–Our duty to vote Democrat. WHY!

We love our Country the USA, we honor the RED-WHITE & BLUE.

We have fought tooth & nail, many giving their life, or a loved ones
life, to preserve our Country, our FLAG flapping alone in the air.

Now, there is nothing more disgusting then to see OUR flag accompanied

by a Foreign Blue Star Flag right behind President Bush, and President

Obama, displayed every where you look any more. NO DAM FOREIGN

RAG should be displayed anywhere near ours, especially one that
represents our worst enemy.

WHO’S WHO IN YOUR LEADERSHIP TODAY? WHO SHOULD IT BE?

Christian Zionists embrace the very people who call Jesus “Hitler of Bethlehem”

Zionist, the chosen people of Lucifer, the worlds largest crime syndicate.They
will again face complete condemnation from GOD. The pillars of SALT, and will
again be cast out of Israel.

Spiritual ignorance and Zionist propaganda leads many Churches to condemnation.

By the grace of God, believers in Jesus Christ will not face the condemnation of God.
“We have passed from death to life”

The Bible teaches that every human being will be brought before the judgment throne of God
for an ultimate and decisive judgment . Christ Himself will be the judge.

We are all naturally under the condemnation of God: “Whoever does not believe stands condemned already”

Therefore there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.

Gods condemnation of Lucifer’s people occurred more than 2000 years ago. He has never released
them from that condemnation. Only the false prophets for profits are leading Christians into the
control by the anti-Christ “Zionism”. Political and religious leaders are leading, or are they lazily
following a condemned leader that offers them riches beyond what they EARN by honesty.

Separation of Church & State gives us all the right to worship as we as an individual desire and believe we
should. Zionism is a leader of forcing us to support a religion that is contrary to Christian or Muslim belief.
That by their propaganda using TV, Media, Movies, and the Holocaust all monopolized by Zionism, perpetrated
by them.

How many Christians, Muslims, and any other human beings have been murdered by Zionism since they
came about in Russia in the early 1900’s. Of course that includes the Holocaust of 6 million.

Separation of Church and State does not, and should not , separate us from our responsibility of moral
conduct, integrity, ethics, and sense of fairness. We no longer witness any of that from AIPAC, Israel, or
our influenced political and religious leaders.

The coin chasers are or have bought out Church organizations (Watch the investments on Wall Street).
Bought out our political leaders. ( Watch the campaign donations and to whom).
Bought out Law and Law Universities. ( Look at the chair positions of each)
Gained control of our education system. ( Teachers & Ministers are now robots, teaching by a script
created for them, same message in every Church each Sunday, same lesson plan in each school each
day, that soon can be done by video) The Holocaust message all the time, what is owed to them.

The message should be, not to allow the Zionist to continue such false propaganda, and false flag
operations.

We have but one Supreme Court, and that certainly is not located any where near Washington, DC.

Ronald L. Waldron

We have tried for 55+ years for a peace agreement. Borders for such were set in 1967.

The time is right now for a FAIR peace agreement. If not, both will be completely on your
own with out any support from the people of the UNITED STATES. Congress is well
aware, and all attempts will be made to get rid of anyone supporting either side from
that point on.

You presently have zero time to waste prior to the elections 2014. Do not forget how
soon 2016 will come up for extinction of the remaining partners in CRIME.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 31, 2014
Reply

We the AMERICAN people are “Stein-Mead”

America: The UNITED STATES. 50 United States, not 51. Israel is not and never should be one of them.

YET we see the Foreign lobby AIPAC with now 50 chapters, one in each state heavily involved with,
The Republican Party and control of congress, some Democrats, several congressional committees,
the so called “Home-Land Security”. AIPACs only interest is ISRAEL.
We see this organization controlled by Zionism. Russian Zionism previously known as Communism.
The real designers of the Holocaust, and supporters of Hitler. In the end stealing the true Jewish identity.

They have become involved with all American Elections, now dumping multimillion s into the campaigns
of their republican partners in organized crime & treason. Involved in all American Elections. Fraud in
Florida 2000, Fraud in Ohio 2004, and Supreme Court 2014.(Campaign funding decisions).
Supreme Court 6 Catholics-3 Jews.

Heavily involved with Wall Street, Banking, National Debt, Foreign policy, No domestic spending on our
infrastructure, control of all media & reporters. 127 Journalist assassinated in Iraq war.(Most foreign media)
False Mossad Intelligence lead us into that pre emptive WAR.

They are involved with all major universities, education policies, ALL MEDIA, Banking, corporations,
out-sourcing, foreign trade agreements, breaking up of our UNIONS, National & State Laws & changes
in all.

They attacked Syria in June of this year. Their good neighbor policies they have had with all middle East
Countries. Attack Kill and Take Land and resources from all. Then expect the USA to clean up their mess
again when there is retaliation from groups such as ISIS, Jihad, Al Qaeda, now others.

OF course no American Zionist Jew goes to WAR, nor any family member.

Anger against the USA because of the support given by the USA government to the ISRAELI regime,
not by the USA people. Supply of military, weapons, money, and veto of now 77 sanctions by the UN.
More and more Allies drop the USA do to such ridiculous support of Israel and its atrocities all over
the middle East and Africa. War crimes stack up, and just today Israel confiscates over 1,000 acres
more of Palestinian land, south of Bethlehem. Killing many people. No one can count the murders
they have perpetrated the last 60 years. OUR past President Kennedy for one.

President Obama recognizes exactly what we are facing, yes he is walking on EGG shells, trying to
prevent World War 111 here on our land. Trying to prevent more suffering by Americans, and our
families. WE BEST SUPPORT HIM AND MOST DEMOCRATS BEFORE IT IS TO LATE.
IT MAY ALREADY BE TO LATE. RECOGNIZE THAT ISRAEL IS OUR WORST ENEMY,
AND WILL ATTACK WITH NUCLEAR WEAPONS BEFORE THEY ARE DISTROYED.

Weapons by the way, supplied by the USA.

Remember Russia and China are at a cold war with us, THE USA, presently, like right now.

They are Allies with Israel, the non-believers in Jesus Christ, or any GOD for that matter.

THAT MY FRIENDS, FAMILY, AND NEIGHBORS IS THE REAL TRUTH OF THE MATTER.

I WOULD PRAY VERY HARD IF YOU ARE A BELIEVER.

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. PLEASE IF WE ARE ABLE TO VOTE, VOTE
REPUBLICANS OUT, OUT, OUT.

IF YOU CAN NOT VOTE FOR A DEMOCRAT, AND KNOW THE CORRUPTION OF ISRAEL
AND REPUBLICANS. STAY HOME AND PRAY FOR BLESSING.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 11, 2014
Reply

13 years ago. 911 9/11/01—THE TRUE PERPETRATORS “ISRAEL–MOSSAD” STILL ON THE LOOSE.

VERY FEW PEOPLE ARE STILL UNAWARE OF WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN AND WHY.

PROTECTED BY OUR OWN GOVERNMENT—-VOTE THE ZIONIST SUPPORTERS “REPUBLICANS” OUT OF OFFICE .

GET RID OF CITIZENS UNITED WITH OUT THE HOUSE !! VOTE ALL THEIR REPUBLICAN PARTNERS OUT OF OFFICE.

If you’re tired of Koch-backed Republicans taking advantage of Citizens United, we need you right now. We need to raise EVERYONE’S ATTENTION TO IT immediately to call out Citizens United-defending House Republicans.

17 of the top 20 corrupt members of congress are Republican, vote them out of office 2014. Any remaining members
will come up for re-election 2016. Show all officials & committees how serious we the people are about real change.

PLEASE FORWARD this message to all concerned folks you know.

1. No more tax exemptions for anyone. Tax reform for fairness for all of us.

2. Eliminate non-profit organizations being able to invest in Wall Street, or any other profit
raising investment. Their communities that money was given for have been neglected long enough.

3. All imports from foreign soil shall be taxed accordingly, including American owned corporations.

4. No more WARS, we have sacrificed enough for the disrespectful, arrogant, Foreign Countries.

5. No more foreign aid or military aid to any Religious State regardless of the Religion. We have
separation of Church & State, and are unwilling to support Israel and a false religious State of
Zionism. There has never been, nor will there ever be any respect for we the people that have
paid all cost of life, limb, money and resources for them to commit the Atrocities they have on
all neighbors, the attacks on our present president. The killing of Kennedy. The attacks on the
World Trade Center, the attack on the USS Liberty, the final attack on 911.

6. We the people keep looking for the next false flag operation committed by Israel to promote
their agenda, again at our cost none of theirs.

7. Presently 65 %, or 165 of the Billionaires in America are Zionist. Coming from 1% of the Population.
They carry 80% of the influence on congress, by manipulation of our elections using the monopoly
they have by now owning ALL major media sources and distortion.

8. Look close at the 14 characteristics of Fascism, we are seeing that NOW. 2000 ELECTIONS on.

9. WHO is really in charge of Foreign Policy, is there any other agenda other then by/for Israel?

10.AIPAC lobby, the largest in the World, the most corrupt in the World. Head quartered in D.C.,
with a chapter in nearly all 50 states. Chapters all over Canada, and now near 80 Countries,
beating the same DRUM for 65 yrs. Suffering seems to be happening all around them ,
, but some one else’s genocide is OK “because WHY ? They are only gentiles, just like the rest
of us around the World. NAME ANY OTHER SO LARGE, so powerful, so organized, so corrupt,
inter-national criminals that no nation, or inter-national organization dares to organize a
Campaign against such Treason. Is the World Bank & World Economy really here already? WOW!!

PLEASE GET OUT EARLY TO VOTE. STAND IN LINE IF YOU HAVE TO, IT IS YOUR
RIGHT TO VOTE. WE HAVE A DUTY TO VOTE FOR WHAT IS RIGHT.

WE ARE ASKING EVERY ONE TO VOTE ALL DEMOCRAT. WE THANK YOU FOR COURAGE,
AND STRENGTH TO STAND UP AND BE COUNTED .

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL !!

THE REPUBLICAN PARTY IS DIVIDED AND HAS FALLEN!!!

WE Americans will demand transparency in all of Government, agency, organization, funded
by the tax payer. Any thing regarding national security exempt but with restrictions.

Ronald L. Waldron

Israel Is No Ally:

By Philip Giraldi • March 13, 2014

Inside the beltway types and the media constantly refer to Israel as an ally, which it is not. Israeli soldiers have never fought beside American troops and to be an ally you need an actual alliance on paper. No such legally binding document exists between Washington and Tel Aviv. Sycophants in congress are also fond of calling Israel Washington’s best or closest friend in spite of the fact that it does actual damage to the United States through using its considerable access to the government and media to promote policies that are good neither for the US nor for Israel itself. Recalling the expression that a friend does not let a friend drive drunk, one might observe that the United States has been driving drunk for quite some time, dangerous behavior that has to some extent been encouraged by Israel and its many supporters in Washington.

Israel might or might not have been an actual enabler of the disastrous American invasion of Iraq but it is undeniably true that the Pentagon officials who contributed to the “Clean Break” recommendations prepared for Benjamin Netanyahu in 1996 were subsequently behind the rush to war and the forgery of phony intelligence that fed the process. And Iran is Iraq redux. If the Washington goes to war with Tehran in the near future it will not be because Iranians actually threaten America, it will be because Israel and its powerful lobby in the US have succeeded in creating an essentially false casus belli to bring about such action.

Phil Giraldi: Is a former CIA Case Officer and Army Intelligence Officer who spent twenty years overseas in Europe and the Middle East working terrorism cases. He holds a BA with honors from the University of Chicago and an MA and PhD in Modern History from the University of London. In addition to TAC, where he has been a contributing editor for nine years, he writes regularly for Antiwar.com. He is currently Executive Director of the Council for the National Interest .

Congress Must Not Cede Its War Power to Israel

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who once commented that 9/11 was good for Israel, has repeatedly sought to commit the United States to draw red lines that would narrow options for the White House and de facto require it to take military action against Iran. Congress is meanwhile advancing legislation that would commit the United States to intervene militarily in support of a unilateral Israeli attack, meaning that Israel could easily be empowered to make the decision on whether or not the US goes to war.

Nothing relating to Israel is quite like how the US interacts with other countries. Direct grants, forgiveness of loans, charitable exemptions, and Pentagon co-production schemes all contribute to the dollar costs that go to support Israel, measures that are not in place for any other nation. Congress also recently approved by a 410 to 1 vote the United States Israel Strategic Partnership Act which grants to Israel an exemption from the reciprocity mandated by the so-called visa waiver program. Israelis will be able to travel freely to the United States while their government will be allowed to refuse entry to American citizens, a privilege granted to no other visa waiver country. One congressman has even introduced a bill to cut off federal funding for any academic organization that engages in boycotting Israel. Boycotting other countries is apparently okay.

Israel involves itself in American elections, most recently on behalf of Mitt Romney, it has corrupted our congress, its head of government publicly humiliates our own head of state, its government ministers insult and ridicule John Kerry, and its intelligence officers actually provide alarmist and inaccurate private briefings for American Senators on Capitol Hill. No other country interferes in our system in as many ways as Israel.

Conrad
September 13, 2014
Reply

Thank you a lot for sharing this with all
folks you really realize what you’re speaking approximately!
Bookmarked. Kindly also consult with my site =). We will have
a hyperlink exchange agreement among us

Ronald L. Waldron
October 4, 2014
Reply

The U.S. Dares to Criticize Israel
by ROBERT FANTINA

It seems that, perhaps, Israel’s latest slaughter of defenseless Palestinians may have been a bit too much even for the United States to condone. In what may be the U.S.’s harshest, although still quite mild, criticism of its puppet master, President Barack Obama said that the plan to increase illegal settlement building could alienate Israel from ‘even its closest allies’.

There is, of course, no closer ally of Israel than the United States. Israel is able to disdain international law, violate the most basic human rights of Palestinians, slaughter men, women and children, bomb United Nations refugee centers, kill journalists and commit genocide only because of U.S. funding and use of its veto power in the U.N.

But the U.S., this time, went even further in its criticism. State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said that the newly-approved construction would cause the global community to ‘question Israel’s ultimate commitment to a peaceful negotiated settlement’ with Palestinians.

One must wonder which rock it is that Ms. Psaki has been hiding under during her entire diplomatic career. Is there anyone, including the hypocritical United States, that doesn’t know that Israel has no ‘commitment’ to a peaceful solution to its self-induced problems with Palestine? Does she not recognize, however dimly, that the countless internal checkpoints, home demolitions and illegal settlements, all in violation of international law, sheds at least a bit of doubt on Israel’s sincerity to negotiate a settlement? Does it not seem to her, that when Israeli Prime Murderer Benjamin Netanyahu states categorically that not one settlement will be removed, nor one Israeli settler displaced, that perhaps his ‘commitment’ to a negotiated settlement might be a tad weaker than is necessary?

But Mr. Obama, like all U.S. presidents since the bloody establishment of Israel, was careful to negate Palestinian needs, and value only Israeli lives. Said he: “I think we also recognize that we have to find a way to change the status quo so that both Israeli citizens are safe in their own homes, schoolchildren in their schools, from the possibility of rocket fire, but also that we don’t have the tragedy of Palestinian children being killed as well.” During Israel’s recent ‘mowing of the Gaza lawn’, its periodic destruction of lives and infrastructure in the Gaza Strip, one Israeli child was killed. This unfortunate child was, as Mr. Obama said, not safe, whether in his school or home at the time he was killed. Yet what of the more than 500 Palestinian children who were not safe in their schools or homes, in United Nations refugee centers, or even on public beaches? Should they not be safe ‘from the possibility of rocket fire’, rocket fire provided by the United States and delivered by Israel? He did, at least, acknowledge the ‘tragedy of Palestinian children being killed’, but didn’t attribute any responsibility for those hundreds of deaths to Israel.

During the July massacre of Palestinians by Israel and the United States (the U.S. may not drop the bombs, but it provides them, so its role in Israel’s genocidal practices is significant), information about the massacre was widely available on social media. For the first time, people in large numbers didn’t have to rely on one-sided news programs to learn about the situation; people in Gaza were able, when conditions allowed, to send pictures and other information about the bombings of hospitals and mosques. They showed pictures of mangled cars, on which the large letters spelling out ‘PRESS’ could still be seen, despite being blown apart by Israel bombs. Social media’s tens of millions of users saw photos of four young boys, lying dead on beach where they had gone to play to obtain a few minutes respite from the horror of daily bombardment. They saw Israeli soldiers using Palestinians as human shields. And they knew, as never before, that U.S. proclamations about Israel’s need to ‘defend’ itself were simply lies; it is illogical for a nation to ‘defend’ itself from another nation that it occupies. It is not war when a powerful military brutally attacks a nation with no military at all. It is genocide.

If Mr. Obama feels that Israel has, finally, crossed a line, what is he to do about it? The obvious answer is to cut the purse strings. Israel gets more foreign aid from the U.S. than the U.S. gives to all other countries combined. It is this aid that enables Israel to continue murdering Palestinians, stealing their land, humiliating them with countless checkpoints, destroying their reservoirs and depriving them of basic imports needed for survival. This raises three basic questions, all of which have the same answer:

Will Mr. Obama do this?

Will he have the courage to reinforce his gentle admonition to Israel with something that has meaning?

Will Santa Claus come down your chimney in December, bringing toys to all the good little boys and girls in your home?

The answer, sadly, is that Mr. Obama will not do anything to stop Israel from continuing its illegal settlement activity, which is part of that nation’s goal to obliterate Palestine, Palestinians and their culture from existence. And why is this? Will this writer begin to bore the reader if he once again discusses the power of the Israeli lobby over U.S. government policies? Between July 1, 2008 and June 20, 2014, Israeli lobbies funneled an impressive $12,036,252.00 into the campaigns of U.S. Senate candidates, most of them incumbents. This included monies donated to their failed presidential campaigns. During the period of July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014, Israeli lobbies donated a mere $5,190,280.00 to members and candidates of the House of Representatives.[1] One need not wonder just who it is the elected ‘representatives’ are representing.

But one could see Mr. Obama’s gentle rebuke of Israel as a positive sign. Perhaps the countless telephone calls and emails that the White House received during the most recent Israeli slaughter of the Palestinians may have given Mr. Obama pause. Perhaps those elected officials, so willing to bow and scrape before the golden Israeli altar, also heard from constituents in such numbers as to enable them to countenance Mr. Obama’s mild reprimand. Occasionally the voters are able to get through the cloud of lobbyist money that enshrouds the corrupt, greedy and racist governing members of the House and Senate. One must not be sufficiently naïve as to think that common human decency motivates them; no, that would be an imaginative stretch that even the most creative writer of fiction would never consider. But if enough constituents indicate displeasure, to the point that, perhaps, an elected official’s job may be in jeopardy, he or she may change their tune.

Time alone will tell if this is the case. With Israel violating the current cease-fire agreement on a daily basis, expanding settlements and gaining even the timid wrath of Barack Obama, perhaps the global community is finally preparing to act.

GUNS & AMMO WILL SERVE NO PURPOSE FOR THE NEXT FALSE FLAG OPERATION.

The next false flag operation by the Republicans number one ally, the number one enemy of we the people (gentiles).
Will be biological war-fare. Which seems to be well underway. Unknown Viruses such as EV-D68, and Ebola.

Lock downs already, with plenty more coming, the fear mongering and propaganda by media will keep people away
from the polls in selected democrat districts. Scare tactics and election frauds always works for the Billion
dollar elite Zionist Society.

Fair Elections, and the right to vote, is a major part of our Democracy. Realize that credit cards, Social Security numbers,
have an immediate accurate recording. BUT we can not develop a voter registration card and recording with the same accuracy.

That in itself seems very fraudulent to most of us.

NOW, we not only have the right to vote, we have a duty to get out there register and vote.

Please vote the criminals out of office, vote with us Democrats. United we stand–Divided we fall.

17 of the top 20 corrupt officials are Republican.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 4, 2014
Reply

Columbia, Harvard, Yale anthropologists among 360 backing boycott of Israel

Signatories worldwide include 13 academics from City University of New York, 13 from Columbia, 9 from Harvard and 8 from Yale

The statement was posted on Oct. 1 on the website jadaliyya.com with 231 signatories and a call for others to add their names to the list. On Friday, the list had reached 360 names.

“As a community of scholars who study problems of power, oppression, and cultural hegemony, we have a moral responsibility to speak out and demand accountability from Israel and our own governments,” reads the statement, which endorses “boycott[ing] Israeli academic institutions that are complicit in these violations.”

Israeli academic institutions, the statement said, “are complicit with the occupation and oppression of Palestinians” with “intimate connections between Israeli academic institutions and the military, security, and political establishments in Israel.”

Among the signatories are 13 academics from the City University of New York and 13 from Columbia University. Nine cosignatories are listed as being from from Harvard University and eight from Yale University.

four corners alliance group review
October 23, 2014
Reply

Quality posts is the important to interest the visitors to
pay a visit the site, that’s what this site is providing.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 24, 2014
Reply

THE REPUBLICAN PARTY PLATFORM FROM 2000 ON:

THE FOURTEEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FASCISM:

1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.

2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.

3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.

4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread
domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.

5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.

6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.

7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.

8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.

9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.

10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.

11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.

12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.

13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.

14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.

Sounds like america to me…UNDER ZIONIST – REPUBLICAN CONTROL. 2000 ON PLEASE VOTE FOR DEMOCRATS 2014 & 16.

A Republican, the hypocrites of any religious belief, with the exception of In god we trust on the money. Presently anyhow. By the way check out your religious affiliations holdings on Wall Street. You may consider placing your donations where it does some good.

Read the TRUTH. GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad —— Peace Blog.

PEACE: – Something we will never be afforded under a Republican Administration..

Allen D. Post
October 24, 2014
Reply

BLACK-WATER SE & ISIS —- VOTE FOR AMERICA & AMERICANS.

IRAQ WAR: AMERICAN TAX PAYERS PAID THE $$. AMERICAN TROOPS GAVE THEIR ALL.

ON FALSE INTEL. FROM ISRAEL. SAME THIS TIME, THEY CREATED IT. LET THEM
HANDLE IT. THEY NEVER PUT THEIR TROOPS AT RISK. THEY ALWAYS ATTACK THE
DEFENSELESS CIVILIANS.

BLACK WATER NO BID CONTRACT. EQUIPPED BETTER THAN OUR TROOPS. KILLED
1.2 MILLION CIVILIANS. GIVEN IMMUNITY TO DO SO.

IF ? TROOPS ARE NEEDED ON THE GROUND TO FIGHT ISIS, LET THE MIDDLE EASE COUNTRIES
HIRE BLACKWATER SE. GIVE THEM IMMUNITY AGAIN, IRAQ WON’T FIGHT. LET THEM AND OTHERS
PAY THE BILL.

WANT MORE WAR, WANT ANOTHER 911, WANT MORE COVER-UP, WANT MORE NATIONAL DEBT,
WANT THE SAME FOREIGN POLICIES, WANT MORE CORRUPTION ?? VOTE “REPUBLICAN”.

WANT PEACE, WANT BOYCOTTS, WANT ETHICS, WANT ACCOUNTABILITY, WANT A DIFFERENT
FOREIGN POLICY, WANT LESS OF ISRAELI-AIPAC INVOLVEMENT IN OUR GOVERNMENT,
WANT JOBS, HOMES, INFRASTRUCTURE , FAIR TAXATION ?? VOTE “DEMOCRAT”

“UNITED WE STAND—DIVIDED WE FALL. REPUBLICANS ARE DIVIDED,

THE COUNTRY IS DIVIDED.

THE next two elections, 2014 and 2016 are the most important in our history.

PLEASE UNITE WITH US. VOTE DEMOCRAT FOR AMERICA AND AMERICANS…PROTECT OUR BILL OF RIGHTS & CONSTITUTION.

THE NEXT TWO ELECTIONS ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT IN AMERICAN HISTORY. DON’T LET OUR ELECTIONS BE BOUGHT OUT.

WHAT DO WE WANT ? WE WANT YOUR VOTE !

URGENT RESPONSE NEEDED: With voting starting TODAY in Georgia and key states, the news is B-R-U-T-A-L for Democrats.

MILLIONS IN SLIMY ATTACK ADS IN WISCONSIN, FLORIDA, GEORGIA…

VOTERS ARE SEEING LIES ABOUT DEMS RIGHT BEFORE THEY VOTE…

IT COULD COST US VICTORIES, AND IT’LL BE ALL

Ronald L. Waldron
October 25, 2014
Reply

The Republican party has beat out Unions down for the last 25-30 years.(AND our ECONOMY)…

NOW THE TIME HAS COME TO BEAT THEM DOWN WHERE THEY BELONG. No more selling out to
Foreign Lobbies, Corporate dominance, or Religious Institutions. No one will prosecute the corruption that
has dominated the Politicians and Republican Party. The ramped crimes of TREASON in Washington,DC and
State Capitols.
HOW-EVER, we the people can, by voting them out of office. Then clean house with in Our Labor Party, the
Democrat Party. Us grass roots Americans will make the difference. What can you do about it. PLEASE VOTE
WITH US, SHOW THE REAL AMERICAN STRENGTH WE HAVE.

Please forward to Unions and members.

Reread the above posting.

THE REPUBLICAN PARTY PLATFORM FROM 2000 ON:

THE FOURTEEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FASCISM:

RLW

Ronald L. Waldron
October 26, 2014
Reply

REPUBLICAN CREATION: HOME-LAND SECURITY—DIRECT PIPE LINE TO ISRAEL.–SPIES NOT NEEDED.

HOME LAND SECURITY: CREATED UNDER THE G.W.BUSH ADMINISTRATION.

Being of the opinion that there was little communication or co-operation between Federal agencies. It was decided that
all agencies such as the FBI, CIA, NSA, Military intel, FEMA, DEA and Pentagon would be vetted through one agency. Thus
Home-Land Security was formed for that purpose. Which has become the largest Fascist organization with in the USA government.

The top four positions of this NEW agency were all duel citizens with Israel , and became the pipe line of all classified
materials direct to Israel. Of course with the worlds largest lobby being AIPAC, with tons of American tax-payer money
at their disposal to buy..Senators, congressmen, Labor Union bosses, Law enforcement and Military leaders, the claims
by Israel leaders that they did not need to worry about the USA, They certainly have had a major insider position in our
government as well as Wall Street, Banking, and corporate America. Religious organizations included in the mix of things.

Take a look at this organized crime syndicate. Ramped Corruption in our government. 17 of the top 20 most corrupt are
Republican. The party caters to the 2% that now control 68% of the wealth, with-out paying ANY taxes.
Their policies have caused 47 MILLION Americans to live at & below the poverty level, highest unemployment levels,
highest crime rates in History, AND the biggest DRUG abuse ever, which comes directly to you from our worst enemy
Israel.

WE THE PEOPLE ARE THE ONLY ONES THAT CAN BRING IT TO A HALT. We have a responsibility, not just a
right, to get involved. (NOW)

We have a war to fight in America, not just a war on Drugs, but a WAR on policies gone ah-rye, and the Criminals
committing TREASON.

Look at the out-sourcing of our jobs, the unfair trade agreements, the bail-outs, the national debt, the lack of proper
medical care, the lack of proper education.

Look at the Fourteen Characteristics of Fascism, WE HAVE A PROBLEM HOUSTON.

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL.

PLEASE: Join us, get out and vote for Democrats, AND stay on top of each

and every one of them. Demand a shut down of AIPAC in America, no more

Duel citizens in government positions. No more foreign aid to Israel. No more

wars fought for anyone but America.

Nov. 4Th get out and vote, regardless of the harassment from the right.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 30, 2014
Reply

No wonder Kentuckians and most others are ready for new leadership in Washington. We also know this is true politically in the other 49 states, along with our anti-Zionist Jewish friends.

Last week, in the wake of Mitch’s unwavering support for tax breaks for companies that ship jobs overseas, the largest employer in Russell County, KY announced they’re shutting down and moving 600 jobs to Honduras. And just Monday, McConnell once again put partisanship before people by refusing to extend unemployment benefits, leaving thousands of Kentucky families without assistance to pay their bills or put food on the table.

Breaking new poll: Alison Lundergan Grimes leads Mitch McConnell, 45 to 44

The new poll is good news – but this race is going to be close all the way until Election Day, considering the amount of campaign funds being given to Mitch McConnell. All from special interest groups foreign & corporate lobbies with no interest for Kentucky.

It is very much a time for change, and a time to retire McConnell, not only Senator McConnell but the Party of corruption
& TREASON needs to go. THE ELEPHANT has now become a DINOSAUR.

BREAKING: House GOP Passes Paul Ryan’s Republican Budget

Ronald L. — It’s official: Moments ago, Speaker Boehner’s Tea Party House passed the most radical budget we’ve ever seen.
The middle-class costs in the Ryan Budget are swift and brutal. This budget takes $40 billion out of the pockets of students paying for college and ends the Medicare guarantee for seniors — then hands new tax cuts to millionaires. It’s a slap in the face to the middle class and a direct attack on President Obama’s agenda.

The next two elections are the most important in the history of the USA. VOTE, VOTE, VOTE. VOTE every Republican out of
office

readiness of sacrifice :

On 03/10/14 11:48 PM, Hanan —- wrote:
——————–
Dear Ronald,good morning to you.
I highly admire your courage,your message to the world is highly appreciated.I know it is very difficult task,the difficulties you faced and your readiness of sacrifice marks the real role of the writers and thinkers and the believers of justice.
All the support,
Hanan

On 03/06/14 3:32 PM, Ronald Waldron wrote:
——————–

lack of morality, ethics, & integrity

Corruption has led to complete failure of our government.

Why our congress has an approval rating of only 9%. They have relied on who they perceive as the worlds best trained intelligence agency. To train, give leadership to our agencies, and work with our military intelligence. That of course being Mossad’s take-over.

Next, how well they have been manipulated by lobbies, again the largest is the foreign lobby,AIPAC.
It not only shows the ignorance of elected officials, but the self-serving agendas of most.
It took just 50 years for our government to be taken over with out any resistance from Washington, DC. It just took money,
campaign funds, personal gifts, trips, vacations, and any other forms of gratuity. (Corruption & Treason against WE the people)

Prosecution of the criminals will not happen,the reason why not, corruption has a solid grip on all agencies including our Supreme Court.

Millions now given freely to campaigns , for Billions in reduced or no taxes to pay, None invested in infrastructure of America, or EPA rules, of FDA approval of products. Out-sourcing of jobs for slave foreign labor. Unfair trade agreements, unnecessary WARS.

No action against the atrocities committed, no one held accountable for their action or inaction. All for SPECIAL Foreign INTEREST .

The transparency is there folks, if you only would look for it. NOT the propaganda of our modern day MEDIA or Organized religion.

WE need to remove the criminals, and the polarized. Do not re-Elect anyone with over 8 years in office, we the voters will set the term limits ourselves if we have any sense.

No one should have a life time appointment to any position
that has a direct affect regarding our Constitution and its
application.

Congress has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house, Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, education, religious leaders, and now attempting
to control the internet. Thankfully we can communicate with
each other on the world wide web, the only means to expose
the lack of morality, ethics, & integrity in our governments.

BUT Now look at the killing of Journalist, the character assassinations , the false flag operations, and the SILENCED Truth.

No wonder Kentuckians are ready for new leadership in Washington.

We also know this is true politically in the other 49 states, along with
our anti-Zionist Jewish friends.

Last week, in the wake of Mitch’s unwavering support for tax breaks for companies that ship jobs overseas, the largest employer in Russell County, KY announced they’re shutting down and moving 600 jobs to Honduras. And just Monday, McConnell once again put partisanship before people by refusing to extend unemployment benefits, leaving thousands of Kentucky families without assistance to pay their bills or put food on the table.

Breaking new poll: Alison Lundergan Grimes leads Mitch McConnell, 45 to 44

The new poll is good news – but this race is going to be close all the way until Election Day, considering the amount of campaign funds being given to Mitch McConnell. All from special interest groups foreign & corporate lobbies with no interest for Kentucky.

It is very much a time for change, and a time to retire McConnell, not only Senator McConnell but the Party of corruption
& TREASON needs to go. THE ELEPHANT has now become a DINOSAUR.

BREAKING: House GOP Passes Paul Ryan’s Republican Budget

Ronald L. — It’s official: Moments ago, Speaker Boehner’s Tea Party House passed the most radical budget we’ve ever seen.
The middle-class costs in the Ryan Budget are swift and brutal. This budget takes $40 billion out of the pockets of students paying for college and ends the Medicare guarantee for seniors — then hands new tax cuts to millionaires. It’s a slap in the face to the middle class and a direct attack on President Obama’s agenda.

The next two elections are the most important in the history of the USA. VOTE, VOTE, VOTE. VOTE every Republican out of
office

readiness of sacrifice :

On 03/10/14 11:48 PM, Hanan —- wrote:
——————–
Dear Ronald,good morning to you.
I highly admire your courage,your message to the world is highly appreciated.I know it is very difficult task,the difficulties you faced and your readiness of sacrifice marks the real role of the writers and thinkers and the believers of justice.
All the support,
Hanan

On 03/06/14 3:32 PM, Ronald Waldron wrote:
——————–

lack of morality, ethics, & integrity

Corruption has led to complete failure of our government.

Why our congress has an approval rating of only 9%. They have relied on who they perceive as the worlds best trained intelligence agency. To train, give leadership to our agencies, and work with our military intelligence. That of course being Mossad’s take-over.

Next, how well they have been manipulated by lobbies, again the largest is the foreign lobby,AIPAC.
It not only shows the ignorance of elected officials, but the self-serving agendas of most.
It took just 50 years for our government to be taken over with out any resistance from Washington, DC. It just took money,
campaign funds, personal gifts, trips, vacations, and any other forms of gratuity. (Corruption & Treason against WE the people)

Prosecution of the criminals will not happen,the reason why not, corruption has a solid grip on all agencies including our Supreme Court.

Millions now given freely to campaigns , for Billions in reduced or no taxes to pay, None invested in infrastructure of America, or EPA rules, of FDA approval of products. Out-sourcing of jobs for slave foreign labor. Unfair trade agreements, unnecessary WARS.

No action against the atrocities committed, no one held accountable for their action or inaction. All for SPECIAL Foreign INTEREST .

The transparency is there folks, if you only would look for it. NOT the propaganda of our modern day MEDIA or Organized religion.

WE need to remove the criminals, and the polarized. Do not re-Elect anyone with over 8 years in office, we the voters will set the term limits ourselves if we have any sense.

No one should have a life time appointment to any position
that has a direct affect regarding our Constitution and its
application.

Congress has carried out the orders of Rothschild and his sub-agent Zionist billionaire George Soros to the letter. There has been a coup d’état by Zionist traitors. Zionist now control both political parties, both the Senate & house, Wall Street, Hollywood, The media, our food chain, TV, YOUR GUNS, JOBS, education, religious leaders, and now attempting
to control the internet. Thankfully we can communicate with
each other on the world wide web, the only means to expose
the lack of morality, ethics, & integrity in our governments.

BUT Now look at the killing of Journalist, the character assassinations , the false flag operations, and the SILENCED Truth.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 1, 2014
Reply

Republican political pundits.

They will control Congress after Tuesday’s election, if we the people don’t fight tooth & Nail.

Here is what we ALL know, which should get us to the polls.

The Republicans have engaged in a concerted war on the poor and middle class.
And who benefits? The Republicans’ wealthy backers.
And here’s the kicker: the beneficiaries of Republicans’ regressive policies are using their ill-gotten gains to… you guessed it!… elect even more Republicans.

It’s a vicious cycle that rewards the Republicans for handing out more tax breaks to billionaires — but keeps the minimum wage stagnant, education underfunded, and millions of low-wage workers without Medicaid assistance. It HAS STOPPED the WAR on poverty in AMERICA.
WITH NOW 47 million AMERICANS living at or below the poverty level. See it all around you in any city, community, County, State or
reservations with-in our unprotected borders.

Their Foreign and Fascist policies, their out-sourcing, Foreign trade agreements, Foreign aid policies, Foreign THINK TANKS & LOBBIES,
we all have witnessed the corruption and controls of the ZIONIST organized crime syndicate. ( Partnership with the DEVIL, and Anti-Christ,
Anti-Christian, Faith Based FASCIST State of Israel.) Our worst enemy, that has bled our ECONOMY and RESOURCES . (NOW OWN IT)
NATIONAL DEBT ( OVER 17 TRILLION) FOR THEM AND THEIR GENOCIDES AND WARS. Not one of them living in poverty or home-less like many of our VETS.

America’s True National Debt: $87 Trillion

AMERICANS — we can fix this.

The solution is actually pretty simple.

If we want to tackle income inequality in our country, we need to elect a better Congress. And if we want a better Congress, we need to get-out-the-vote for Democrats who will put the middle-class first.

Get-out-the-vote (and kick out the Koch-funded Republicans)?

Together, we can defeat Republicans who put the interests of billionaires over the common interest. THAT MEANS PAYING FAIR TAXES FOR
ALL, NOT JUST THE MIDDLE CLASS.

HELP get-out-the-vote program for the final days of this election. If everyone who’s reading this email FORWARDS TO ALL YOU POSSIBLY CAN, CALL EVERYONE YOU CAN, SAY SO TO FAMILY & FRIENDS. WE CAN WIN BY VOTING DEMOCRAT, AND TAKING CHARGE, LOCAL, STATE & FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVES. A WATCH GROUP ON EACH ONE.

UNITED WE STAND—DIVIDED WE FALL. WE ARE DIVIDED, WE ARE FALLING. PLEASE PULL TOGETHER WITH US. FOR AMERICA AND NO
BODY ELSE. PERIOD !! PLEASE STAND WITH US, VOTE WITH US!! TAKE ACTION WITH US. AMEN.

Thank you for your Courtesy;

Ronald L. Waldron A very concerned average American. Retired Police Officer. Help stop the Corruption!!

Together, we can defeat Republicans who put the interests of billionaires over the common interest.

HELP get-out-the-vote program for the final days of this election. If everyone who’s reading this email FORWARDS TO ALL YOU POSSIBLY CAN, CALL EVERYONE YOU CAN, SAY SO TO FAMILY & FRIENDS.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 5, 2014
Reply

WE AS DEMOCRATS FAILED TO STOP THE BUY-OUT!!

MONEY IS THE KEY FOR ALL GOOD & BAD.

The lack of it, or lack of it’s value leads to What happens next, now that the
obstructionist will destroy any value or Values America has left.
More War will be coming, but with the National Debt to China and others
being near 18 Trillion, the real debt is 87 Trillion, low GNP, brings our
currency worth to about $.03 (cents).

We soon will be facing a huge recession, to a depression that will take
25 years to recover from. The Sky may not be falling, but the floor is
falling from under our feet.

Yes, we have failed to STOP our worst Enemy, greed of the Zionist syndicate
that will destroy all things that would other wise be possible.

I feel I failed my God, Country, President, Family, and friends, by not getting
more information to the voters, how can Journalist that know what the real
nature of things are, sit on their thumbs, and follow a script handed to them.

How can politicians be silent, staffers be silent, when they witness it every
day. I certainly hope that the new representatives elected will stand up on all
the real issues. NOT that they are not known, just too many are unaware.

In the mean time, we will be persistent. I think Jesus history, and the
forgotten NEW TESTAMENT would be a good thing to study for a
while. It just might refresh a sense of Christianity, and OUR holy-land.

The World’s most Rich & Famous are the most moral decayed people,
with no compassion for humanity. GOOD LUCK IN THE FUTURE.

2016 May be too far away to salvage the remaining carnage of atrocities.

Continue Fighting Tooth & Nail for what is Truly Right , for us ALL..

Ronald L. Waldron

I Thank the Following for recognizing hard work, and dedication to the
residences of this world on earth.

Those Candidates that have E-mailed me today, Thanked me for my work, rather
they won or lost. Those that did not want to see Netanyahu remain as the
dictator of policy for AIPAC’S bought out congress. .

Allen D. Post
November 5, 2014
Reply

Not only congress occupation, how about Homeland Security, Pentagon,and the Judicial Courts. There is no one to investigate,
or prosecute the crimes, & criminals of Israel & AIPAC !

Ronald L. Waldron
November 7, 2014
Reply

REVOLUTION IN THE UNITED STATES

by GARRY LEECH

How can it be just that so few dictate the lives of so many? And I’m not referring to the 1 percent and the 99 percent. I’m speaking of the voting population in the United States and its minions Canada and Britain. Meanwhile, the billions of people around the world whose lives are directly impacted by the decisions made by elected officials in these wealthy nations have virtually no voice. The US Empire is far from democratic. It is authoritarian! It is imperialist! It is unjust! And a revolution is needed.

In the 2012 presidential election, 121 million Americans voted, which constituted 57 percent of the voting age population. This voter turnout, while not a significant majority, nevertheless provides legitimacy for the US political system, particularly in the eyes of many Americans.

But the political decisions made by elected US officials reach far beyond that nation’s borders. Through its foreign policy and its dominant role in international institutions such as the United Nations Security Council, NATO, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, the United States impacts the lives of virtually everyone on the planet. In other words, the electoral choices of 121 million Americans directly impact the lives of billions of people around the world. How is this democratic?

National borders are repeatedly decimated in the name of ‘free market’ capitalism so that corporations can freely move their capital and profits around the globe to take advantage of cheap labour and natural resources, particularly in the global South. But while the economy is becoming increasingly globalized, democracy remains rooted in the nation-state.

But all nations are not equal. The United States has inherited the role that European colonizers played for hundreds of years. And like the ruling powers in the old colonial system, the United States wields a disproportionate amount of political, economic and military power in contemporary imperialism. As a result of this dominance, 121 million American voters hold the fate of billions in their hands every four years.

But the fate of the world’s population is the farthest thing from the minds of most US voters at election time. They are primarily focused on their own immediate needs such as jobs, taxes, security and other issues that they perceive to be of importance to their daily lives. They are not concerned with—or fail to see—how the political, economic and military policies implemented globally by the government they elect negatively impact many people around the world. Consequently, there is little chance of Americans voting against what they perceive to be their own interests for the benefit of a majority of the world’s population.

But what happens when those people negatively impacted by US policies attempt to take matters into their own hands and challenge the undemocratic US imperialist model? Washington inevitably responds in violent ways to defend the status quo. This is why so many people around the world do not believe that the United States is a force for good. In fact, in a 2013 WIN/Gallup poll conducted in 68 countries, the United States was overwhelmingly viewed as the greatest threat to world peace—as it is each year the survey is conducted.

The American Empire

Washington’s global political dominance manifests itself through military and economic support to allied governments regardless of how corrupt, undemocratic and violent they may be in order to defend US interests. These interests primarily consist of enabling the profit-taking activities of multinational corporations and ensuring a continuation of the consumer lifestyle enjoyed by many Americans.

The consequences of prioritizing corporate profits and consumer lifestyles in wealthy nations have been devastating for many around the world. According to the World Health Organization, more than 10 million people die annually in Latin America, Africa and Asia due to a lack of access to adequate healthcare and medicines. This is the inevitable result of the capitalist system, which prioritizes profits over everything else.

For example, it is more profitable for pharmaceutical companies to produce ‘lifestyle’ drugs to address such issues as baldness and other non-life threatening conditions for people in wealthy nations who can afford to purchase them than to manufacture essential medicines for the poor who do not constitute a viable market. The inevitable consequence is structural genocide; a tragedy that has be made more visible by the Ebola epidemic in West Africa.

When governments do come to power and challenge US interests then Washington inevitably responds with economic sanctions, support for a military coup and, if necessary, direct military intervention. The objective is to ensure that the capitalist model is the dominant social model throughout the world. And in order to ensure that this model is accepted as legitimate it is crucial that populations around the world internalize Western liberal values. This is precisely why the ongoing US military interventions in the Islamic world are, despite the rhetoric emanating from the White House, a war against Islam. The acceptance of Western liberal values is essential for the perpetuation of capitalism and many of these individualistic values contravene some of the collectivist values found in Islam.

The ongoing military interventions in the Middle East and Central Asia are a continuation of the empire-building that began in 1492 after Christopher Columbus ‘discovered’ the Americas. The values and cultural practices of the indigenous peoples of the Americas were not aligned with the liberal and Christian religious values prominent in Europe, particularly Enlightenment thought, which provided the philosophical foundation for capitalism. Consequently, those indigenous that resisted—and many who didn’t resist—the imposition of European values onto their cultures were slaughtered.

Most of those that survived were effectively interned in reservations and generation after generation subjected to forced assimilation through a Eurocentric education system. Similarly in Africa and Asia, European colonialism imposed liberal ideas and Christianity on peoples in order to inculcate them with the Western values essential to validate the capitalist system that drove the colonial project.

More recent attempts to challenge this imperialist process have similarly been met with violence. The United States has overthrown virtually all governments that have challenged its hegemony. Just a partial list of countries whose governments were overthrown by US-backed coups or military interventions in recent decades includes Iran (1953), Guatemala (1954), South Vietnam (1963), Brazil (1964), Indonesia (1965), Chile (1973), Argentina (1976), Haiti (1991 and 2004), Afghanistan (2001), Iraq (2003), Honduras (2009) and Libya (2011). Some of these governments were democratically-elected in free and fair elections.

Other governments that have dared to challenge US hegemony have managed against great odds to survive all efforts to bring them down. Cuba repelled the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and has endured an inhumane US-imposed economic blockade for more than half a century. The UN General Assembly recently voted overwhelming for the 23rd time to condemn the blockade with 188 countries calling for its end and only two—the United States and Israel—voting against the resolution. Similarly, Venezuela survived a US-supported coup attempt against President Hugo Chávez in 2002 and continues to be routinely demonized by US policymakers.

Radicalizing Islam

US militarism in the Islamic world has similarly sought to challenge those who resist the implementation of the Western liberal values essential for capitalist globalization. Fifty years ago there were no prominent extremist Islamic groups. The contemporary evolution of extremism can be dated to the US-backed overthrow of Iran’s popular moderate and largely secular Prime Minister Mohamad Mossadegh in 1953 after he nationalized the oil industry. The Shah was re-instated as ruler of Iran and he immediately re-opened the country to Western oil companies while his US-trained secret police brutally repressed all dissent.

It was under the despotic rule of the US-backed Shah that Western cultural practices became commonplace in Iran due to the presence of so many US and British oil workers. Meanwhile, increasing numbers of Iranians were enduring poverty while the Shah and Western oil workers flaunted the country’s resource wealth in their faces. The growing resentment caused by these circumstances provided an ideal environment for Islamic fundamentalists to make inroads among the Iranian population. And by 1979, the majority of Iranians supported the fundamentalist revolution that overthrew the corrupt and brutal regime of the Shah.

In the ensuing decades, Washington’s support for corrupt regimes in the region that serve Western interests, particularly with regard to ensuring a steady flow of oil, has further radicalized elements of the Islamic world. The United States also provided more than $4 billion in military and economic aid to Mujahideen rebels fighting against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan during the 1980s. One of the Mujahideen rebels supported by Washington was Osama bin Laden who, following the removal of the Soviet Western invaders from the Islamic world, founded Al-Qaeda and shifted his sights onto the latest Western invader when the US military established bases in Saudi Arabia in 1991. The numerous US military interventions in the region since 1991and Washington’s unconditional support for Israel have only added fuel to the fire of extremism.

It is clear that US military intervention in the Middle East is not motivated by the promotion of democracy and human rights. After all, if US foreign policy were motivated at all by these noble causes then Washington would have long ago overthrown the ruthless dictatorship that governs its close ally Saudi Arabia and rid the region of its other authoritarian friends. And given that the Saudi government routinely publicly beheads its own citizens—19 in July and August—Obama’s decision to commit the US military to fight alongside the Saudi beheaders against the Islamic State beheaders speaks volumes about human rights. Evidently, it is not beheading per se that makes one ‘evil,’ but rather the beheading of Westerners in order to challenge US economic interests.

The failure of moderate and more secular nationalist groups to address the needs of Muslims has resulted in the emergence of more radical fundamentalist organizations such as Hezbollah, Hamas, the Taliban, al-Qaeda and now the Islamic State. In short, we are witnessing a radicalization on a regional scale similar to that which occurred nationally in Iran following US intervention in that country and support for the Shah’s brutal regime.

Washington’s imperialist policies have prioritized the interests of Western oil companies and Western economies over those of Islamic peoples. Not surprisingly, this has resulted in a radicalization of the growing opposition to US military, political and economic interventions in the Islamic world. The US response to this emerging radicalism hasn’t been a re-evaluation of its imperialist approach in the Islamic world, but rather to intensify it. How else can the US-led military invasions and occupations of Afghanistan and Iraq be explained? In both countries, the objective was to militarily impose Western liberal democracies on Islamic peoples and to incorporate the resources and economies of these nations into the global capitalist system.

Despite the oft-repeated rhetoric of Western leaders that military intervention in the region does not constitute a war against Islam, it is a war against Islam. It is a war against those Islamic values that are contrary to the gross and inhumane profit-taking of multinational corporations and investment banks. It is a war against those collective values and beliefs that conflict with the individualistic and self-indulgent consumer culture at the core of Western capitalism. It is a war against those Muslims who have become disenchanted with a democratic model and economic system that has left them disempowered and impoverished.

Not only has neoliberal globalization left many in the Islamic world in poverty, but it has also failed to give them any meaningful political voice through the ballot box. When Muslims elect an Islamic party to power in Western-style elections, the new government is immediately targeted by the United States and its allies. Egyptians took to the streets in 2011 as part of the Arab Spring uprisings to demand the removal of the country’s US-backed dictator Hosni Mubarak and that elections be held. The following year a majority of Egyptians elected the presidential candidate who represented the country’s leading Islamic organization, the Muslim Brotherhood. One year later, Washington and its allies gladly turned a blind eye when the US-backed Egyptian military overthrew the new democratically-elected government.

This was not the first time that Western powers undermined democracy in the Islamic world. In 1991, when parliamentary election results in Algeria made it apparent that the Islamic Salvation Front would win a two-thirds majority, the military stepped in and annulled the election rather than allow an Islamic party to gain power. The United States and France supported the coup because they were opposed to the establishment of an Islamic government in Algeria, even though it would have been a democratically-elected government that represented the wishes of a majority of Algerians. The price of this abrogation of the democratic process was a civil war that resulted in the deaths of more than 150,000 people over the next decade.

Similarly in 2006, the Palestinian people voted in favor of the Islamic party of Hamas over the more moderate Fatah Party, with the former winning 76 seats to the latter’s 45, thereby allowing Hamas to head the government. The United States, Canada and the European Union responded to the election results by immediately cutting off funding to the new Hamas-led government and allowing Israel to implement an inhumane blockade of the Hamas stronghold of Gaza. These cases send a clear message to Muslims: Accept Western-style democracy but do not elect an Islamic party. Is it any surprise that growing numbers of Muslims are becoming disenchanted with Western-style democracy and a global economic system that primarily serves Western interests?

This growing disenchantment has manifested itself in a new ‘threat’ that has emerged from the US invasion and occupation of Iraq. The Islamic State is even more extremist than al-Qaeda in its efforts to resist Western imperialism. Despite this reality, the Western response to the Islamic State is to replicate the previous military interventions in the Middle East that brought al-Qaeda and the Islamic State into existence in the first place.

Washington is intensifying a military intervention in the Islamic world that has already killed thousands of innocent civilians. In fact, the number of innocent Muslims killed by US bombs far surpasses the number of Westerners killed by extremist Islamic groups. History suggests that even if the United States and its allies militarily defeat the Islamic State, the inevitable killing of civilians by Western forces will result in its replacement by an even more extreme group.

The real reason the United States and its Western allies are targeting the Islamic State becomes apparent when that extremist group is compared to the Mexican drug cartels. Mexico’s cartels pose a much greater violent threat to civilians, including Americans, than does the Islamic State. They killed more than 16,000 people in 2013, almost double the number that died in Iraq. More crucially from the US perspective, more than 300 US citizens have been killed by Mexico’s drug cartels in the past six years, which far surpasses the number of Americans killed by the Islamic State.

Furthermore, the cartels not only behead many of their victims, they dismember their entire bodies. They also routinely enlist youth as young as eleven and regularly target women and children. The cartels control vast tracts of territory in Northern Mexico and the government cannot defeat them. And yet, we are not bombing Northern Mexico to eliminate this violent group. Why not? Because it is not human rights or democracy promotion that motivates the US government to act; Washington responds to perceived threats to the capitalist system.

In Mexico, the violent actions of the drug cartels do not infringe on the capacity of multinational corporations to generate profits through the exploitation of that country’s cheap labour and natural resources. The drug cartels do not interfere with the free trade economic model, which is most visibly represented in Mexico by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). As a matter of fact, drug traffickers rely on the constant and uninterrupted flow of trade across the US-Mexico border to transport their product. In short, unlike the Islamic State, Mexico’s drug cartels do not constitute a challenge to Western liberal values and the capitalist economic model promoted by the United States.

Conclusion

Western imperialism has spent the better part of five hundred years trying to impose Western values on peoples throughout the world. These peoples have never had a meaningful voice in the political, social and economic policies that have been imposed on them. Imperialism, by definition, is undemocratic. While the policies of the US government impact billions of people around the world, only a tiny percentage of the global population have any say in electing that government. And the overwhelming majority of the 121 million Americans who vote give little thought to how their ballot will impact Muslims in the Middle East, indigenous peoples in Latin America, and billions of others throughout Africa and Asia. Their voting decisions are primarily determined by their perceived immediate needs, which provides a veneer of legitimacy not only to US democracy but also to US imperialism.

Consequently, it is highly unlikely that in the foreseeable future a revolution will occur in the imperial heartland. It is much more likely to occur in the outlying regions of the US Empire. In fact, it is already occurring in various forms, from the indigenous movements for autonomy in Latin America to the extremist Islamic fundamentalism of groups such as al-Qaeda and the Islamic State in the Middle East. At the current time, the overwhelming majority of the world’s population that stands opposed to US imperialism are moderates who are non-violently seeking autonomy and a meaningful voice in the major decisions that impact their lives. But if we continue to crush all moderate opposition to US imperialism, we will likely further spread the sort of extremism that has emerged in the Middle East.

For the world’s sake, it is crucial that a revolution occur that brings down the US imperialist system before the violent extremism it fuels leads to global chaos. And if the US Empire is not brought down by those living at its core then it must be overthrown by its ‘subjects’ in the outlying regions who endure taxation—through the exploitation of their cheap labour and natural resources—without representation. After all, they have nothing to lose but their chains.

Garry Leech is an independent journalist and author of numerous books including Capitalism: A Structural Genocide (Zed Books, 2012); Beyond Bogota: Diary of a Drug War Journalist in Colombia (Beacon Press, 2009); and Crude Interventions: The United States Oil and the New World Disorder (Zed Books, 2006). ). He is also a lecturer in the Department of Political Science at Cape Breton University in Canada.

INVESTIGATE AND PROSECUTE EVERY LEGISLATOR THAT IS INV0LVED IN THE RAMPED “TREASON” OF MEMBERS OF GOVERNMENT SUPPORTING FOREIGN POLICY , FOREIGN LOBBIES, AND FOREIGN LEADERSHIP THAT TAKES AWAY FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE THEY WERE TO REPRESENT. WE WANT PROSECUTION OF WAR CRIMES, AND TREASON BY CONGRESS MEMBERS.

戶外教學
November 12, 2014
Reply

I lopve what you guys tend to be uup too. This sort
of clever worrk and reporting! Keep upp the awesome works gujys I’ve
you guys to blogroll.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 12, 2014
Reply

Thank You for your comment. Please join us, with United We Stand,
We stand with the Democrats to take our Country back from the
Zionist crime syndicate. Spread the word that we are fighting
against the corruption that has bought out the Republican Party.
We also are fighting against the FOREIGN SPECIAL INTEREST
LOBBY (AIPAC). No interest in America or Americans, except as
a WAR MACHINE for ISRAELI interest.
America needs to dismantle AIPAC as non-American. Then
prosecute all connected with TREASON.

Thanks again, encourage every one to do their part.

Be Blessed;

Ronald L. Waldron

Support our PRESIDENT “Obama”

Netanyahu IS A CRIMINAL. not a leader of Democracy &
Freedom. Sign a petition to keep him off our air ways, which is
controlled by other Zionist. No more duel citizenship people in
any of our government agencies. No more genocides and
Atrocities.

DEMAND A PEACE AGREEMENT for Palestine.
KEEP Jerusalem out of Israel’s grubby hands.
Support Palestine State hood.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 13, 2014
Reply

Several pro-Israeli US Senators wanted for treason:
Two of them suggest sanctions against Iran which is ignorant.
We want any representatives supporting Israel
Charged with treason, any one of them accepting money from any source connected to
a foreign regime, Country or entity, should be charged with accepting a Bribe. Campaign donations
and where there are from should be recorded on public record.

Cross reference, check donations against Tax dollars spent to benefit the DONOR, past, present,
and future. ANY foreign aid should be for Human rights like the Palestinian suffering and the
atrocities against them, and others.

To suggest sanctions when the UN pasted 67 sanctions against Israel, and the U.S.A. veto’s them is
shameful.

Every one knows ISRAEL has, and has had nuclear weapons. That they will not sign a non-proliferation
agreement, will not allow inspections, and will not speak about what they have. How-ever they have
openly threatened to use such before they will be defeated. That makes them more dangerous than
any other organization or regime located in the Middle East.

In the future, never vote for any candidate that suggest anything but Boycott & Sanctions against
Israel. Talk about co-conspirators, WATCH closely at the relationship between our congress, AIPAC
(Which should be thrown out of our Country), ISRAEL and their syndicate, and of course the
REPUBLICAN connection to it. YES, any Democrat also that co-sponsors for any DEAL involving Israel.

Washington DC always falls behind what the American people want and expect out of our representatives.

NOTHING: Until there is a “CONCRETE PEACE AGREEMENT WITH PALESTINE, WITH PALESTINE HAVING
ITS OWN STATE” NO MORE FALSE FLAG OPERATIONS AND ATTACKS ON THE USA, AS IN THE PAST.

[New post] Bill Clinton Says Forget About Netanyahu, He’s ‘Not The Guy’ For Peace !!

MAKING PEACE IS THE ONLY WAY THEY SURVIVE, NO MORE WARS—-BOYCOTT AND SANCTION, NO MORE AID.

WE THE PEOPLE, CONSIDER ISRAEL AS BEING OUR WORST ENEMY, NEVER HAS BEEN OR SHOULD HAVE BEEN
CONSIDERED AN ALLY. AMERICA HAS BEEN WARNED, AND WARNED, FROM PRESIDENT EISENHOWER,S
WARNING ON.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 14, 2014
Reply

EVERY ONE NEEDS TO READ THIS LETTER. HIGH CRIMES & FELONIES. THE ZIONIST–REPUBLICAN PARTNERSHIP. AMERICANS FACE THE TRUTH, DO YOU CARE, REALLY CARE? VOTE, TALK, VOTE, VOLUNTEER–DEMOCRAT 2016.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 14, 2014
Reply

EVERY ONE NEEDS TO READ THIS LETTER. HIGH CRIMES & FELONIES. THE ZIONIST–REPUBLICAN PARTNERSHIP. AMERICANS FACE THE TRUTH, DO YOU CARE, REALLY CARE?
November 12, 2014
Tomas Young: November 30, 1979 – November 10, 2014
My Last Words to George W. Bush and Dick Cheney
by TOMAS YOUNG

Editor’s Note: News came yesterday that Tomas Young, an Iraq war vet turned anti-war activist, had passed away in Seattle at the age of 34. Tomas enlisted in the Army just two days after the 9/11 attacks. Following his training at Ft. Hood, Texas he was deployed to Iraq and paralyzed after being shot through his spinal cord just five days into his first tour. Many CounterPunchers may remember Tomas from the excellent Body of War, a documentary film by Phil Donahue about Tomas’ struggles following his return from Iraq. Below is a letter Tomas wrote to George W. Bush and Dick Cheney in June 2013. RIP Tomas Young. We promise to carry on your fight. – Joshua Frank
I write this letter on the 10th anniversary of the Iraq War on behalf of my fellow Iraq War veterans. I write this letter on behalf of the 4,488 soldiers and Marines who died in Iraq. I write this letter on behalf of the hundreds of thousands of veterans who have been wounded and on behalf of those whose wounds, physical and psychological, have destroyed their lives. I am one of those gravely wounded. I was paralyzed in an insurgent ambush in 2004 in Sadr City. My life is coming to an end. I am living under hospice care.

I write this letter on behalf of husbands and wives who have lost spouses, on behalf of children who have lost a parent, on behalf of the fathers and mothers who have lost sons and daughters and on behalf of those who care for the many thousands of my fellow veterans who have brain injuries. I write this letter on behalf of those veterans whose trauma and self-revulsion for what they have witnessed, endured and done in Iraq have led to suicide and on behalf of the active-duty soldiers and Marines who commit, on average, a suicide a day. I write this letter on behalf of the some 1 million Iraqi dead and on behalf of the countless Iraqi wounded. I write this letter on behalf of us all—the human detritus your war has left behind, those who will spend their lives in unending pain and grief.

I write this letter, my last letter, to you, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney. I write not because I think you grasp the terrible human and moral consequences of your lies, manipulation and thirst for wealth and power. I write this letter because, before my own death, I want to make it clear that I, and hundreds of thousands of my fellow veterans, along with millions of my fellow citizens, along with hundreds of millions more in Iraq and the Middle East, know fully who you are and what you have done. You may evade justice but in our eyes you are each guilty of egregious war crimes, of plunder and, finally, of murder, including the murder of thousands of young Americans—my fellow veterans—whose future you stole.

Your positions of authority, your millions of dollars of personal wealth, your public relations consultants, your privilege and your power cannot mask the hollowness of your character. You sent us to fight and die in Iraq after you, Mr. Cheney, dodged the draft in Vietnam, and you, Mr. Bush, went AWOL from your National Guard unit. Your cowardice and selfishness were established decades ago. You were not willing to risk yourselves for our nation but you sent hundreds of thousands of young men and women to be sacrificed in a senseless war with no more thought than it takes to put out the garbage.

I joined the Army two days after the 9/11 attacks. I joined the Army because our country had been attacked. I wanted to strike back at those who had killed some 3,000 of my fellow citizens. I did not join the Army to go to Iraq, a country that had no part in the September 2001 attacks and did not pose a threat to its neighbors, much less to the United States. I did not join the Army to “liberate” Iraqis or to shut down mythical weapons-of-mass-destruction facilities or to implant what you cynically called “democracy” in Baghdad and the Middle East. I did not join the Army to rebuild Iraq, which at the time you told us could be paid for by Iraq’s oil revenues. Instead, this war has cost the United States over $3 trillion. I especially did not join the Army to carry out pre-emptive war. Pre-emptive war is illegal under international law. And as a soldier in Iraq I was, I now know, abetting your idiocy and your crimes. The Iraq War is the largest strategic blunder in U.S. history. It obliterated the balance of power in the Middle East. It installed a corrupt and brutal pro-Iranian government in Baghdad, one cemented in power through the use of torture, death squads and terror. And it has left Iran as the dominant force in the region. On every level—moral, strategic, military and economic—Iraq was a failure. And it was you, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney, who started this war. It is you who should pay the consequences.

I would not be writing this letter if I had been wounded fighting in Afghanistan against those forces that carried out the attacks of 9/11. Had I been wounded there I would still be miserable because of my physical deterioration and imminent death, but I would at least have the comfort of knowing that my injuries were a consequence of my own decision to defend the country I love. I would not have to lie in my bed, my body filled with painkillers, my life ebbing away, and deal with the fact that hundreds of thousands of human beings, including children, including myself, were sacrificed by you for little more than the greed of oil companies, for your alliance with the oil sheiks in Saudi Arabia, and your insane visions of empire.

I have, like many other disabled veterans, suffered from the inadequate and often inept care provided by the Veterans Administration. I have, like many other disabled veterans, come to realize that our mental and physical wounds are of no interest to you, perhaps of no interest to any politician. We were used. We were betrayed. And we have been abandoned. You, Mr. Bush, make much pretense of being a Christian. But isn’t lying a sin? Isn’t murder a sin? Aren’t theft and selfish ambition sins? I am not a Christian. But I believe in the Christian ideal. I believe that what you do to the least of your brothers you finally do to yourself, to your own soul.

My day of reckoning is upon me. Yours will come. I hope you will be put on trial. But mostly I hope, for your sakes, that you find the moral courage to face what you have done to me and to many, many others who deserved to live. I hope that before your time on earth ends, as mine is now ending, you will find the strength of character to stand before the American public and the world, and in particular the Iraqi people, and beg for forgiveness.

-Tomas Young

AMERICANS WILL YOU ALLOW THEM TO TAKE US BACK INTO ANOTHER SENSELESS WAR?—FIX–IT!!

Ronald L. Waldron
November 14, 2014
Reply

ANOTHER DISABLED VETERAN:

Delonne Scharf, West Valley, New York Pasted away 4-5 years
ago this month. He filed his complaint with the Courts prior To
passing, regarding wrongful treatment, culpable Negligence etc.
VA Hospital, Buffalo, NY.

The case has been delayed by VA, now the family hears
nothing from the Court or the VA.

Remember all that has now been silenced again. Veterans
Day just passed. We remember our veterans, but has the
Government. Congress has done nothing for the past six
years NOW that they control the House & Senate, what ta
hek will they do?. MORE PAID FOR TRIPS TO ISRAEL?

Ronald L. Waldron
November 15, 2014
Reply

Billionaire patrons of Democratic and Republican parties united by fanaticism for Israel
Submitted by Rania Khalek on Mon, 11/10/2014 – 19:42

The Israeli American Council, a right-wing Israel advocacy organization, kicked off its first ever national conference in Washington, DC this weekend.

Big name speakers included Republican hot shots like former Massachusetts governor and 2012 GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney as well as hawkish neoconservative warmonger Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina. As was predicted, the mostly rightwing speakers capitalized on the event, using it as an opportunity to mock Obama, brag about the GOP’s midterm victory and pander to the right wing of the Israel lobby.
Billionaire kingpins

The most illuminating spectacle of the conference appears to have been the highly anticipated public conversation between Las Vegas casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson and Hollywood billionaire Haim Saban.

On the surface the pair could be easily mistaken as ideological rivals.

Adelson, the tenth richest person in the world who bankrolls the far right wing of the Republican Party, spent $150 million trying to defeat Obama and unseat Democrats in 2012.

Conversely, Saban is a top donor to the Democratic Party, earning favors and groveling from Obama. In 2002, Saban doled out $7 million to the Democratic National Committee’s construction of the party’s headquarters. It was believed to be the largest single donation in Democratic Party history up to that time.

But when it comes to Israel they share a hawkish obsession with maintaining the state’s settler colonial regime, making the elderly power duo practically indistinguishable.

And they make no secret of their motives.

Saban, who made his fortune building the Power Rangers empire, freely admits that his number one priority is to influence US foreign policy in Israel’s favor through a three-pronged approach that entails donating to political parties, establishing think tanks and controlling media outlets. “I’m a one-issue guy and my issue is ISRAEL , AIPAC is also a one-issue lobby, and that naturally is ISRAEL” he once told The New York Times.

In a Wall Street Journal op-ed explaining their transformation from a Democrat to a Republican, Adelson revealed that the main driver was greater Republican sympathy for Israel.

Having expressed regret for serving in the US military instead of the Israeli army, Adelson has said he hopes to see his son “be a sniper for the IDF,” referring to the Israeli military. Adelson’s sectarian zealotry is matched only by his deep-seated hatred for Palestinians, who he routinely labels an invented people.

Meanwhile, Adelson donates more than $30 million annually to Birthright Israel, a program that sends young American Jews on a free ten-day trip to Israel in an attempt to radicalize them into immigrating to bolster the Jewish majority and participate in the dispossesion and ethnic cleansing of the land’s indigenous inhabitants.

Extremists with power, and stolen assets from the American tax-payers. (Gentiles)

I had hoped to attend the Adelson-Saban event but was denied entry to the conference even though I applied for and was granted press access beforehand. The woman at the registration desk insisted my name wasn’t on the press list and refused to budge even after I pulled up my confirmation email from the Israeli American Council’s press contact.

However, the live tweets from the event candidly show the lust for extremism and violence espoused by the influential speakers. They mix no doubt but what they feel they now control
Americans Government, Banking, and largest per cent of Business.

While Republicans enjoy the riches they receive from the Zionist Billionaires and AIPAC, they also gain support from the religious right, the Zionist Christians that make up their Base.

Democrats on the other hand, are pulling away from Zionism and the atrocities of Israel’s and occupations of others. A realization that
Washington, DC is ZIONIST occupied.

THINK: Can any one remember what the 50’s were like. The 60’s,
The Seventy’s, Late 60′–70″s. Mall’s, Super-Stores, Restaurants,
Gas Stations, Grocery Stores, Fast-Food, Conglomerate Auto
Sales, Tire & repair shops, Paint stores, Shoe Stores. ALL that
had been private family businesses. NOW all chain Box businesses
across the Country. 80’s private businesses bankrupt, inventory
bought out at $0.10 on the dollar. Sold to thrift shops at $0.50 on
the dollar until gone. 5-7 year period.
All owned by the now 2%. Then industry takes the hits, shops
bought & moved away from Unions, to the, Southern Right to
work States.
Then NAFTA, and other Foreign trade. Then out-sourcing of
our industries to Slave-worker countries like Communist
China. STRONG unions a thing of the past. Stock holder earnings
became the agenda! Banks national, Hedge-funding. Wall St.

CAN YOU THINK that this is just a conspiracy Theory. That this
has happened under our noses ALL since the Zionist Holocaust,
WW-2, and the Development of AIPAC & The Occupations of
Palestine, Gaza, West Bank, and Congress. FIX-IT!!

HOW!! Vote nothing but Democrat-except if a candidate supports
any thing for the benefit of AIPAC, Israel, or Tax breaks for the RICH. (That 2 %) 48 % of American Billionaires are Zionist.

YOU know all the above is the truth, but you are part of the.005%
that reads. Say nothing about Fwd.the material.

It is up to YOU what you do with it.

PERMISSION GRANTED, EVEN BURN IT IF THAT FITS FOR YOU. Delete, what ever.

The Truth of the Matter, is not a conspiracy Theory.

IN THIS CASE IT IS THE FACTS.

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
November 17, 2014
Reply

Report: 600,000 vets wait for care:

By Erin Delmore

Despite Department of Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald attesting to reduced wait times at VA hospitals and clinics, a new report obtained by USA Today shows that one in 10 patients continue to wait a month or longer for appointments.

Wait times of a month or longer have continued for more than 600,000 veterans under the department’s care, while the most severely affected veterans – those waiting more than four months for an appointment – have decreased by around 80%, from 120,000 cases in May down to 23,000 in October, the report found.

But last Tuesday on “Morning Joe,” McDonald applauded improvements at the VA, saying “We’ve got wait times down for appointments for veterans by 18% nationally. We’ve got disability claims backlog down by 60%. Homelessness is down by 33 percent.”

An ongoing investigation into the department’s handling of veterans health care has revealed widespread backlogs, with veterans waiting more than four months for an appointment. The crisis forced former VA Secretary Eric Shinseki to retire in May. More than 100 investigations into VA facilities nationwide have been launched the U.S. government, including the FBI and the Department of Justice.
In Gaza, life persists amid the rubble

This past summer’s conflict in Gaza between Israel and Hamas, which was sparked by the June deaths of three Israeli teens in the West Bank, claimed the lives of more than 2,000 Palestinians, wounded more than 100,000 and displaced an estimated 300,000 people in Gaza, according to NBC News.

On the Israeli side, 64 soldiers were killed and six civilians died, according to the Israeli Army.

The Gaza Strip, a Palestinian region on the edge of the Mediterranean Sea and adjacent to Egypt, is just 139 square miles and home to 1.8 million people, about half of them children under the age of 18. One of the poorest and most densely populated regions in the world, it is run by Hamas, a U.S.-designated terrorist organization that controls a majority of seats in the Palestinian Parliament.

Throughout the conflict, Israel and Hamas traded military strikes, and while the death toll was much higher on the Gaza side, Hamas was accused of firing at Israel from civilian areas. Throughout the summer, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asserted Israel’s right to defend itself from Hamas attacks. WHAT CHAP !

In July, Hamas rockets reached as far as Tel Aviv, within a mile of its Ben Gurion International Airport, causing U.S. airlines to briefly suspend flights to the area.

Residents of Gaza have limited mobility in the region, and given that its official border crossings with Egypt and Israel are largely restricted, people are mostly unable to flee the grim conditions. Alaa Radwan, head of the Popular Committee for Monitoring the Reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, gave his projections for rebuilding the region in a recent interview with Haaretz: “Given the pace at which construction materials are currently entering Gaza, it will be at least 20 years,” he said.

The reconstruction effort in Gaza is expected to cost more than $4 billion dollars.

Japanese photographer Q. Sakamaki recently traveled to Khan Yunis, a city in southern Gaza, to document the aftermath of the conflict, which ended in a ceasefire on August 26. Sakamaki found many Gazans displaced by the Israeli shelling still living in the ruins of their homes without assistance. These people are often living in tents in their ruined homes and have little to no money to relocate.

The USA Zionist Republicans, AIPAC, ISRAEL should be held accountable for the Atrocities, and genocides they have committed in The Middle East and the theft from the American tax payers.
Israel becomes major hub in the international cocaine and heroine trade, abuse rising, theirs and Richard Armitage cartel

Corruption of a foreign country occupation, foreign lobby AIPAC +, and the Republican Party. Next in power after Condi Rice–Richard Armitage.
Because of the never-ending international war on drugs, which is being spearheaded by America’s Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), drug dealers use various sophisticated methods for reaching their customers. In recent years, a new drug trafficking route has opened up from West Africa – chiefly through the territories of weak countries with unstable regimes. Because of the prevalence there of weak governments in power and corrupt law enforcement systems, the West African countries have become virgin soil for the importation and redistribution of cocaine from South America. Recently, an additional smuggling route has been launched through Syria and Lebanon; it then continues through Turkey to all of Europe and America. (BLACK Hole Money for political under-ground corrupt activity)

From ME, the guy you all have ignored and kept silent buy
censorship, Blocking, monitoring, remote controls, etc.

how-ever, we continue to get the word out. now if anyone is
interested enough. help circulate the “truth”.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 17, 2014
Reply

Israel to step up demolition of Palestinian homes.

Meanwhile, an Israeli military official says tens of thousands of reserve soldiers will be called up for duty later in the day to be deployed to areas near Gaza.

Israeli military took houses in Shejaiya as barracks for its soldiers after crossing the border into the blockaded Strip last month, when the regime launched its ground operations against Palestinians.

“We fled from this area as it was our zone. We came back during the first truce and found our house destroyed,” a Shejaiya resident told Press TV while showing his house.

Israeli soldiers killed many Palestinians from the house, including Salim al-Shamali. Mohammed Abed Allah from the International Solidarity Movement said they were in the area to help evacuate Palestinians trapped due to Israel’s offensive, but an Israeli sniper shot him dead from the balcony of the house.

Israeli soldiers killed many Palestinians from the house, including Salim al-Shamali. Mohammed Abed Allah from the International Solidarity Movement said they were in the area to help evacuate Palestinians trapped due to Israel’s offensive, but an Israeli sniper shot him dead from the balcony of the house.
It is time to stop the Genocide and atrocities of Zionist Israel, and USA partners. The UN needs to take action with all other members involved.

The Christian Community needs to come to grips with facts. Gods chosen people were murdered 6,000,000 by Zionist in the Holocaust , their identity was stolen at that time.
Zionism is not Jewish, even though there are Jews involved. It began 100 years ago in Russia. With Communist-Atheist ideals, with elites from all beliefs & nationalities becoming
involved with a take over of World Wide wealth & resources as their agenda. False prophets for profit from Religious institutions quickly joined in. Twisted propaganda ensued.
Hitler came to power with the support and directives then from Zionist. The same as Powerfully supported politicians of today are. Bought & paid for to do Zionist bidding.
Wealthy wolves in sheeps clothing JUMPED into the fray to become wealthier. Like several TV Evangelist of this day. The book you swear on, tells to watch out for such. Have we?

The complete disregard for Gods words & Law, the killing of his son Jesus, and the destruction of the Holy Land eliminates any salvation, or acceptance by God. No promise Land,
only reservation is in HELL for Zionist and supporters of such ideals & agenda.

Remember: Be not deceived, God is not mocked. For what so ever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. Look around, holds true to today.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 19, 2014
Reply

Zionist violence escalates in occupied Palestine:
The absolute most EVIL so called humans on Earth. They molded Hitler in their image.
Israeli settlers stab a Palestinian in Jerusalem, attack school in West Bank.

A Palestinian man was stabbed by a group of Israeli settlers in north Jerusalem on Tuesday, relatives told Ma’an news agency, hours after settlers attacked a Palestinian school in the village of Urif in the occupied West Bank.

The two incidents came just hours after two Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli Occupation Forces after attacking a Jerusalem synagogue and killing four Israelis, and two days after a Palestinian bus driver was found hanged inside his vehicle in Jerusalem.

The two incidents came just hours after two Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli Occupation Forces after attacking a Jerusalem synagogue and killing four Israelis, and two days after a Palestinian bus driver was found hanged inside his vehicle in Jerusalem.

With the Zionist owned media conglomerates, the Secrecy of Think Tanks and influence of foreign lobby, the silence on any of the issues. The cover-up of False flag operations, and attacks on
America. Being uninformed does not mean voters are stupid, we certainly shall make sure the voters are well informed about Zionist activities by 2016 Elections.

IF AMERICANS KNEW: WHAT EVERY AMERICAN SHOULD KNOW ABOUT ZIONIST ISRAEL & PALESTINE
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is one of the world’s major sources of instability. Americans are directly connected to this conflict, and increasingly imperiled by it
It is the goal of If Americans Knew to provide full and accurate information on this critical issue, and on our power – and duty – to bring a resolution.

132 Israeli children and 2,053 Palestinian children

have been killed since September 29, 2000.

The International communities must stop this insanity now or prepare for Marshall Law,
and Fascist regimes.
IDF Thugs Shoot 10-Year-Old For ‘Loitering’

IT IS WAY PAST TIME FOR OUR GOVERNMENT, AND
RELIGIOUS LEADERS TO STOP SUPPORTING ISRAEL.

ZIONISM IS A RADICAL POLITICAL MOVEMENT BY AN
ORGANIZED CRIME SYNDICATE, THAT ORIGINATED
IN RUSSIA, COMMUNIST-ATHEIST BASE, WITH INTENT
OF GLOBAL TAKE OVER.

THEY MUST BE STOPPED. THEIR LOBBY, AIPAC, RIGHTS
IN AMERICAN DROPPED, AND SUSPENDED FOREVER..

Ronald L. Waldron
November 21, 2014
Reply

CNN & NEWSMAX SEEM QUITE CONTROLLED BY ZIONISM, AS
MOST MEDIA IS TODAY: (Silence–right, for the right).
How about a media personality round table.
1. Jack Kafferty– Supported Obama. Gone from CNN.
2. Lou Dobbs–Open up on views against out-sourcing. Gone from CNN.
3. Anderson Cooper–Open always a fair report. Gone from CNN.
4. Of course the best at digging, Tim Russick. Passed on. Unexpected.
5.Wolf Blitzer, Buffalo MAN, WALKED on a different side of the Street,
very much the company spokesman , Very much Bias toward Zionist.
6.Roland Martin–Lets get with it, Understood a lobby. Gone from CNN.
The National Association of Black Journalists this week issued a statement
voicing concern about a series of black media professionals who have
departed CNN over the course of the last several years.

Is this a case of Zionist control. I would certainly bet it is, How about you.
7. Glenn Greenwald what would you say. HOW ABOUT YOU ALL SAYING IT?

Ronald L. Waldron
November 25, 2014
Reply

DRUG WAR–ANOTHER FALSE FLAG OPERATION FOR YEARS.

Your Government Heroes that peddle DRUGS (cocaine & Heroine), RAISE $$ FOR CLASSIFIED OPS??
While our young people become addicted, over-dosed, committing crimes and ending up in prison, if not that then its
the false flag wars that have killed or injured our troops. Iraqi civilians 1.2 million killed according to John Hopkins report.

It has all been for Zionism, World dominance, and the so called Christians , hood winked for $$, have gone along with it 100%..

Media being the silent partner. May GOD bless you all with what you deserve.

Today being Easter certainly doesn’t have anywhere near the meaning for the majority of us, as it always did in the past.
Could it be the lack of Morality, Ethics,or integrity. No sign at all from any official that accountability to the 80% of the
American people, other human life, or nations matters . It is just you and the pay-masters at AIPAC.
With no belief what so ever for a Christian holiday.

We will hear more plain BULL_SHIT at Election time, your media friends will cover that OK!!

You republicans can lie once, twice, three times, religious institutions, & Zionist media have covered many times.
BUT NOW we know not to believe one thing a Republican states, and only 3/8’s of 2/3’s of Democrats.
That is due to more women in the Democrat Party, They may repeat a lie, but don’t seem to make them up.

If you base pay on productivity, the pay-gap should be reversed, not equal.

Respectfully,

A past Republican, A past member of
organized religion. A male.
Now a Christian, A Democrat, A peace Activist.
A MAN
Ronald L. Waldron

Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad | Peace Action Blog

http://peaceblog.wordpress.com/2007/11/30/fighting-terrorism-at-home-abroad/
Nov 30, 2007 … Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad. When we talk about “Real Security through International Cooperation and the Funding of Human Needs” …

Ronald L. Waldron
November 26, 2014
Reply

Ronald L. —

Thanks to your hard work last week during the Ready for Hillary Organizing Bomb, you set a record and added over 103,721 Hillary supporters to our movement in less than seven days!

Ronald L., thank you so much for everything you’ve done to help us make sure America is ready for Hillary. But our work isn’t over yet.

GET ON YOUR MARK, GET SET, GO: FIGHT FOR
WHAT IS RIGHT. RIGHT FOR AMERICA WITH OUT
ZIONISM.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 27, 2014
Reply

Israel To Arrest Anyone For Posting Content Deemed “Anti-Israel” On Facebook (Video):

For many years – Israel has been monitoring the social media accounts of pro-Palestinian activists. The Israeli government has a long track record of arresting Palestinians indiscriminately where they can and do detain every day Palestinian citizens in military prisons for up to 6 months without charge. But now they’re actually telling activists they will be arrested for posting content deemed to be “anti-Israel.”

Last week, Mahmoud Asila from the Old City of al-Quds, was arrested for merely posting a picture on Facebook that claimed he was in support of the attacks carried out by the Palestinians against the Israeli forces occurring in the West Bank. Israel called this thought crime “incitement”.

Asila claims that he did, in fact, make the post but he was just voicing his freedom of speech online.

This is drawing plenty of criticism from human rights groups:
Israel to nab Palestinians over Facebook posts

The international law and the four Geneva conventions state that no government has the right to arrest people for their ideas or for what they publish on their pages. But Israel, which is not respecting any international law, will be preventing freedom of speech, especially in Jerusalem al-Quds, to keep controlling the city and humans leading the youth,” Bassem Eid, a human rights activist, told the Press TV correspondent.”

Israel – America’s Biggest Frenemy;
by Justin Raimondo, November 24, 2014

Today [November 24, 2014] is the deadline for the closing of a deal with Iran regarding their nuclear program. No one should be surprised that Israel is marking this deadline with a threat to attack Iran regardless of the outcome of the negotiations. As the Jerusalem Post is reporting on its front page:

– Antiwar.com Original – http://original.antiwar.com –

Israel is America’s Biggest Frenemy

Posted By Justin Raimondo On November 23, 2014 @ 11:00 pm In Uncategorized | 57 Comments

Today [November 24, 2014] is the deadline for the closing of a deal with Iran regarding their nuclear program. No one should be surprised that Israel is marking this deadline with a threat to attack Iran regardless of the outcome of the negotiations. As the Jerusalem Post is reporting on its front page:

“Israel has issued a stark, public warning to its allies with a clear argument: Current proposals guarantee the perpetuation of a crisis, backing Israel into a corner from which military force against Iran provides the only logical exit.”

This is a lie, and is widely recognized as such: the Israelis don’t have the military capacity to take out all the Iranian nuclear sites without American assistance. Aside from that, however, they never attack those capable of hitting back in any significant way, so we can write off this latest threat as just so much kvetching. Yet one has to wonder: is this the way an ally is supposed to act never mind one that we enjoy a purported “special relationship” with?

The reality is that Israel is our biggest frenemy.

For decades the Israelis have lived off our largesse without having to offer anything of value in return unless Israeli interference in American politics is considered of value. We’ve handed them over $3 billion a year in tribute, stood by while they subjected their Palestinian helots to conditions not seen since South Africa’s apartheid, and smiled tolerantly, as one would at an obstreperous child, while they noisily spat in our faces at every opportunity. And what have we gotten in return? Insults, interference, and outright threats â not to mention one of the most effective (and obnoxious) spying operations conducted on our soil by a foreign power.

For years, the War Party has been accusing Tehran of running a secret nuclear weapons program, although no convincing evidence of this has ever been produced. The Israelis and their international assets notably the MEK terrorist group have done their best to doctor up convincing forgeries, albeit to no avail. They’ve run all kinds of interference in order to prevent the normalization of US-Iranian relations. Their goal: to ensure that Israel’s regional monopoly on nuclear weapons remains intact.

Aside from North Korea, Israel is the only nuclear power that has managed to get away with thumbing its nose at the international community over this issue. The Iranians submitting themselves to a strict inspections regime will doubtless turn the worlds attention to the weapons of mass destruction in the hands of Israels leadership  a political class increasingly seen as extremist by outsiders. Steadfastly refusing to sign the Nonproliferation Treaty, along with North Korea, the Israelis have managed to maintain what is referred to as “nuclear ambiguity,” but there is absolutely nothing ambiguous about the destructive power of their arsenal.

“Ambiguity” is not a concept that applies to Israel these days. There no doubt about where they stand or what they are becoming. Their latest shtick: taking out the part about being a democracy in their Basic Law, and putting in “no Arabs need apply.” Or, as The Age puts it: ”

“The proposal would mean Israel would no longer be defined in its Basic Laws as Jewish and democratic but instead as âthe national homeland of the Jewish people”

What the great Israeli classical liberal Yeshayahu Leibowitz rightly called the “Judeo-Nazi” trend in that country’s political life has now come to the forefront: they arenât pretending to be the Gallant Little Democracy of the Middle East any more. Nope, they’re coming out of the closet as ethno-religious fanatics, just like their opposite numbers a few kilometers away in the Islamic State. In tandem with the new law, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced the introduction of legislation stripping “anti-Israel” Arab activists of their Israeli citizenship, along with their entire families. And so the Jewish State of Israel in the Levant JSIL is born.

In the past, the Israel lobby has offered a number of arguments in favor of maintaining the US-Israeli “special relationship.” And while strategic military and geopolitical factors were a big part of their routine during the cold war era, with the collapse of communism this became less important and so a new party line was trotted out: the claim that we share important values with the Israelis, especially those associated with liberal democracy, i.e. tolerance, diversity, etc. Yet the truth of the matter is that Israel is no longer a liberal democracy: indeed, as they tighten the screws on their Palestinian untermenschen, the Jewish State in the Levant is becoming the mirror image of its authoritarian Arab neighbors.

In politics as in real estate, the dominant factor is location, location, location. In choosing the Middle East as the site of their “Jewish nation,” the early Zionists ensured that their state would eventually lose touch with its European roots and become just another Oriental despotism. The Jewish settlers are said to have transformed the land, but in reality the opposite occurred: the land transformed them.

The Israelis think they are immune from condemnation: they think they can get away with torturing the Palestinians, provoking endless wars, and engaging in the kind of blatant racism that gets Hungary sanctioned as an “illiberal” state. And given the behavior of the political class in America and the West, they have every reason to think this kind of “Israeli exceptionalism” is going to hold, but they are living inside an illusion.

The Israel lobby is losing its grip: the American people â previously inclined to support Israel no matter what show signs of waking up to the danger posed by our Israel-centric foreign policy. In Europe, where the Israel lobby has always been weaker, they are in real trouble. The Israeli’s recent slaughter in Gaza has done much to open the eyes of a new generation to real nature of the Jewish State in the Levant. Thats why the boycott and divestment campaign aimed at Israel is taking hold, despite the frantic efforts of Israel’s amen corner to smear and even outlaw it. (Yes, the illiberal policies of the Jewish State in the Levant are even seeping into the United States a revolting prospect, indeed.)

Israel today is a tyranny on the order of the old South Africa, with one added factor: they are armed with nuclear weapons. As such, the Israelis represent a threat to the peace of the world, one far more dangerous than Iran will ever be. Their pernicious influence on American politics is the biggest arrow in the War Party’s quiver. In the end, as Americans rebel against the regime of perpetual war, this will be their undoing.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 30, 2014
Reply

FEAR CAUSES TUNNEL VISION, AN UNEXPECTED REACTION TO A SITUATION:

SPLIT SECOND DECISIONS BY OPPOSING FORCES.
FEAR CAUSES TUNNEL VISION, AN UNEXPECTED REACTION TO A SITUATION

THE FIVE STEPS IN THE CONTINUUM TO DEATH IN A POLICE / SUSPECT CONFRONTATION..

When it comes to training for Police Officers, fear is a factor when it comes to personal & public

protection, and when is it a life threatening situation. The training in the use of tools of the trade.

When should an officer reach for his hand gun to protect life, or reach for his night stick, or his

Tear-gas, Pepper spray, or mace. Tunnel vision can effect the decision as to witch tool do I reach

for, training with deadly force weapon far exceeds the training for alternative tools, night stick

usage has been criticized nearly as much as hand guns. Pepper spray, a non-lethal weapon, is

not a tool of regular training. May be one or two hours of certification in an officers total

career.

There is also a lack of public information regarding what are the responsibilities of the public

when it comes to reasonable compliance of the public, when a police officer or officers arrival

on the scene of an incident. They should be in charge with out resistance.

Race relations are a problem, but it takes work on both sides, and a reduction of fear of each other.

Police are intimidating, as is a bazaar suspect. I believe compliance is a law, as well as police

conduct should be with out bias or prejudice.

Ronald L. Waldron (Retired Officer)

Ronald L. Waldron
December 1, 2014
Reply

The Price for Criticizing Israel:

Part of the neocon grip on Official Washington comes from the harsh career damage inflicted on people who criticize Israel’s abuse of the Palestinians, with such critics deemed anti-Semitic and thus often denied work or a place to express their opinions, as Lawrence Davidson notes.

By Lawrence Davidson

Of late there has been news about attacks on academic freedom, much of it the result of aggressive efforts by Zionist organizations and individuals to silence those academics they see as enemies of Israel.

The latest example of this is the successful pressure brought to bear, apparently by a Zionist donor, on the chancellor of the University of Illinois to rescind a job offer for Professor Steven Salaita. This was done because this influential donor, noting Salaita’s anti-Israel tweets, decided he was anti-Semitic. The Chancellor was apparently convinced that hiring Salaita would cost the university a lot of support – a pretty clear example of donor blackmail.

The Salaita case is not the only recent attempt to intimidate academics critical of Israel. An organization calling itself AMCHA (“your people” in Hebrew) and purporting to work for the “protection of Jewish students” has posted a list of over 200 professors who support the boycott of Israel. They too have been judged anti-Semitic and Jewish students are urged by the organization to avoid their classes.

These attacks are tied to a long-standing and growing movement in American higher education to confront Israeli persecution of Palestinians particularly as regards the Occupied Territories – to point out the barbaric nature of the Israeli/Zionist state, not because it is Jewish, but because it is deeply racist.

However, because the leaders and many of the supporters of Israel are Jewish, they confuse the issue and claim a stance against Israel must be one against Jews per se and that is anti-Semitism. It is a claim that makes little sense if only due to the fact that many of those opposing Israeli actions, both within and without of academia, are Jewish.

The Back Story ( Dictating what should or should not be with-in our Education system. Such as eliminating AMERICAN HISTORY from our academics)

This attack on academics who see things differently than the Zionists is not new. In 2007, David Horowitz organized teach-ins on campuses across the nation during which professors critical of Israel were accused of purposely withholding information about the threat of “Islamo-fascism.”

Horowitz also asserted that many of these same “left-wing” professors had taken over the country’s universities and were systematically harassing conservative students. Through his influence, 17 state legislatures ordered investigations of these charges. Later he would publish a book entitled The Professors: The 101 Most Dangerous Academics in America. All were critics of Israel. This set the precedent for the recent listing put forth by AMCHA.

Horowitz was acting in coordination with Daniel Pipes. In 2002, Pipes founded Campus Watch, a website on which he posted the names of academics, mostly in the field of Middle East studies, whom he accused of being “apologists for suicide bombing and militant Islam.” Pipes encouraged students who supported Israel to “hover over the shoulders” of such professors and let them know they were being monitored.

There are many other examples of attacks on academic freedom, and as a consequence Professor Salaita’s career is by no means the only one to be harmed by this sort activity. Dozens of faculty at all levels of higher education have suffered threats, harassment, discipline and/or termination.

The entire agenda for the Republican party is set by ZIONISM. Several Democrats have been influenced to some degree when it comes to the need for 60 votes. On Republican Bills.
Consequently, all bills proposed by Democrats are filibustered, at least for the last six + years.

UNITED–WE–STAND—DIVIDED WE FALL PLEASE UNITE WITH US, SUPPORT DEMOCRATS AGAINST CITIZENS UNITED, BUYING OUT OUR REPRESENTATIVES.

These range from well-known figures such as Edward Said at Columbia University and Juan Cole in his dealings with Yale University, to perhaps less-known, but still important teachers and scholars such as Terri Ginsberg at North Carolina State University and the horribly persecuted Sami al-Arian at the University of South Florida.

Larger Historical Context

And then there is the larger historical context for all this. In terms of U.S. history the suppression of free speech, academic or otherwise, can be traced back to 1798 and the Alien and Sedition Acts. Suppression reappeared in the 1830s under Andrew Jackson and during the Civil War under Abraham Lincoln. Woodrow Wilson used the Espionage Act to jail vocal opponents of the First World War beginning in 1917, and this was followed by the first Red Scare in the early 1920s. McCarthyism appeared in 1950s. The intimidating finger-pointing of Islamophobia appeared even before the tragedies of 2001.

What does all this history, stretching from the very beginning of the nation until the present day, tell us? It demonstrates that the effort to control dissenting speech has always been present and probably always will be. There are a number of factors that support this sober conclusion:

First, there is the fact that most people have short historical memories. On average, the United States experiences significant attacks on dissenters and their right to free speech once every 30 to 40 years. This suggests that most citizens have forgotten the essentially barbaric nature and consequences of the previous episode and how, in the end, the claims and charges that ruined so many lives turned out to be false or greatly exaggerated.

Second, there is the difficulty of thinking critically about events of which we have little knowledge. When confronted with such a situation, most citizens rely on the government and its allied media to provide them supposedly accurate information. These sources may well slant stories in a certain way so as to produce public support for specific policies.

The consequences of such distortions are particularly noticeable when it comes to foreign events. Thus, the effectiveness of the ongoing attack on academic freedom, and specifically the freedom of those who are critical of Israel and U.S. policies in the Middle East, is directly related to the ignorance of most Americans about the persecution of Palestinians and the Muslim world’s perception of U.S. behavior.

Third, there is the majority’s ignorance of or indifference to the Bill of Rights. The Bill of Rights is the result of a strong demand that the original U.S. Constitution be amended so that it enumerates the basic rights – including freedom of speech – of citizens, residents and visitors on American soil.

However, who is it that usually exercises their rights in ways that might need such protection? It is not the mainstream majority, but rather a vocal minority usually disapproved of by the mainstream. This disregard of the importance of the Bill of Rights is all the more dangerous because those who seek to suppress free expression almost always claim to be acting in defense of the majority.

Such is the power of this claim that often the courts, the job of which entails the enforcement of the Bill of Rights, end up sanctioning its violation.

It is clear that there is a recurring pattern to the assaults on free speech. Perhaps the pattern has its roots in a community’s natural preference for group solidarity. Whatever the origins, the pattern of periodic negative reactions is so well established that we can justifiably conclude it is not going to go away. We are historically stuck with it.

The only way to minimize the consequences of these repeated assaults is to continuously defy them. In other words, only by maintaining a counter-pattern of vigorously defending and using the right of free speech and academic freedom can space be sustained for critical voices.

If at any time we fail to sustain this space we risk the possibility of being overwhelmed by a combination of closed-minded ideologues and the mass indifference of the majority.

Lawrence Davidson is a history professor at West Chester University in Pennsylvania. He is the author of Foreign Policy Inc.: Privatizing America’s National Interest;　America’s Palestine: Popular and Official Perceptions from Balfour to Israeli Statehood; and Islamic Fundamentalism.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 3, 2014
Reply

Times of Israel: Time to divest, boycott, demonstrate, protest, and petition.

A BILL OUR PRESIDENT MUST VETO, VETO.
Enough is Enough of the Rogue State and their atrocities. (Treason by Congress).
Congress was poised to give its final approval Wednesday afternoon to a bill that supporters say will create a unique status for Israel and serve as a framework for increased partnership in a number of key sectors, particularly energy and defense. If all goes as expected, the long-anticipated legislation will represent a significant achievement for the pro-Israel groups that pushed for its passage.
“This bipartisan measure will strengthen cooperation between our two countries on a wide range of issues from defense to energy, ensure that Israel has the resources to defend herself in an emergency, and affirm Israel’s ability to participate in the visa waiver program as long as she meets existing requirements,” said Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA), who authored the Senate version of the United States-Israel Strategic Partnership Act of 2014, along with Roy Blunt (R-MO).
“This legislation sends a clear message that America’s bond with Israel remains unbreakable, and I am proud that it passed the Senate unanimously,” she said.
Although the bill is most likely to be considered on Wednesday, there’s a chance that scheduling uncertainties could push it to later in the week.
The bill, which has been a keystone of AIPAC lobbying since early 2013, issues a Sense of Congress describing Israel as a “major strategic partner” of the United States, reflecting the importance that Congress ascribes to the US-Israel relationship and giving name to the legislation as a whole. A DAMNED FOREIGN LOBBY, WITH ONLY FOREIGN INTEREST. The only so called Americans that have benefited is our Treasonous congress.
Following a summer in which the US and Israel tangled over weapons resupplies during and immediately following Operation Protective Edge, the bill would permit an increase of $200 million in the value of US weapons held in Israel, bringing the total to $1.8 billion. The stockpiles in Israel are designed to allow the US quick resupply for its own needs in case of a major Mideast conflict, but can also be used by Israel in the event of an emergency as long as Israel reimburses the US for weapons used.
The bill also requires the president to take steps so that Israel may be included in the top-tier category of the Strategic Trade Authorization Exception. In 2011, the Commerce Department created the exception, which allows 44 countries to qualify for some exceptions to arms export licensing requirements. Israel is currently in the second-tier category, which provides a more restricted list of license-free goods.
Another section authorizes the president to carry out cooperation between the United States and Israel across a range of policy areas, including energy, water, homeland security, agriculture, and alternative fuel technologies. Although the bill does not detail what these sectors entail, it is meant to serve as a framework for future legislation further defining the US-Israel relationship in those fields.
A slightly more robust framework for cyber-security cooperation is also delineated, with the bill requiring the president to submit a report to Congress on the feasibility and advisability of expanding US-Israeli cooperation on cyber issues, including sharing and advancing technologies related to the prevention of cybercrimes. The president is also required to provide Congress with an update on the implementation of a series of objectives to assist in the defense of Israel that were enacted in 2012. TAKING OUR COUNTRY BACK TAKES PRIORITY OVER ALL ELSE. NO DUEL CITIZENS IN OUR GOVERNMENT.
The administration will also be required to include additional information in the already-mandatory report about the potential impact on Israel’s Qualitative Military Edge from any proposed sale of defense items that requires Congressional approval. The new, more extensive reporting would require that for any defense item considered to be “major defense equipment” — including such significant arms as F-16 aircraft, tanks, armored personnel carriers, and anti-armor missile systems — the administration must provide a detailed assessment of Israel’s ability to counter the specific risks presented if it were to be transferred to Israel’s neighbors.
WHAT BULL-SHIT THIS IS !!
Perhaps the most hotly contested section of the bill was a statement of policy on the visa waiver program, a section that passed through a number of permutations and changes before its final version. WHERE IS THE TRANSPARENCY IN HIDDING THE ONLY THING THEY HAVE WORKED ON.
After much debate, the Senate took up the House’s version of the statement, which reads that “it shall be the policy of the United States to include Israel in the list of countries that participate in the visa waiver program when Israel satisfies, and as long as Israel continues to satisfy the requirements for inclusion in the program.”THEY KILLED JFK, RFK, MLK, ATTACKED THE USS LIBERTY, AND DID 911. PLUS A GENOCIDE ON PALESTINE, WHO IS KIDDING WHO.
The amendment, sponsored by Boxer, was the only amendment added to the bill’s text when it was received in the Senate by unanimous consent on September 18. WE MUST VOTE ANYONE SUPPORTING THIS BILL TO HELL OUT OF OFFICE.
Preliminary action has already begun on turning the section on increased energy cooperation into reality. The bill’s text recognizes energy cooperation between the US and Israel as being in the strategic interest of the United States and encourages increased collaboration between the two countries’ academic communities and governments. THERE IS NOT A DAM THING THAT ISRAEL HAS THAT THEY CAN OFFER US AS A BENEFIT. WE SURE AS HELL DO NOT NEED THEM AS ANY TYPE PARTNER. THEY ARE ALREADY TO INVOLVED IN ALL ASPECTS OF LIFE IN AMERICA.
The bill allows for the authorization of a US-Israel Energy Center in the United States, engaging academic institutions and the private sector to further dialogue, collaboration and academic cooperation in energy innovation technology and technology transfer, among other things. Among the center’s goals are to develop more robust academic cooperation in offshore energy development, energy innovation technology and engineering, and water science. WHAT A FRICKING JOKE.
The specific details of the center’s structure will be worked out by the US Department of Energy and the Israeli Ministry of Energy and Water, with input from Israeli and American universities and private sector entities. WHILE THE GOOD PEOPLE OF AMERICA SIT WITH FINGERS UP THEIR ASS !!

Ronald L. Waldron
December 6, 2014
Reply

Israeli man arrested for threatening to assassinate Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
OCDG : A message from La Kosher Nostra?

Police arrested a 52-year-old Netanya resident after he allegedly threatened to assassinate Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
According to Israel Radio, the man also threatened to kill the police officers that would come to arrest him.
The suspect’s motives were not initially clear, nor were details of his threat.
The threat came to light during a conversation with a social worker. The social worker notified police and the man was arrested in his home.
Tensions on the political front have been high as the country faces new elections following Netanyahu’s dismissal on Tuesday of Yesh Atid leader Yair Lapid and Hatnua chairwoman Tzipi Livni from their posts as ministers. The remaining four ministers in Yesh Atid resigned two hours later.
The next day, the Knesset voted to disperse itself and new elections were called for March 17, 2015.
In a poll, taken on Wednesday among 500 respondents representing a statistical sample of the adult population, participants were asked whether they want Netanyahu to remain prime minister after the vote.
Sixty percent said no, 34% said yes, and 6% did not know.
In a head-to-head race between Netanyahu and former welfare and social services minister Moshe Kahlon, 46% preferred Kahlon, 36% Netanyahu and 18% did not know. Between Netanyahu and former interior minister Gideon Sa’ar, 43% said Sa’ar, 38% Netanyahu, and 19% did not know. Several responces thought Netanyahu should seek mental health evaluation. A growing concern about Zionist and their allusions of superiority and being Gods chosen people, a deception of fact, that was destroyed from being TRUE 2000 years ago when they were exiled because of their practice of immorality. True to this very Day. A partnership with the USA congress now is destroying the World as we have known it. (Zionism is the AntiChrist). Anti-Semitism is a psychotic paranoid disorder of the Israeli people. All of Gods children were created equal, it is time for check & balance. Get off your propaganda trash & wedgie Boards, try to be some what Humane. In our Country, it is called one of two things. Christianity and Democracy something that will never be understood in the middle east, or by AIPAC.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 6, 2014
Reply

Livni: Netanyahu shouldn’t be prime minister, he’s weak and frightened:
‘The public needs to understand it has been brainwashed. We became a paranoid country. Netanyahu turned Israel into a ghetto’
After being fired from the government, Hatnua leader Tzipi Livni attacked her former boss Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Thursday morning, calling him a “weak” and “frightened” man.
“Netanyahu is a frightened man. Unfortunately, he passed on this fear to large parts of the public,” Livni said at an interview in Ynet’s studio.
“It is our obligation to say: We have a prime minister of a country truly under a lot of threats, but his ability to function is very low. And there’s a massive gap between the character seen in speeches – the very impressive appearance – to his very small political conduct behind closed doors, even in difficult situations,” Livni said. “The public need to be told of this gap, because at the end of the day we elect the person sitting in the (prime minister’s) chair. I’m not making accusations. It’s not personal between me and him. The issue is the personality of the person in the chair.”
The former justice minister went on to describe Netanyahu’s conduct behind closed doors. “We’re in a situation in which a decision needs to be made, the world is waiting, and all of a sudden the settlers come in and Bennett says one thing, and the pressure works and no decision is made. And we’re pulled into an incident we don’t actually control.
“The prime minister’s entire worldview is based on the assumption that no matter what we do – the world is against us. For years he actually got the public feeling this way. The public needs to understand it went through a few years of brainwashing. We became a paranoid country. He turned Israel into a ghetto.
“In ’96 I was the director of the Government Companies Authority. I was watching from the sidelines and saw Netanyahu’s fear of his ministers. This is what’s happening now. He’s a man afraid of the politicians around him, of his ministers.”
When asked whether or not she will join another Netanyahu government, Livni asserted that “Netanyahu should not be the prime minister. I’m working to replace him. That’s why I don’t see myself in the future sitting in such a government.”
Starting on Tuesday evening, the center-left factions initiated advanced talks on creating what they refer to as an “alternative to Netanyahu.” Labor Chairman Isaac Herzog tried to assemble the various center-left parties – Labor, Yesh Atid, Hatnua, Kadima, and Meretz – into a united front.
According to the proposal, the factions will run on separate lists but will lead with one message to the public, asking them to give their vote to whichever party they prefer – as long as the votes remain within the center-left bloc.
Livni: Obama’s Words Should Be Wake Up Call to All Israelis
After reported criticism from Obama, Livni calls for a “citizens’ appeal” to change policies of the administration and avoid isolation.
The aspersion cast on Israel’s ability to run its own country is in line with predictions of various pundits who said that once Obama wins a second term, his antipathy to Israel and understanding for the Palestinian Arabs would become obvious.
“All Israeli citizens should have received a wake-up call this morning.” said Livni. “Everybody who has not yet awakened, everyone who still thinks things will be fine — got up this morning to very sharp and clear statements by the U.S. President who said that the Israeli Prime Minister is leading the State of Israel towards severe isolation.”
Right now the only real support Israel has is 600 people in the American Government, that being because of Israel’s lobbies influence and campaign financing, along with religious leaders thatfeel they can save Israel by converting Jews to Christianity. We all know that will never, ever happen, we are a Jewish State jeopardized by another power.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 7, 2014
Reply

WHY NOT ADDRESS THE TRUE ISSUES:

We have a government that has been catering to AIPAC, ISRAEL, ZIONIST, the corporate giants that have developed from 1948 on.
When you allow this type of influence from people who are the most abusive, most prejudice, most racist, and in the middle of
all that has brought our economy down to a third world culture and standard. A national debt that has grown from 3 trillion in 1990,
to 18+ trillion in 2014. In that same period, 48% of the billionaires in America are duel citizens with Israel, and from that 2%
of our population. It is a known fact that these people THINK they are the supreme people, GODS chosen people. THE rest of
us whites, Black people, Brown people,Red people, Yellow people are all worthless gentiles.

They help to bring on the racial riots of the sixties, encouraged the burning of the deteriorated communities where they were the
slum lords, and collected millions from insurance companies. They then build malls, plazas, apartment buildings in suburban areas
leaving the inter-cities ghettos. No infrastructure repairs. BUT they were leaders of civil rights, not on your life. LOOK CLOSER.

Private owned businesses driven out of business by big box stores, super markets, all chain economy. Owned by who, accross
our entire country. Check the subsidiaries, and you shall find how they have monopolized our entire Country and major businesses.
Now controlling the food industry, clothing industry, other industries, now the price index keeps rapidly raising.

They have out sourced business and jobs to foreign countries, slave labor, less quality, but much higher profits. Creating 47 million
people in America to live at poverty level & below. People trapped in the center of the mess created by the greed of Zionist.

We are tired of our government being run by corrupt congress, serving and spending for Israel.

This is America, not Israel or a Country run by Jews, Penis sucking Rabbis , Zionist criminals, or their organized crime syndicate.

Media, Banks, Wall Street, Government, Including Military, you name it, they have taken it over. The bobble heads in Washington,
in the pulpits, on the Media are their new puppets. No they have been developed into robots. Like out teachers all having the
same scripted prepared by them called CORE EDUCATION. Just like Israel.

AIPAC, ISRAEL, are our worst enemies. American Police: Major agencies are being trained by Mossad, IDF, even the Security
forces such as Black water, no bid contracts training from Mossad. Torture training, water boarding, choke holds all Mossad
tactics.

Don’t believe it. YES, you do . No one wants to believe it. What is your heart telling you. READ & RESEARCH. THEN.

get involved. WE HAVE TO TAKE OUR COUNTRY BACK. STAND-UNITED. We are a Country of 300 Million.
vs. at the most 10 million at the top of all this. VOTING TOGETHER COUNTS. VOTE DEMOCRAT UNTIL WE
GET THE AMERICAN LABOR PARTY OFF THE GROUND WITH THE ABSOLUTE RIGHT PLATFORM FOR
AMERICANS ONLY. BUYING OF AMERICAN PRODUCTS ONLY. KEEP ISRAELIS THE HELL OUT OF HERE

That immigration problem is our biggest problem. Republicans give them a tax free ride, with now a debt we owe
that is impossible to pay. It has all gone to Zionist with off shore accounts.

You will never change Gods decision of EXILE, until he
decides, There is no evidence that the Zionist control of
America and Israel is a plan of Gods, No matter how
much the Republican Hypocrites, use God in vein, their lies
and conduct gives the deception away.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 7, 2014
Reply

HAARETZ
ED HENRY, FOX NEWS: There were reports that the administration is considering sanctioning Israel over the settlements issue. I wonder if you could say true or false.
JOSH EARNEST, WHITE HOUSE: Well, uh, I’ve been informed of some of these reports. What I can tell you is that I’m not going to talk about any sort of internal deliberations inside the administration and certainly not inside the White House. But I will say something that I have said many times before, which is that Israel is a close and strategic partner of the United States. And I don’t need to remind you of the strong and unshakable bonds that exist between the United States and Israel and the United States’ exceedingly strong commitment to the security of the nation of Israel.
That being said, we have also been crystal clear about our view of settlement activity. That view has not changed. We believe that settlements are illegitimate, and we have deep concerns about highly contentious planning and construction activities that the Israeli government is pursuing in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We believe that those kind of activities are counterproductive. We’ve made those views clear in public; we’ve made those views clear in private.
HENRY: So very clearly you are not denying that sanctions are on the table against even an ally?
EARNEST: I am very clearly not denying we have strong concerns about that settlement activity that’s underway in Israel. But it has not and will not affect the United States’ strong commitment to the national security of the nation of Israel.
HENRY: But how can you be telling Congress don’t issue more sanctions against Iran at the same time you’re considering sanctions against an ally in Israel?
EARNEST: Again, I’m not going to comment on those reports about our discussions as it relates to Israel.
HENRY: But you are talking about sanctions. You’re leaving that door wide open here.
EARNEST: I’m not saying I’m not willing to talk about those conversations.
HENRY: So you’re not considering sanctions?
EARNEST: I’m not saying I’m not willing to talk about those kinds of conversations. But what I am saying is that we have been clear about what our strategy is against Iran. There is a historically tough sanctions regime in place against Iran. Those sanctions that were put in place by Congress and implemented by this administration have been effective, both in terms of exacting a heavy toll on the Iranian economy. We’ve seen their economic output, been significantly negatively affected by this. We’ve seen significant decline in the value of their currency. There are a lot of ways to measure the impact of this sanctions regime.
We do believe that while productive talks continue, that it would be unwise to put in place additional sanctions on Iran only because of the success of that sanctions regime depends upon the ability and willingness of our partners around the globe to enforce the sanctions regime.
As we know, there’s not a whole lot of business conducted between the United States and Iran directly. We’re relying on other countries that actually do more business with Iran to abide by the sanctions regime. So far we have gotten that international buy-in that has really cracked down on the Iranian economy. It has prompted the Iranian leadership to come to the negotiating table with the United States and our P5+1 partners to try to resolve the international community’s concerns about their nuclear program. So, we have been clear about what our strategy is as it relates to Iran. I’m less willing to talk about any internal conversations about Israel.
White House: ‘Odd’ of Netanyahu to call our stance on settlements ‘un-American’

White House resumes criticism of Israel’s decision to continue settlement construction.

White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters at his daily briefing on Monday that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s remarks that American criticism of Israeli settlement construction was against American values, “did seem odd.”

“It did seem odd for him to defend Israel’s position by saying US position is un-American,” Earnest said. “American values are why this country’s support for Israel has been unwavering.” Earnest repeated the U.S. criticism of settlement construction and said that continuing it “will send a troubling message” about Israel’s intentions.

On Wednesday, the White House and U.S. State Department warned that Israel’s decision to move ahead with the planning process of 2,600 new housing units in Jerusalem’s Givat Hamatos neighborhood, and the recent occupation of some 25 apartments in Silwan, located near the Old City in Jerusalem, will “poison the atmosphere” with the Palestinians and the Arab world.

President Obama: Please VETO the Boxer Bill, and place sanctions against Israel.

Pass messages along.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 8, 2014
Reply

New UN report reveals collaboration between Israel and Syrian rebels:

The new documents show that Israel has been doing more than simply treating wounded Syrian civilians in hospitals.
jpost
The Syrian ambassador to the UN has long complained of a Zionist conspiracy working with the Syrian rebels to overthrow President Bashar Assad.
Now, a report from the UN Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) reveals that Israel has been working closely with Syrian rebels in the Golan Heights and have kept close contact over the past 18 months. The report was submitted to the UN Security Council at the beginning of the month.
The documents show that Israel has been doing more than simply treating wounded Syrian civilians in hospitals. This and a few past reports have described transfer of unspecified supplies from Israel to the Syrian rebels, and sightings of IDF soldiers meeting with the Syrian opposition east of the green zone, as well as incidents when Israeli soldiers opened up the fence to allow Syrians through who did not appear to be injured.
At one point, a small tent city was erected around 300 meters away from the Israeli sector for about 70 families of Syrian deserters, the report said.
The Syrian army then sent a letter of complaint to UNDOF, warning them to evacuate the camp or it would be considered a target, and claiming that terrorists were using the camp to cross into Israel.
Israel’s health ministry says around 1,000 Syrians have received treatment in Golan hospitals, but maintains that only civilians are treated. The UNDOF report, on the other hand, says they have seen Israelis treating civilians as well as insurgents, including members of al-Qaida and Islamic State.
The report said UNDOF “observed at least 10 wounded persons being transferred by armed members of the opposition from the Bravo side across the cease-fire line.”
UNDOF has monitored the Golan Heights buffer zone between Israel and Syria since 1974. Six countries contributed to the 1,200-strong brigade.
UNDOF peacekeepers have been the target of kidnappings and attacks carried out by al-Qaida on the Syrian side since September, causing hundreds of troops to withdraw to across Israeli border.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 8, 2014
Reply

HOW AMERICA’S MORAL COMPASS HAS CHANGED–1963 ON–THE AIPAC, ISRAELI INFLUENCE !

Please join me in supporting crucial legislation protecting victims of military sexual assault, and on College Campuses. (Zionist strong holds) Figures don’t it?? Moral decay. Hollywood AND ALL.
They TOOK OVER TV, look at the filthy stuff we get, even prime time. BUT Government and Religious organizations support THEM>

The Defense Department estimates 26,000 cases of rape, sexual assault and unwanted sexual contact occurred in our military in 2012 alone — an avg. of 71 a day. More recent reports found that as many as 8 in 10 victims don’t trust the chain of command enough to report the crime committed against them.
The Military Justice Improvement Act would transfer the decision to prosecute from the chain of command to independent, impartial military prosecutors. It could receive a vote in the Senate in days.

Click here to add your name to call for justice for victims of military sexual assault today. http://endsexualassault.com?sp_ref=89057964.236.10591.e.41102.2&code=Heitkamp20141201_sp&source=email

This is horrifying, to think this has been going on for so long. No media, congress, Senator, or congress member has raised HELL about this. Makes me mad as hell. so lets raise hell.
Our Military resembles IDF more & more. Who is running the show. RLW

A Department of Defense report shows that as many as eight in 10 victims of military sexual assault don’t trust the chain of command enough to report the atrocious crimes committed against them.

I cringe when I hear statistics like this, but these are the facts: The current system doesn’t work.

We need to take immediate action to secure justice for our troops. The Military Justice Improvement Act would put independent military prosecutors in charge of sexual assault cases, ensuring that victims can speak freely without fear of retribution. Help us pass this important bill now: Add your name to support justice for our military.

Click here now to join me and my colleagues in demanding Congress pass the Military Justice Improvement Act to protect our brave troops.

As North Dakota’s attorney general, I saw the damage done to victims of sexual assault up close. But few cases in the military even reach prosecution, because the victims can’t trust that the current system will bring them justice or protect them from retribution.

With so many assaults and such little justice for victims, this couldn’t be more urgent. We need to pass legislation showing the men and women of the military that we stand with them.

It’s time to end sexual assault in the military. Tell Congress to pass the Military Justice Improvement Act now

UNIVERSITIES NEED TO TURN CASES OVER TO THE STATE OR LOCAL POLICE AND DISTRICT ATTORNEYS OFFICE.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 9, 2014
Reply

Israel is ‘guilty,’ Amnesty International Gaza report on Zionist war crimes:
By Editor:
Foreign Ministry says ‘ description of events’ ignores Hamas’s use of civilian infrastructure:
ed note–besides the endemic and autonomic use of deception (lawyer-ese for lying) that comes as a package deal in all things Zionist and Judaic, remember as well that Israel can make this claim with a straight face and a clear conscience based on the Judaic teaching that Palestinians are Amalek, whom Jews have been commanded by their religion to destroy, as well as the fact that as Gentiles, those who lost their lives in Gaza were not humans, and therefore no murder was committed and therefore no ‘war crimes’. (A large % of Judiac today is also highly Influenced by Zionist propaganda & profits from such)
Until humanity comes face to face with the reality that Zionism was/is/ and always will be a toxic, radioactive force that destroys all with which it comes into contact, we will continue to move closer and closer to the abyss. Jews included.
Jerusalem on Tuesday deplored an Amnesty International report accusing Israel of war crimes during the summer conflict in Gaza, saying the monitor used murky sources and focused on monetary costs to Palestinians rather than consider Hamas targeting of Israeli civilians.
In a statement the Foreign Ministry said that the international human rights group offered “a decontextualized description of events, while relying heavily on testimonies gathered by unnamed local ‘fieldworkers,’ who are not identified and whose credibility is never questioned.”
On Monday night, Amnesty International accused the IDF of committing several war crimes during the summer’s Operation Protective Edge campaign in Gaza and called for the charges to be investigated. In particular, the destruction of four multi-story buildings during the last four days of the 50-day war were in breach of international humanitarian law, the group said in a report.
More than 2,100 Palestinians were killed in the war between Israel and Hamas-led fighters, according to the Hamas-run Gaza Health Ministry. Israel maintains that about half of those killed were Palestinian fighters; Gazan officials say most were civilians.
On the Israeli side 73 people were killed, including 66 soldiers. Many of the casualties on the Israeli side stemmed from indiscriminate Palestinian shelling of Israeli towns and cities.
Warning: Major Countries Internationally are facing the same “DEVIL”, National Debts, failed Governments, and being pushed toward globalization. The warning is the non-bid international contracts, the privatization of the inter-workings. Same international corporations contracted “same insiders” now total international control. Please wake to “HELL” up. Including the UNITED NATIONS, THE HAGUE ==+++$$$. GONE GONE GONE!!! WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, & WHY ? YOU KNOW THE ANSWER!!

“What GOD said / Did yesterday”, Is good for yesterday, today, tomorrow, and forever for what we gentiles should care..
THE EVIDENCE IS CLEAR, IF YOU LOOK AT IT ALL, OR IF YOU WOULD LOOK & LISTEN, —maybe–? !!

Ronald L. Waldron
December 9, 2014
Reply

The only way for PEACE is not the “AMERICAN WAY”, but a
WORLD_WIDE WAY TO PEACE!!

DEMAND GLOBALIZATION FOR PEACE ONLY.

Stay with-in your own boarders, and Stay home.

If that is isolation so be it. It has worked fine in the past, and
will have to be again..

Ronald L. Waldron
December 9, 2014
Reply

REMEMBER WHEN ?

Remember when young people in the USA Military were charged with torture treatment of prisoners. The sexual humiliation etc. Demeaning them.
The media covering the acts of these your troops.Prosecutors Prosecuting them for those acts. People at the very bottom, the escape goats.

Listen to the news today. CIA involved with it all, with approval of the BUSH & The Dick (Cheney) administration.

A lesson in how to commit mass murder, and get away with it. No War crime charges, no other charges. No other torture charges.

Will this investigation include how much involved Mossad training in such acts?

Do you really think that there will not be more cover-up at the TOP.

Moral compass decay and WHY? WHY, is recognized by many people, the American people are dam sick of the broken system.

WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, & WHY?

Ronald L. Waldron
December 10, 2014
Reply

‘bastards’

Scott Rickard: US committing crimes worldwide:

A recent Senate report that shows the CIA misled the public on its torture program indicates the criminal nature of Washington’s actions, says an American analyst.

On December 9, the US Senate Intelligence Committee released a truncated report into the CIA’s so-called Terror War, which detailed torture techniques used during the term of former President George W. Bush.

Scott Rickard, a former American intelligence linguist from Orlando, said in an interview with Press TV that “Americans have been operating criminally” in various parts of the world over the past decades.

The analyst added that some of the high-ranking American officials and senators have been trying to hide the crimes which were committed in violation of the Geneva Conventions.

Rickard also stated that both administrations of Bush and incumbent President Barack Obama should be held accountable for such crimes.

“Both administrations are guilty of crimes and war crimes worldwide.”

Rickard stated that some of the CIA torture techniques had led to the death of inmates at CIA-run prisons.

Rickard also expressed regret that the US Department of Justice would not pursue charges against anyone involved in the CIA torture program.

The commentator concluded by saying that Washington is still pressing ahead with its policy of supporting terrorist groups such as ISIL.
I think it sort of speaks for itself. We’ve known for a long time that Israel has been in violation of international law and that it disrespects the rights and Israel’s obligations to international law.

The question is what can the international community do to get the Israelis to stop their violations and their actions not only in the Gaza Strip, but also in other occupied territories in the West Bank ,

and the United States Congress, several committees, agencies such as Home-Land Security. Mossad training conducted with-in Military, Federal Agencies, and Police agencies..Also

Our Education systems K-12, and Higher Education Universities, Our Think Tanks. No critics of such policies are listened to by anyone. How-ever, Americans recognize WHO our

WORST ENEMIES are, Our Republican Party, Congress-members, AIPAC, Israel, Mossad, and the USA Media.

A major per-cent age of government representatives and employees are IN FEAR OF ZIONIST/JEWISH REPRISAL .

Israel continues to steal Palestinian land and colonize that land because, as you noted earlier, it can do so largely with impunity and it has the backing – I’m embarrassed and ashamed to say – of my government.

I feel the anger and frustration of Americans, with the issues not dealt with, a revolution being widely talked about more and more are opposed to Zionism and the Congressional agenda….

American activists spread word of Israel crimes in Palestine, in fact the Whole World is against the Zionist movement, and Israel.
“We’ve seen this time and again where Israel and the United States are on one side and essentially the entire rest of the world is on the other.”

The corruption of both the United States and Israel, is isolating themselves from all people that desire PEACE instead of WAR. Violations of International Law, the Ten Commandments,

the USA Constitution, The Bill of Rights, and any sense of accountability.

HELP BLAST THE HELL OUT OF THEM FOR THE NEXT TWO, FOUR, SIX, EIGHT, YEARS. WHAT EVER IT TAKES TO REFORM THE REAL “BASTARDS” .

Ronald L. Waldron
December 11, 2014
Reply

Republican Politicians train well on how to ‘think Jewish’:
YES, ALL POLITICIANS smell like BULL-SHIT.

WHILE ALL ATTENTION IS ON ISIS, AND TERRORISM.

Government is seeking to go after pension funds.

Unions being dismantled by Republicans, they now are
Secretly looking to reduce Union pensions by 25–30 %.

They also in an attempt to aid Wall Street, are already
turning Public Employee pension funds over to Wall Street.
Many more Public Employee Pensions are being considered
for the same Secret maneuver, including Teachers pensions,
Police & Fire Pensions, up and down the line.

While Americans are asleep at the wheel, many more
Countries are under the same threat of oppression and
control of their assets by the same Zionist movement.

They call it Globalization, & privatization of all services
by the same International Corporations , guess who is in charge.

There may only be one very small Zionist Jewish Country, BUT
their influence, power, and corruption is far reaching into
other governments. The USA is a prime example.
Our government including the Pentagon is largely controlled by
ZIONISM.

300 Military Bases on foreign lands. There for your safety &
protection? NO! There to take you over, with any assets you have.
They will continue until they have it all. (All4Israel) or until We all
stop it.

Confiscate all property, assets, accounts, owned by foreign investment.
By emanate domain and force foreign troops off your land, home to
where they belong. Take care of your own people & borders.

Let the UN and International agencies decide when any intervention is needed.
Like Palestine etc. Abuse for 60 years with no real support, WHY ?

The International community needs to step up now, Borders have been
set, World-Wide. Stop all occupations. Fight it now, or lose all rights &
dignity we have left. Here in AMERICA, it has become a story of the
few haves, and the majority of have NOTS. 2% with 80%, 98 % with 20.

It seems they have their fingers into every aspect of the ? Free
World. While suppressing many others.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 12, 2014
Reply

In Gods eyes Israel is still none Existing. Exiled for good reason–Nothing in the Scriptures has changed his mind.

Again — ALL4ISRAEL.com. ONLY JEWS HAVE RIGHTS IN AMERICA— DEFINED BY THEM !! — THAT IS KOSHER ??

Last month, the California State Assembly passed a resolution urging state educational institutions to more aggressively crack down on criticism of the State of Israel on campuses, which the resolution defines as “anti-Semitism.” The anti-democratic resolution is the latest step in the broader campaign to stifle and suppress dissent on California’s increasingly volatile campuses.

The California State Assembly is the lower house of the state legislature, consisting of 80 members. The resolution—H.R. 35: “Relative to anti-Semitism”—was passed by a vote of 66 to 80, including a majority of both Republicans and Democrats in the Assembly.

The resolution was drafted by Republican Linda Halderman and passed without public discussion. The vote on the resolution came when most students were between semesters and away from their campuses.

The resolution (available here) uses the classic trick employed by defenders of Israel’s Zionist regime: lumping together any criticism of the Israeli state’s policies or of the US government’s support for them with racist attacks on Jews.

On the one hand, the resolution denounces “swastikas and other anti-Semitic graffiti in residential halls, public areas on campus, and Hillel houses,” and denounces those who accuse “the Jewish people, or Israel, of inventing or exaggerating the Holocaust.”

On the other hand, the bulk of the resolution is dedicated to defining criticism of the state of Israel as “anti-Semitism.” It lists the following as examples of “anti-Semitism”:

• “language or behavior [that] demonizes and delegitimizes Israel;”

• “speakers, films, and exhibits” that indicate that “Israel is guilty of heinous crimes against humanity such as ethnic cleansing and genocide;”

• describing Israel as a “racist” or “apartheid” state;

• “student-and faculty-sponsored boycott, divestment, and sanction campaigns against Israel;”

• “denying the Jewish people their right to self-determination;”

• “applying double standards by requiring of Israel a behavior not expected or demanded of any other democratic nation;” and

• “actions of student groups that encourage support for terrorist organizations such as Hamas and Hezbollah.”

This list makes clear that the accusations of anti-Semitism are a red herring, employed to attack students’ democratic rights and stifle dissent. The resolution recalls the smear campaign against German author Günter Grass and his poem “What Must Be Said” earlier this year.

Defending the poem, the World Socialist Web Site explained: “Anti-Semitism is the term used to describe racist hatred aimed at the oppression and persecution of Jews—and in the case of the Third Reich, the extermination of Jews. Grass’s criticisms of the war policy of the Netanyahu government are not directed against Jews, nor against Jews in Israel. His overwhelming concern is the well-being of both the Jewish population in Israel and the Iranian people. This is in stark contrast to the Israeli government.

“The Israeli regime does not represent the interests of the Jewish population, but rather a tiny rich and corrupt clique that has always worked closely with American imperialism.” (See Defend Günter Grass!)

The aggressive narrowness of the resolution’s definition of acceptable political discussion, combined with its broad definition of anti-Semitism, prompted the University of California to distance itself from the resolution, though without rejecting or denouncing it. “We think it’s problematic because of First Amendment concerns,” UC spokesman Steve Montiel told the San Francisco Chronicle last week.

The resolution does clearly implicate the First Amendment, which protects not only criticism of the state of Israel, but generally protects anti-Semitic hate speech as well.

Moreover, it must also be said that the State of Israel is, as a matter of fact, guilty of crimes against humanity.

To cite only a more recent example, the 574-page UN Goldstone Report published in 2010 found that the State of Israel had deliberately targeted civilians and civilian infrastructure in Gaza during the 2008-2009 “Operation Cast Lead.” The invasion of Gaza saw 1,400 Palestinians killed compared with 13 Israelis killed. More than 21,000 buildings, factories, and apartments were damaged or destroyed.

Under California H.R. 35, it appears that the Goldstone report is now to be considered “anti-Semitic.”

The resolution also contains a denunciation of “suppression and disruption of free speech that presents Israel’s point of view.” This appears to be a reference to the “Irvine 11” incident last year, in which 11 students shouted down Israeli ambassador Michael Oren during his speech at the University of California at Irvine.

The 11 students shouted, “Michael Oren, you’re a war criminal,” and “You, sir, are an accomplice to genocide.” These students were later arrested, charged, and convicted of the crimes of “conspiracy” and violating Oren’s rights. (See University of California students convicted for protesting Israeli ambassador’s speech.)

The resolution goes on to state that the “Assembly recognizes recent actions by officials of public post secondary educational institutions in California [e.g., the prosecutions of the Irvine 11] and calls upon those institutions to increase their efforts to swiftly and unequivocally condemn acts of anti-Semitism on their campuses and to utilize existing resources . . . to help guide campus discussion about, and promote, as appropriate, educational programs for combating anti-Semitism on their campuses.”

On California’s campuses, as on campuses and workplaces internationally, explosive class antagonisms are increasingly apparent. Massive tuition hikes year after year coupled with job losses and skyrocketing youth unemployment present an entire generation of young people with an increasingly impossible situation.

State authorities in California, which is controlled by the Democratic Party, have watched the large campus protests that took place across state campuses over the past two years with hostility, consternation, and fear.

Over the past year, at the behest of Democratic Party officials, demonstrating students across the state have been attacked by paramilitary police squads armed with batons, tear gas, and flash grenades, with hundreds of students arrested and jailed. The world’s attention was captured when students peacefully protesting tuition hikes at UC Davis were pepper sprayed by police in cold blood.

In the face of increasing tensions and protests, state authorities are moving to clamp down on the campuses, intervening to “guide campus discussion” and criminalize criticism of both domestic and foreign policy. Under the guise of criticizing “anti-Semitism” the state government signaling that the persecution of student protesters will be tolerated or welcomed.

The resolution concludes that “strong leadership from the top remains an important priority so that no administrator, faculty, or student group can be in any doubt that anti-Semitic activity will not be tolerated in the classroom or on campus, and that no public resources will be allowed to be used for anti-Semitic or any intolerant agitation.

WE ALL MUST ACT JEWISH NOW, NEVER TELL THE TRUTH
ABOUT ANYTHING AGAIN. LMAO

Ronald L. Waldron
December 14, 2014
Reply

Over the last 14 years, AIPAC, MOSSAD, ISRAEL, TORAH JEWS, ZIONISM, and the Organized Crime Syndicate have been
covered in the Books I have published, The 800+ Postings on Congress.org posted by me,paid by me. The messages are on file.
They were sent to students, faculty, student organizations, Religious organizations, Churches, Police & Fire Departments, Teachers,
Unions, Federal Agencies, Pentagon, The Presidents & Vice Presidents, Commissions, Governors, Mayors, Media Organizations,
and personalities, Newspapers Public and Universities , Student Unions & Organizations & Media, Editors, Radio Stations.
Broadcasted and E-mail distribution World-Wide. WAKE-UP CALLS TO MANY.
International organizations, The United Nations , NATO, The HAGUE, several UN divisions, International News Media, several
Countries, Justice Departments National & International, Alternative Media, Jewish Organizations & News letters. Political
Parties-&-Candidates and Centers, Doctors with out Borders, many peace organizations International, Many, Many Jewish
organizations that are opposed to Zionism, and the actions of Israel. A large split in the Jewish communities has developed
over the atrocities of Palestine, Gaza, The West Bank, on & on. I have sent to AIPAC & chapters here in the USA, and all over
Canada.

Now we must concentrate on the aspects that is most concerning to us the American people, and what has been supported by
our government, congress, administrations, and our religious leaders. The deceptive actions, and the treason by such. All done in our name..

Forget Iraq just for now-1.5 million dead civilians-Communities destroyed, preemptive because of all the W.M.D.
How many of our sons & daughters killed, injured, disabled for life. Many now untreated, homeless VETS.

Forget Afghanistan, just for now. Death figures unknown. MANY TROOPS KILLED, INJURED, DISABLED.

REMEMBER THE NO BID CONTRACTS: HALLIBURTON, BLACK-WATER ? OF COURSE OTHERS. PRIVATE CORPORATIONS.

18+1+++TRILLION national debt. 1990 it was 3 Trillion ??

HEROINE; Production has quadrupled after our Arrival there. HEROINE is the number ONE drug now distributed accross
AMERICA: VERY FEW COMMUNITIES HAVEN’T SEEN A HUGE INCREASE IN HEROINE SALE & USE.
CHECK OUT “BLACK HOLE” MONEY. WHAT IT IS, WHERE IT COMES FROM. GOOGLE: FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD PEACE BLOG. 4 YEARS AGO. AGAIN 2 YEARS AGO. NOT A WORD ON IT
IN THE MEDIA.

PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER, ONE OF THE FIRST TO SPEAK OUT REGARDING ISRAELI ATROCITIES & APARTHEID..

PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA, WHO HAS RECOGNIZED THE NEED TO PUT RESTRAINT ON ISRAEL.
HIS LIFE THREATENED BY ISRAEL ON AT LEAST TWO OCCASIONS.
BEEN THREATENED ON TWO KNOWN OCCASIONS BY, ISRAEL. NETANYAHU and his Mossad leader heard plotting such. Reported to the WHITE
HOUSE, and Media. No one heard it on the MEDIA?

UNRWA–United Nations relief and works agency for Palestine refugees in the near East. They provide assistance and protection for some five million Palestine refugees.

UNRWA human development and humanitarian services encompass primary and vocational education, primary health care, relief and social services, infrastructure and camp improvement, micro-finance and emergency response, including in situations of armed conflict.

The Gaza Strip is home to a population of more than 1.5 million people, including 1.2 million Palestine refugees.

For the last decade, the socioeconomic situation in Gaza has been in steady decline. Years of conflict and closure have left 80 per cent of the population dependent on international assistance. The tightened blockade, imposed following the Hamas takeover of Gaza in June 2007, has decimated lives and livelihoods, resulting in the impoverishment and de-development of a highly skilled and well-educated society. Despite adjustments made to the blockade by the Government of Israel in June 2010, restrictions on imports and exports continue to severely hamper recovery and reconstruction.

Over half a million Palestine refugees in Gaza live in the eight recognized Palestine refugee camps, which have one of the highest population densities in the world.

The blockade has had a devastating impact on Palestine refugees, including those living in Palestine refugee camps. Unemployment continues to be at unprecedented levels, particularly among young people.

Operating through more than 11,000 staff in over 200 installations across the Gaza Strip, UNRWA delivers education, health care, relief and social services, microcredit and emergency assistance to registered Palestine refugees.

In recent years, the Agency has made significant improvements to its services in Gaza, such as its schools of excellence and excellent health services initiatives. It also better targets its assistance to the poorest of the poor through the implementation of a proxy-means tested poverty survey. UNRWA continues to: HELP, instead of inflicting devastation.

Families massacred by Israel. Lives destroyed. Hopes and Dreams shattered. Once again, the people
of GAZA, especially the children, are victims of Israeli cruelty, and continued attacks since 1948.
66 years of atrocities, brutality.against Gaza, The West Bank, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, no one is
left out as a potential target of Israel.

During this Summer 50 Day attack. 2256 murders, 540 children killed, 400000 children in need of
medical help, 110000 homeless, 1500 children orphaned. 1000 children with serious life long
disabilities. The suffering and pain of Palestine gos back 66 years. Aided by USA>

IT IS TIME TO END IT, NO MATTER WHAT IT TAKES. STOP ISRAEL IN THEIR TRACTS.. WE DEMAND PEACE FOR ALL–STOP ALL SUPPORT FOR OCCUPATION, WAR, AND ZIONIST ORGANIZED CRIME.

THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT THE BUSH-CHENEY ADMINISTRATION SHOULD HAVE BEEN CHARGED WITH WAR CRIMES, NO DOUBT MEMBERS OF CONGRESS SHOULD BE CHARGED WITH TREASON.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 15, 2014
Reply

Breaking from Newsmax.com

CIA Lied About Torture, Senate Report Suggests

When CIA interrogators were torturing accused Sept. 11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed at a secret prison in Poland in March 2003, a top CIA analyst asked them to show him a photograph of an alleged terrorist named Majid Khan.

Mohammed offered up details on Khan after interrogators slapped Mohammed, denied him sleep, rehydrated him through his rectum, threatened to kill his children and waterboarded him 183 times. The case was cited as a successful use of harsh methods to obtain valuable intelligence. But Mohammed’s interrogators knew Khan had already been captured, according to the Senate report released this week.

Allen D. Post
December 16, 2014
Reply

President Obama: Please VETO the Boxer Bill, and place sanctions against Israel.

UN & USA, should demand Israel sign a nonproliferation agreement, allow inspections by International Inspectors, for the Nuclear weapons, all facilities capable of producing,
storage, of Nuclear devises etc. Otherwise set boycotts, sanctions, until they do so. Same as IRAN, who has complied with all those request. The entire World is aware that they possess such weapons.
They may also be producing them, have a delivery system.
WHO knows, all we know is they are EVIL, and have stated
they will use such, before they are defeated.

Allen D. Post
December 17, 2014
Reply

OCDG: This is a “clarification” of another article… even when trying to whitewash and backpedal, they make an even bigger mess and reveal for all their true intentions:

Eisav’s hatred and Amalek’s are not purely genealogical. The actual nation of Amalek does not exist today. I was not making a claim that today’s Arabs are Amalek. I said that their hatred of Israel and the Jews is Amalek-like in character. I was not suggesting that we attack Arabs, as they attack us. I was urging caution and diligence to the situation we are in.

Read and re-read the quote above until it starts to sink in and makes sense. This is their “clever” way of trying to deny the obvious. The only logical conclusion is that they think all Arabs are amalek… even if they use weasel-words to obfuscate the issue. For if in their view, Arabs/Muslims are behaving in an “amalek-like” way, then you’d still have to deal with them as if they were amalek. The story this judas relates, is the one of Esau and Jacob… how it endures generation after generation.

We, the Jewish People in the Land of Israel, should not have to watch every bulldozer that passes us in the street, wondering if it is going to swerve and hit us. We should not have to avoid crowded bus stops or supermarkets that serve a wide range of customers. Our children should not have nightmares or get nervous every time a siren sounds. And the list goes on and on.

Actually it does, for at least 2 reasons. The foremost is that you have invaded a land which is not yours and the legal residents have a right to fight back. This isn’t even mentioning that God Himself has forbidden you to have a nation of your own. Those who steal and murder, should expect resistance.
2nd, you are lucky to be allowed to live on this Earth at all… God has exiled you permanently… which is extremely lenient given your nature. Instead of this being a humbling experience, you are ever more arrogant and stiff-necked. You have destroyed nation upon nation and countless lives… there is no torment enough on Earth for your transgressions. Vengeance is God’s but we will do our part to make sure justice is done.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 17, 2014
Reply

by ROBERT FANTINA
Is Time Running Out for Israel?
Netanyahu in a Panic:

It seems that Israeli Prime Murderer Benjamin Netanyahu is all in a dither because much of Europe seems on the verge of recognizing Palestine. At a meeting in early December with French President Francois Hollande, Mr. Netanyahu asked him to put a stop to a proposal being initiated by France’s Foreign Minister, Laurent Fabius, which calls for a two-year timetable for the establishment of a Palestinian state within the agreed-upon 1967 borders.

Mr. Netanyahu said this: “Such a move is contrary to a peace agreement, it will thwart all future negotiations and bring about an escalation.” CORRECT:” IT ALL SHOULD GO BACK TO PALESTINE!”

He is probably right on two out of three counts. If there is such an agreement, the nonsensical ‘negotiations’ that have been ongoing for years, and have only delayed any real international action while Israel commits incremental genocide, will cease. The United States will no longer be able to support Israel’s land grabs and other atrocities through the guise of ‘negotiations’. Palestine will exist as a free and independent country, and there will be nothing to negotiate.

The second assertion, that such a move will “bring about an escalation” should be seen as a threat by Israel. If a proposal to grant Palestinians the right of self-determination, and the ability to live on their own land, is accepted, Israel will, in all likelihood, escalate its terror against Palestine. The Gaza Strip may be bombed again, there will be an increase in house-demolitions in the West Bank, and more men, women and children in the West Bank will be arrested and held indefinitely without charge. All this is, of course, in violation of international law, but Israel and its financier, the United States, care nothing for international law. Oh, both countries trot out international law when it suits them, but when it inconveniences them, as it certainly would Israel if that rogue nation were to abide by it, they are happy to ignore it.

But Mr. Netanyahu’s assertion that ‘such a move is contrary to a peace agreement’ is only true when peace is defined on his terms, which is the complete annihilation of Palestine. The proposal being prepared by Mr. Fabius would bring about peace, although it does include land swaps, which are unnecessary. Palestine should not have to ‘swap’ any land. All land that was taken in violation of international law for settlements should be vacated and returned to its rightful owner, which is Palestine.

After his conversation with Mr. Hollande, Mr. Netanyahu refused to say how receptive the French president was to his demands. This is not a good sign for his apartheid regime, but that is not all the bad news he received. He also spoke with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, called by some the top U.S. diplomat, and by others the understudy for Bozo the Clown, requesting or demanding assurance that the U.S. would, as is its custom, veto any bid that Palestine makes for statehood at the United Nations. Similar to the conclusion of his meeting with Mr. Hollande, Mr. Netanyahu wouldn’t say if he received the desired assurances from Mr. Kerry.

On Monday, an unnamed Israeli official told reporters that “what is at stake now is a resolution at the UN Security Council to try to force Israel to accept the creation of a Palestinian state unilaterally and within a certain time frame.” One forgets one’s history if one doesn’t remember that the U.N. forced Palestine to accept the creation of an Israeli state unilaterally and within a certain time frame, and no one in the world except the Palestinians seemed too upset about that at the time.

The same official continued: “International support for such a unilateral measure would open the door for Hamas to enter the West Bank. Such a step could be destructive for Israel and the Palestinians.”

So Israel is concerned that support for Palestinian recognition would enable Hamas, the democratically-elected government of the Gaza Strip that recently united with Fatah, the puppet government of the West Bank, a unification that caused Mr. Netanyahu to have such a deadly temper tantrum over the summer, to enter the West Bank. He claims that this would be destructive to Israel and Palestine, again threatening Palestine with increased violence.

His final sentence is the most puzzling. “Demands are being made of Israel without being made of the Palestinians, and that is why we will oppose [such an initiative].”

One might think that Palestine has already met far more demands than Israel would ever even consider. Palestine surrendered over half its land mass during the Nakba, or Catastrophe, when Israel was formed and 750,000 Palestinians were violently driven from their homes within a matter of months. Palestinians have continued to lose their homes, farms, fishing boats, livelihoods and their lives for over 60 years. They suffer horribly today, with Israel exercising brutal control over all Gaza’s borders, and occupying the West Bank. No further demands should be made on Palestine. Israel has given nothing, and the world is finally coming to terms with that fact. Palestine should become Allies with Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, AND.

What has caused this change? Where did Mr. Netanyahu finally misstep? Why are so many countries, once timid in any criticism of Israel, now appearing ready to recognize Palestine? While it has been a long time coming, as indicated by the increased success of the BDS (Boycott, Divest and Sanction) movement, one can argue that this past summer’s unspeakably cruel and barbaric bombardment and invasion of the Gaza Strip, coupled with the increased violence against Palestinians in the West Bank, combined to be Mr. Netanyahu’s undoing. Graphic photos of hospitals, mosques, homes and U.N. refugee centers being bombed, and of children and adults being shot by snipers, may have finally proved to be more than most of the world was willing to tolerate. Articles in U.S. newspapers by Israeli writers endorsing the genocide of the Palestinian people also seem too much for most people to bear.

Israel, much like its puppet, the U.S., creates its own reality. The citizens of those two countries tend to believe the fairy stories they are told about their nation, but the rest of the world is not quite so gullible. U.S. citizens may proclaim, as government leaders do, that theirs is the greatest country in the world, but the rest of the world recognizes the corruption, racism, poverty and injustice that is so much a part of U.S. society. Israelis may believe that theirs is the only democracy in the Middle East, but the institutional racism against Arabs and Africans belies that idea, and is clear to the rest of the world. U.S. citizens may believe that their soldiers are only sent into the world to protect freedom and democracy, but there have been too many innocent victims of that ‘protection’ for that farce to be believed outside of U.S. borders. Israel often proclaims that it has the most moral army in the world, but pictures of Israel soldiers kidnapping and abusing small children, bombing homes and families, denying medical care to needy Palestinians, and daily committing other atrocities are readily available, and may be ignored in Israel but are seen throughout the rest of the world.

It is possible that Mr. Netanyahu received the assurances he sought from Mr. Hollande and Mr. Kerry; only time will tell. But time is one thing, along with justice, that the Israelis don’t have on their side. If current efforts toward Palestinian statehood fail, they will be followed by others. Israeli land grabs will not be fast enough to gobble up all of Palestine before those efforts succeed. Israeli violence will continue until the United Nations demands a return to the 1967 borders, and provides an international peacekeeping force to protect Palestine from further Israeli violence. That day has been slow in coming, but recent events indicate that it is accelerating.

Our efforts are beginning to pay off , we know that the next 2-4 years is going to bring changes. The support of Israel has been government & Religious leaders. The American People are not
on the same page with them, and will never be. Poles run are inadequate, and Bias by the Media and organizations that take such. They know the districts to run them in. We are not out of
Brain cells because of economic and financial disparity. Or pickled on Alcoholic high balls, like the Elite, and corrupt officials.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 18, 2014
Reply

We can and will think for ourselves, and think of others in the
World that are REAL VICTIMS of ZIONIST oppression. WE NOT ONLY WANT PEACE, “PEACE”. WE ARE DEMANDING IT. NEXT ON THE LIST. PEACE IN PALESTINE.

THANK YOU PRESIDENT OBAMA FOR THE LIFTING OF SANCTIONS ON CUBA, & THE RESPECT FOR THE CUBAN PEOPLE. “NOW” ONTO PALESTINE. YOU ARE FINALLY DOING WHAT YOUR
SUPPORTERS ELECTED YOU TO DO. YOU ARE NOW EARNING THE NOBEL PEACE PRIZE. WE THANK YOU FOR THE JOB YOU ARE DOING. WE ALSO REALIZE IT IS WHAT YOU HAVE WANTED TO DO
ALL ALONG. THANK YOU ALSO FOR NOT SITTING BACK AS A LAME DUCK, AS MANY BEFORE YOU HAVE DONE. WE ARE VERY PROUD OF YOU AND YOUR AIMS. “THANK-YOU”

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
December 21, 2014
Reply

Blackwater Lobbyist Will Manage the House Intelligence Committee
Legislators are now appointing lobbyists to literally manage the day-to-day affairs of Congress. For the House Intelligence Committee, this means hiring Jeff Shockey, a former lobbyist for defense contractor Blackwater.

After lobbyist-run SuperPACs and big money efforts dominated the last election, legislators are now appointing lobbyists to literally manage the day-to-day affairs of Congress. For the House Intelligence Committee, which oversees government intelligence operations and agencies, the changing of the guard means a lobbyist for Academi, the defense contractor formerly known as Blackwater, is now in charge.

Congressman Devin Nunes (R-CA), the incoming chairman of the Intelligence Committee when the House reconvenes in January, announced that Jeff Shockey will be the new Staff Director of the committee. As a paid representative of Academi, Shockey and his firm have earned $80,000 this year peddling influence on behalf of Academi.

In previous years, the House Intelligence Committee has investigated Blackwater over secret contracts with the Central Intelligence Agency. Now, the shoe is on the other foot. As Staff Director, the highest position on a committee for a staff member, Shockey will oversee the agencies that do business with his former employer.

Other committees are also hiring lobbyists. Congessman Jason Chaffetz (R-UT), Darrell Issa’s (R-CA) replacement as chair of the Oversight Committee, just hired Podesta Group lobbyist Sean McLaughlin as his new Staff Director. McLaughlin’s client list includes the Business Roundtable, a trade association for corporate CEOs of large firms. Sen. Rob Portman (R-OH) also hired a new chief of staff, Mark Isakowitz, who represents BP.

The role reversal, for lobbyists to take brief stints in Congress after an election, has become a normalized. In a previous investigation for The Nation, we found that some corporate firms offer employment contracts with special bonuses for their staff to return to government jobs, ensuring the pay cut they receive for passing through the revolving door to become public servants doesn’t have to alter their K Street lifestyle. NO change the Zionist organized crime syndicate, and their Republican partners agenda of screw thy neighbor, Americans, or anyone getting in their way.

While most Americans, along with the UN, want to reign in Israel and their atrocities & false flag operations. The GOP continues to be puppets for the Zionist syndicate. Partners in CRIME.
Visiting Israel, GOP presidential hopeful Ben Carson promises strong support for Jewish state .Every Republican, GOP candidate is required to visit and support AIPAC, Israel, their policies, agenda, and the corruption involved. The coin of the realm: How inside traders are rigging America.

Last year, the top twenty-five hedge fund managers took home, on average, almost one billion dollars each. Even run-of-the-mill portfolio managers at large hedge funds averaged $2.2 million each.
Hedge fund SAC Capital Advisors, headed by Stephen A. Cohen, Several of Cohen’s lieutenants have been convicted of illegal insider trading. Last year Cohen himself had to pay a stiff penalty because of the charges, after making many billions. SAC manages so much money that it hands over large commissions to bankers on Wall Street. Those banks possess lots of inside information of potential value to SAC Capital. This generated possibilities for lucrative deals. SAC’s commissions “grease the super-powerful information machine that Cohen has built up” and “wins Cohen the clout that makes him privy to trading and analyst information ahead of rivals.” Zionist rigging fingers are in every aspect of government & corporations of America.

We the American people can bring it to an end. Do not vote for any candidate that supports Israel. Demand term limits for
all members of congress. Hold every member accountable, hold them to every promise made on the campaign trail.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 22, 2014
Reply

Campaign for America’s Future

Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell knows who he works for, and it’s not you and me.

He’s announced his first priority when he takes the gavel will be to pass the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).

The TPP is a big, multi-national trade deal negotiated in secret.

The big corporations love TPP because it will invalidate scores of environmental and labor regulations and let them ship jobs overseas. Consumer laws could be trumped by unelected tribunals.

The deal is stuffed with provisions that could not survive in the light of day. So Senator McConnell is dead set on passing this deal using a “fast-track” process that will skip niceties like public hearings and amendments.

We have to stop this. There’s no time to feel sorry for ourselves over the last election. The consequences are too grave. We must raise the alarm.

The Campaign for America’s Future will organize progressive groups and allies in Congress (even some conservatives). We will create and distribute educational materials and petitions. We will inundate Congress with letters and phone calls.

Will you help fund the campaign to stop this dangerous, job-killing trade deal before it’s too late?

This is an on-the-ground, in-the-air and across-the-wires campaign. We have the truth and large portions of the public on our side, but we are going to be vastly outspent. You can help level the playing field.

We truly appreciate you and are aware that every dollar you give is a sacrifice. We will not let you down.

Click here to make a donation to help stop fast track in its tracks.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 23, 2014
Reply

Republican strategist John McLaughlin will advise Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s campaign ahead of the March 17 election, Likud sources said Tuesday.

McLaughlin has strategized for Netanyahu and Likud in the past. He will work together with Netanyahu’s Israeli strategist Aron Shaviv in the current race.
For more than 30 years McLaughlin has worked successfully for candidates across the United States and internationally. His past clients include six sitting Republican US Senators and 22 Congressmen, including Lee Zeldin, the only Jewish Republican in Congress, He also has had successes with former California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, former Florida governor Jeb Bush, and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper. Earlier this year he helped Georgia Governor Nathan Deal beat Jason Carter, former US president Jimmy Carter’s grandson, who was endorsed by US president Barack Obama.But in a notable failure, McLaughlin failed to get Republican minority leader Eric Cantor re-elected in Virginia.

In the past, Netanyahu worked with other strategists, including Arthur Finkelstein, who predicted incorrectly ahead of the 2013 election that the Likud Beytenu joint list will win 45 seats. Netanyahu is no longer on good terms with Finkelstein.PM to ministers: Don’t talk about Obama.

Following series of undiplomatic statements by Likud MKs, Netanyahu orders party’s lawmakers not to comment on US president’s re-election without coordinating statements with his office.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 24, 2014
Reply

Netanyahu’s status quo approach has failed – Israel needs a peace deal

In closed-door meeting, FM warns that Israel will face a diplomatic tsunami unless it takes the initiative and pursues a regional peace agreement; cites effect of EU sanctions on Russia.
Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman said on Tuesday that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s status-quo approach to the Palestinian conflict has failed and that without an Israeli initiative the country will face a “diplomatic tsunami.”
Speaking at a closed conference at Tel Aviv University, Lieberman said that absent an Israeli-Palestinian agreement, Israel’s relationship with the European Union would deteriorate severely, which would in turn damage the Israeli economy.
“Look what’s happening with Russia,” the Yisrael Beiteinu party chairman said, referring to the EU sanctions imposed on Moscow due to its aggression in Ukraine.
Lieberman slammed Netanyahu, saying his “sanctification” of the status quo had failed.
Lieberman stressed the importance of Israel’s relationship with Europe and the economic damage a rupture could cause, at times sounding more like Labor Party chairman Isaac Herzog or Hatnuah chairwoman Tzipi Livni than the right-winger he is usually considered. He didn’t explicitly mention the possibility of EU sanctions, but the hint was clear from his comparison of Israel’s situation with that of Russia.
“We must reach a diplomatic agreement — not because of the Palestinians or the Arabs, but because of the Jews,” he said. “This is important for our relations with the European Union and the United States. For anyone who doesn’t know, our largest market is the EU, in both exports and imports. I’m pleased with what we’ve done with the Chinese; there’s been growth in our trade with them. But in the end, our biggest market is the EU.”
Anyone who thinks it’s possible to maintain good economic relations with Europe if the diplomatic relationship deteriorates is deluding himself, Lieberman stressed.
“It doesn’t work, and we must internalize this. When diplomatic relations deteriorate, you see what happens to the economy. I can cite the example closest to me, that of Russia,” added Lieberman, who immigrated from the former Soviet Union. “The more developed the state, the more sensitive it is to political decisions or changes in economic relations based on treaties and agreements.”
Lieberman said Israel should pursue a regional peace deal that would also resolve the Palestinian and Israeli Arab issues. “We need to put an end to all these arguments and reach an agreement with our entire surroundings,” he said.
Lieberman said that Bennett’s plan would spark a crisis with the Arabs and with the West, specifically the U.S. and EU. “I don’t want one state for two peoples,” said Lieberman. “I want a strong Jewish state.”
“There is Bennett’s approach – of one binational state,” said Lieberman. He says, “Not one inch. No compromise. Israeli sovereignty over Area C. But there is what is desirable and there is reality.”
Lieberman said that Bennett’s plan would spark a crisis with the Arabs and with the West, specifically the U.S. and EU. “I don’t want one state for two peoples,” said Lieberman. “I want a strong Jewish state.” CAN YOU IMAGINE IN THE FUTURE IF THEY GET BIGGER, MORE POWERFUL, AND INFLUENTIAL. GOD BLESS US ALL!!
The foreign minister then went on to critique the Labor Party approach as well, saying it is pushing for an agreement with the Palestinians “at any price.”
However, Lieberman said, “There is no such thing as any price. There is no such thing as an agreement only with the Palestinians. I am talking about a regional plan – with the Palestinians, Arab countries and Israeli Arabs.”To everyone in this “2 Millon + NETWORK” needs to keep pressure on Israel.
“WE ARE DEMANDING PEACE”. Please pass this message ALONG!

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
December 24, 2014
Reply

AMERICAN VOTERS, THE TAX, TAX, AND M0R

‘Twas the night before Christmas,
And across every state
The families were gathering
Together to celebrate.

Things were going so smoothly
‘Til one uncle did cry:
“Obama’s a socialist!
Climate change is a lie!”

If this sounds like something
You’re starting to fear,
We’ve got something for you.
Take a look — just click here!

We’ve compiled together
A site filled with facts
So you’ll have what you need
To counter attacks.

From climate to health care —
The economy too —
Everything that’s on here
We’ve confirmed to be true.

So no matter what he’s heard
From Limbaugh or Fox,
Your Republican uncle
Is in for some shocks.

Show up with the facts
(And some holiday cheer),
And enjoy being home
For the holidays this year!

http://www.YourRepublicanUncle.com

Wishing you the happiest of holidays from your friends at DNC Headquarters!

Ronald L. Waldron
December 26, 2014
Reply

Israel buying 4 new warships from Germany, PM confirms:
ed note–keep in mind that when any Israeli politician or religious leader speaks of
Israel’s borders’that there ARE NONE, which means that what Netanyahu & co intend
is that these warships are to be used ANYWHERE in the world.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Thursday confirmed that Israel had acquired four new
Sa’ar-class warships from Germany, reportedly to help protect off-shore gas extraction facilities.
Netanyahu said the deal with Berlin for the corvettes was reached earlier in the week.
According to a Channel 2 report, the deal was signed in Germany on Monday by the Defense Ministry director
and the head of Israel’s National Security Council.
A spokesperson from the Prime Minister’s Office said that for the time being the deal remained an understanding,
and that Germany would be footing a “nice” part of the cost. He refused to detail the cost of the ships.
Of course, our western friends in Washington, DC will appropriate a large part, after the new congress takes
over the first of the year.
Netanyahu said the ships would add “an important element to our defensive force.”
“The State of Israel is building our defense force year by year, from decade to decade, with planes, submarine,
air defense systems like Iron Dome and the Arrow missile, and with some of the most (sophisticated offensive
weapons) in the world,” he said.
The deal, reportedly worth €1 billion, was struck in November, according to a report in German newspaper
Bild am Sonntag earlier this month. According to the report, Berlin will contribute €115 million to the deal.
ISRAEL’S lobby, AIPAC has been instrumental in getting necessary commitments from USA officials.
Netanyahu sends formal message to all Christians:

The Man? has a real problem. See full story posted on the UGLY TRUTH!

“Christian communities across the Middle East will experience a particularly difficult time, with violence, persecution and fear,” Netanyahu said.

The reality, of course, is that Christians are routinely exterminated in Palestine, since almost all Christians are Palestinian. (The rest are Armenians,
or else they are foreign visitors who worship Jews.) Ten percent of all Arabs in Palestine are Christian. We Jews call them “Notzri.” Netanyahu said.

The Christian population in Palestine greatly decreased because of Jewish death squads and extermination campaigns. Today, Jews do routinely
attack Christian churches in what are called “price tag attacks,” meaning that Christians must pay for the privilege of being in Jewish-occupied lands.
In October 2013 they painted “Jesus is a monkey” on a Franciscan monastery on Mount Zion, in the brutally occupied West Bank.

Priests from many Christian denominations have long complained of being continually cursed and spat on by Jews in Jerusalem’s Old City.
The priests say that the solution to such vile Jew filth is “better education” for Jews. (!!)

Especially despised are Jewish converts to Christianity. Mordecai Vanunu says that Jews hate him more for converting to Christianity than for exposing
the Israeli nuclear weapons program. A nuclear program that far exceeds that of Iran’s or any other for that matter. (No inspections, no agreements,
no International agency does anything about it.) BECAUSE why ? The USA blocks any attempt made. ZIONIST-Bought Officials 17 of top 20 are
Republican, (1) Independent. (2) Democrats.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 28, 2014
Reply

I have worked hard for Democrats for 14 Years. Wouldn’t you know, when I ask for some help, no one steps up. Thank-You All
New York State & local Police & Fire Retirement System. Tier # one. Medical retirement–With right of return when qualified.

Ronald L. Waldron
48 Hammond Street
Jamestown, NY 14701

(716) 483-4660

rlw643@windstream.net

I began a career in Law Enforcement Nov. 1966, Village of Lakewood, NY Police Department. I was at the time # one position on a competitive Civil Service list
for the City of Jamestown, NY 14701. I applied for, and hired for police officer in the Village.

In June of 1969, I transferred to the Town of Busti Police Department. The Village of Lakewood is located with-in the Town of Busti. County of Chautauqua.

In 1971 I took the Chief of Police Exam, Placed # 3 on the Chiefs List. I also took the Investigator Exam, and placed # one on that list.

I was offered an Investigator job with the Chautauqua County Public Defenders office. (Temp) grant for one year.

After 13 months, I returned to Busti Police Department on reinstatement. 1973.

I received an injury 1978. I applied for job related disability. Denied, but was granted an ordinary medical retirement, with right of return when qualified.

I accepted such Nov 1978. My registration # 0A462887 My retirement # 0OA113030

My family and I moved to Florida .

Approximately Feb. 1992 I applied for reinstatement though the New York State retirement system, taking all test, and medical exams, & history.
July of 1992 I received notice that I was eligible to return. That I was to be placed on a priority list for reinstatement Chautauqua County Civil service office.
They received such Aug. 12, 1992.

Sept-Oct. 1992, I had not heard anything. I contacted Mr. Bruce Carpenter Esq, Attorney and friend to check out the status. He was told that the Town of Busti
Police Department had dissolved. That the Town contracted with the Village of Lakewood for police coverage. That no position would be available.

Years later I returned to the area, bought a home in Jamestown,NY. At the end of May-2014, I went on the web for the Town of Busti/ Village of Lakewood
police department. I read where the Town of Busti and Village police departments merged together. All personnel of both departments were merged.

It has taken time,but I found that my personnel file was transferred to the village, along with all others. Including. All village officers to the newly formed
department, all Town officers to the new department. Two other medical retired officers. Officer Showers Town Officer, and Raymond Heinzmen Village
officer. All records transferred.

I Qualified to return, and was to be placed on a priority list July 1992. On January 13, 1993 I was placed on a list for Town only. A department that was
dissolved . Decided Nov. 1982. Took effect Jan. 1983.Contract took effect. All after merger of all personnel.

A Mr. Robert Laughlin, director of personnel Chautauqua County, received notice to place me on the appropriate preferred list for reappointment.

Anyone in their right mind can see what the appropriate list would be., should be. Over sight can be understood. But to deny it, and cover up is not.

My not being on the appropriate list from July 1992—July 1996. Six part time officers were hired, and in May of 1995 a full time position was

filled that I should have been granted.

I have tried to talk to people that ignore me like I’m trash. Only one person has been court est, and professional, that being Mr. Joe Johnson, Village of
Lakewood clerk. I certainly have thanked him for it. I have let it be known that I’m willing to negotiate a fair settlement, such falling on deaf ears.

Thus I have had a consultation with a New York City Law Firm. The retainer is high, and the amount they would seek is far beyond what I consider FAIR…

The loss to me is also high, when you consider 10 years wages, proper retirement amount etc.

With no consideration from anyone. I now will seek an attorney with reasonable expectations.

Thank You for Your Courtesy;

Ronald L. Waldron

Truth will prevail–I also have a file that classes me as a whistle blower. Confidential aspects exposed. Leading to the discrimination etc. above.

So Long Everyone.

IT IS TIME FOR AN AMERICAN LABOR PARTY !!

HOPE TO SEE YOU ALL THERE.

RON

Allen D. Post
December 29, 2014
Reply

North Korea’s honey trap scheme revealed: This tact-tic is not a new one in USA

By Julian Ryall, Seoul

North Korea has blackmailed dozens, if not hundreds, of politicians, journalists and businessmen after seducing them with female agents, a former elite North Korean official has revealed.

In a scheme called “the seed-bearing programme”, high-level visitors to Pyongyang would be sent an attractive consort, only to find out several months later that they have a child in Nort

This tact-tic is not a new one in USA: IT WILL NOT CHANGE UNTIL ALL AMERICANS UNITE
The above tact-tic is designed very close to the same used by Zionist Israel & their foreign lobbies in the USA, for the last sixty years.

Both Political parties have faced such, along with many others. Going way back to the fifties & sixties. People having their entire careers and lives
turned up-side down, when exposed to the Public, if the person didn’t do as was expected.

Others have accepted huge campaign funds, others with insider information from Wall Street. The corruption with in the Republican Party is now
ramped. To the real point of TREASON. Media is completely become owned by Zionist, journalist have been assassinated, black mailed, destroyed,
or absolute controlled, and censored by the Zionist Editors in charge. Universities with Zionist Administrators, professors, and chair positions.
A front to take over all. No communication system available that the Zionist Leaders can’t shut down on a moments notice. Not a transportation system
that can not be shut down in a short period of time. No energy grid that can not be shut down immediately. PLEASE PEOPLE, 1776–1956 AMERICA THE FREE.
1956–2008 DEVELOPMENT OF TREASON, & FASCISM, and CORRUPTION. HOMELAND SECURITY, IN CHARGE OF ALL FEDERAL AGENCIES. TOP POSITIONS
OCCUPIED BY DUEL CITIZENS WITH ISRAEL. DIRECT PIPE LINE. OUR LAWS CHANGED, OUR CONSTITUTION IGNORED.

THIS IS SOMETHING WE ALL NEED TO DO. UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. WE ARE FALLING FAST. ZIONIST HAVE CONTROL OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY, AND THEY WILL BE COMPLETELY IN CHARGE OF DISTRUPTION and OBSTRUCTION BEGINNING JANUARY OF 2015.

PRESIDENT OBAMA IS THE ONLY LEADER, THAT FIGHTS FOR AVERAGE MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE, WE NEED TO SUPPORT HIM AND THE PEOPLE THAT ASSIST HIM.

MAKE THE DEMOCRAT PARTY OUR PARTY, TAKE IT OVER BY VOTES, DEMANDS, AND UNITY. AMERICA OUR COUNTRY, NO ONE ELSES !!

Allen D. Post

Allen D. Post
December 29, 2014
Reply

IT WILL NOT CHANGE UNTIL ALL AMERICANS UNITE AGAINST IT……………..

The above tact-tic is designed very close to the same used by Zionist Israel & their foreign lobbies in the USA, for the last sixty years.

Both Political parties have faced such, along with many others. Going way back to the fifties & sixties. People having their entire careers and lives
turned up-side down, when exposed to the Public, if the person didn’t do as was expected.

Others have accepted huge campaign funds, others with insider information from Wall Street. The corruption with in the Republican Party is now
ramped. To the real point of TREASON. Media is completely become owned by Zionist, journalist have been assassinated, black mailed, destroyed,
or absolute controlled, and censored by the Zionist Editors in charge. Universities with Zionist Administrators, professors, and chair positions.
A front to take over all. No communication system available that the Zionist Leaders can’t shut down on a moments notice. Not a transportation system
that can not be shut down in a short period of time. No energy grid that can not be shut down immediately. PLEASE PEOPLE, 1776–1956 AMERICA THE FREE.
1956–2008 DEVELOPMENT OF TREASON, & FASCISM, and CORRUPTION. HOMELAND SECURITY, IN CHARGE OF ALL FEDERAL AGENCIES. TOP POSITIONS
OCCUPIED BY DUEL CITIZENS WITH ISRAEL. DIRECT PIPE LINE. OUR LAWS CHANGED, OUR CONSTITUTION IGNORED.

THIS IS SOMETHING WE ALL NEED TO DO. UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. WE ARE FALLING FAST. ZIONIST HAVE CONTROL OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY, AND THEY WILL BE COMPLETELY IN CHARGE OF DISTRUPTION and OBSTRUCTION BEGINNING JANUARY OF 2015.

PRESIDENT OBAMA IS THE ONLY LEADER, THAT FIGHTS FOR AVERAGE MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE, WE NEED TO SUPPORT HIM AND THE PEOPLE THAT ASSIST HIM.

MAKE THE DEMOCRAT PARTY OUR PARTY, TAKE IT OVER BY VOTES, DEMANDS, AND UNITY. AMERICA OUR COUNTRY, NO ONE ELSES !!

IT NOW IS EVERY AMERICAN’S RESPONSIBILITY and IT’S UP TO YOU.

WE HAVE DONE ALL WE CAN–WE ARE BURNED-OUT–NO ONE IS LISTENING.

YOU TAKE IT FROM HERE. GOOD LUCK !! WE FAILED–WILL YOU ??

Christians are, and have been leaving the church, most would like to worship in
the NEW Testament. Only the preacher may want to learn about the history
of the OLD, but so much time is spent on the Jewish religion, when the only
part of the Bible that should concern us is the NEW.
U.S.: Palestinian UN bid fails to account for Israel’s security needs. w why would it ? The Genocide of
Palestinians, and the illegal occupation, destruction, and blockades are the SECURITY issues to be dealt with.
The Death of Christianity, and the USA if the corruption & support for ISRAEL’S atrocities continues .

Allen D. Post
January 1, 2015
Reply

No Sympathy for the Devil, or his advocates
Somewhat harsh language in ‘civilized’ times such as today’s perhaps, but generally speaking–just as the old saying goes concerning smoke and fire being a packaged deal–people usually deserve the reputations they carry with them throughout life. Like a bad credit score or a criminal conviction attached with superglue, it can be said–fairly and squarely–that lawyers and others whose ‘higher calling’ involves manipulating the law and its accompanying lingo for low-down ends generally reap what they’ve sown in terms of public perception.
After all, who bilks widows out of their bread and water over issues as earth-shattering as ‘i’s left undotted or ‘t’s left uncrossed? Who forecloses on homes paid into for decades by working fathers (and mothers) who’ve given the best years of their lives playing by the rules, raising their kids along the straight and narrow and in general contributing something to the betterment of the world?
It isn’t the ditchdiggers, woodhewers or watercarriers doing that, for sure. They–Mr. and Mrs. Common Clay–aren’t the ones trying to hook and crook their way into inheriting the earth–EVERY SQUARE INCH OF IT–nor the ones constructing some personal stairway to heaven with the broken dreams, broken hearts, and broken lives of those they’ve personally destroyed and sent down the highway to hell.
No, indeed it is that ‘lawyerly’ class, who–much like ‘Mr. Slithery’ taking center stage in the Garden of Eden drama–has a particular ‘gift’ with language in conjuring up some version of (non) reality that best suits them. Like those skilled in the use of incantations, spells and the dark arts, silver-tongued devils such as these have throughout history proven themselves master chefs in cooking up verbal potions designed to seduce the feeble-minded into believing a sow’s ear is actually a silk purse or that a lump of Fool’s Gold is the real deal.
And perhaps it is this–their comfort with all the different flavors of dishonesty (lawyer-ese for ‘lying’)–that makes these ‘scribes’ and ‘doctors of the law’ as universally-hated as they have been throughout history. Just as the old proverb ‘what goes around comes around’ has accurately suggested time and again, were it not for the fact that in virtually every instance where some species of scandal, corruption or chicanery comes to light that some ‘legal eagle’ is found comfortably nested in the middle of it all, perhaps then this particular profession wouldn’t be as ‘undervalued’ in today’s world as it is.
As much a nuisance as they are however, it would be a big mistake for civilized society to simply see them as merely that–a nuisance–and nothing more. As appropriately and justifiably insulting as it is, nevertheless the pejoratively-laced epithet ‘Ambulance chaser’ often used in describing them doesn’t even begin to underscore the danger these creatures pose to an otherwise moral, civilized society. As events throughout time have proven–and particularly now–the life-and-death influence they exert over the well-being of the 7 billion + human souls inhabiting God’s green earth should be enough to make anyone with a vested interest in life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness more than a little nervous.
It’s ‘lawyers’ such as the biblical character Joseph who dive-bomb entire nations over the cliff because of the sweet nothings they whisper into the king’s ear during those ‘intimate’ moments when no other persons (witnesses) are present…It’s those ‘scribes’ and ‘doctors of the law’ who–without the slightest whiff of conscience but with plenty of malice aforethought–commandeer entire ships of state directly into the paths of icebergs, be they political, financial, legal, etc–knowing full well what the outcome must inevitably be…It’s the ‘officers of the court’ who–in the interests of getting personally-profitable yet unnecessary wars started–stand before their citizen peers and perjure themselves in having other nations convicted of imaginary crimes…Having succeeded thus, they then pick-pocket otherwise patriotic, hardworking parents of the most precious investments they’ve worked a lifetime to create–their children–by sending them off to fight and die with empty promises of God, guts, and glory…They ensure that the corrupt political system they created for themselves becomes a perpetual motion machine of sorts so that the aforementioned ditchdiggers, woodhewers, watercarriers et al continue ‘giving their fair share’ and ‘doing their part’ as they are bled dry in bankrolling all that ‘get-rich-quick’ bloodshed, a tragedy too great to be simply Greek and which began rather inauspiciously in the court of public opinion with the words ‘ladies and gentlemen of the jury’…
And finally, later, when the remains of the nation’s children–partial or otherwise–return home in flag-draped coffins amidst sad trumpets and stiff salutes, the same ‘scribes’ and ‘doctors of the law’ acting as the master chefs in cooking up said caldron of human suffering are there on cue with bags of phony condolences and buckets of crocodile tears in order to mitigate the tidal wave of righteous anger that grieving parents are sure to aim in their direction once they realize that that just got bilked out of their life savings, meaning a beloved lost child.
‘A lawyer with his briefcase can steal more than a hundred masked men with guns…’
And while it is true that most of these ‘scribes’ and ‘doctors of the law’ do indeed share DNA that is–ethically-speaking–similar to each other, the fact is that they are certainly not all equal. Like the common street thug who engages in petty, unimpressive criminal activity vs. his more organized and sophisticated counterpart who gets chauffeured around town in a stretch limo and oversees a criminal empire exceeding the GDP of many small nation-states, likewise are there various castes and conditions within the lawyerly species as well.
But perhaps the first thing that needs mention in this regard–certainly a paradox if ever there were one–is that the term ‘lawyer’ can (and indeed should) be applied very loosely these days, since–technically speaking–one need not have attended law school, attained a law degree or passed the Bar to function as a ‘lawyer’ per se. Indeed, some of the most momentous events in terms of their political, legal, moral, social and financial importance have taken place as a result of mouthy/agenda-driven/morally-wanting individuals who’ve spent as much time in a formal legal setting as a prostitute has spent time in a church confessional.
And the reason one doesn’t need a law degree to get things done these days is because in this–the age of mass media and mass-management of public perception–it’s the one with the loudest bullhorn, the biggest mouth and the most generous helping of chutzpah who gets the favorable ruling, while the law, precedent, and procedure be damned.
No, what counts these days are not the little court rooms found in every corner of Nowheresville, America, and where things of little to no consequence are decided, but rather in the court of public opinion, where ‘juries’ made up of not mere dozens, but rather hundreds of millions (or even billions) render verdicts that cause things to shake and quake on a major scale.
And of all the law firms out there operating within the public sphere, clearly the most insidious, oily, and dangerous to the well-being of mortal man is the one that has but one client and one agenda–the infamously shady/crooked-as-a-dog’s-hind-leg outfit known as Israel, Israel & Israel. A gang of Mob lawyers tasked with protecting and defending a criminal enterprise unlike anything previously seen in human history, it is nothing less than a private army of sorts busting at the seams with thousands of professional loudmouths, enforcers, spies, bribesters, etc and strategically placed within the most powerful corridors of influence throughout America, the West and elsewhere. Kingmakers and kingbreakers in their own right, there isn’t a president, prime minister, premier, pope, politician, pundit, preacher or publisher who does not become nauseous with dread the moment that a phone call, registered letter or knock at the door arrives, courtesy of ‘The Firm’. Like those instances described by Russian author Alexandr Solzhenitsyn where KGB personnel–uninvited and unexpected–would arrive in the middle of the night via their infamous ‘Black Mariahs’ to take some unlucky contestant away either for a friendly chat or for an all-expense paid vacation to the Gulag, likewise a visit from an emissary of Israel, Israel, & Israel can only result in something on the negative side of the number line for anyone on the receiving end.
And always with the same result–not a crack or crevice within any otherwise healthy society is left unscathed & unaffected. Standing and grandstanding before 14 billion eyes and ears of those making up the courtroom of public opinion, the Mob lawyers and Syndicate spokesmen of Israel, Israel, & Israel brazenly and bold-facedly weave sticky, entangling webs and intricate yarns in giving criminal concepts, criminal precepts and criminal players places of unwarranted and unjustified respect within civilized Gentile societies. They indict/convict what is intrinsically good while acquitting and exonerating what is intrinsically evil…
And with all-too-predictably disastrous results, as order eventually (and inevitably) becomes chaos, cooperation becomes conflict, enlightenment turns to darkness, and soon, what was previously a healthy, vibrant nation inching closer and closer to unprecedented levels of achievement and progress now begins the slow march backwards towards its own grave…Like political termites with an insatiable appetite for cultural destruction, they chew away at the load-bearing beams and support columns of civilized society–quietly and imperceptibly–until the structure caves in on itself, destroying everything and everyone within…A highly-organized, hyper-focused, sophisticated gang of thieves operating under the cover of night, each member–understanding intimately his particular function in the surgery to be performed–goes to work on the machinery of civilization, loosening bolts, removing lug nuts and screws, pulling out wires, cutting cables and hoses until finally, what had been a well-built, productive, efficient and stable society goes haywire, resulting in a failed state, at which point the ‘surgeons’ move on with their tools and their booty in search of their next big score.
As ‘gifted’ and competent as they are however when it comes to all this ‘by way of deception we shall do war’ business, what has to be said–fairly and squarely in their defense–is that none of the grander, destructive and apocalyptic schemes being waged today on a global scale by the Firm would be possible were it not for the willful, suicidal cooperation given it by those unfortunate Gentile societies of both yesterday and today. Like the old lore whereby a vampire’s would-be victims are rendered defenseless the moment he’s invited into their home, likewise Satan’s little helpers doing the heavy lifting at Israel, Israel & Israel are only empowered in doing the voodoo that they do so well by the deadly naivete of those who should know better but who choose not to. Like the children’s story featuring the little girl marvelling at the big teeth, big nose and big eyes of the wolf she has mistaken for her grandmother, all the ‘signs’ are there that something is not quite right, but yet due to some deficiency of discernment or common sense she refuses to see it.
More tragic than the destruction itself however is the fact that in having aided and abetted in the downfall of their own civilizations, the Gentile nations cannot claim victim status in the matter…They cannot sue for damages, receive an injunction or plead ignorance, as all the signs that something was not quite right were there from the beginning. Like ear-splitting sirens warning of an approaching hurricane, every survival instinct within Gentiledom should have been screaming in shrill, hysterical decibels to put as much distance between their otherwise healthy, vibrant civilizations and what was an intrinsically evil presence…
And the jury–numbering not just in the dozens but rather in the billions–laps up the hypnotic, intoxicating, Judaic black magic with which the Firm concots all its deadly brews and potions…As such, the court of public opinion renders its suicidal verdict in favor of the defendant–‘not guilty’–and thus the wrist shackles and leg irons purposed with the protection of civilized society come tumbling down like the Twin Towers on 9/11…The now-acquitted criminal conspiracy and all its loyal members–political termites with an insatiable taste for cultural destruction–are released back onto the Gentile street so that they may continue their murder and mayhem unabated…
And a few weeks, months, or years later, after (yet another) infamous (mass) murder is committed, after (yet another) infamous (mass) theft takes place, and after (yet more) millions of other acts of criminality and war against Gentile society take place, each directly traceable back to the code and codicils making up the thousands-years-old murder for hire contract against Gentiledom known as ‘the law of Moses’, the Mob lawyers and Syndicate spokesmen of Israel, Israel, & Israel will (yet again) brazenly and bold-facedly weave sticky, entangling webs and intricate yarns in giving criminal concepts, criminal precepts and criminal players places of unwarranted and unjustified respect within civilized Gentile societies. They will (yet again) lie through their teeth in acquitting/exonerating the criminal conspiracy known as Judaism while indicting/convicting those prying into its secrets and exposing it as the toxic, radioactive, and deadly philosophical composition that it is.

The Anti-Christ Hate Crime. Anti-Zionism Truth

Ronald L. Waldron
January 1, 2015
Reply

THE “UNITED-STATES OF ISRAEL”

VETO’S UN Palestinian Statehood bid

at UN Security Council

Much to the dissatisfaction of the
“American people” It will not change
until ALL Americans unite against IT. .
The above tact-tic is designed very close to the same used by Zionist Israel & their foreign
lobbies in the USA, for the last sixty years.

Both Political parties have faced such, along with many others. Going way back to the
fifties & sixties.People having their entire careers and lives turned up-side down, when
exposed to the Public, if the person didn’t do as was expected.

Others have accepted huge campaign funds, others with insider information from Wall Street. The corruption with in the Republican Party is now
ramped. To the real point of TREASON. Media is completely become owned by Zionist, journalist have been assassinated, black mailed, destroyed,
or absolute controlled, and censored by the Zionist Editors in charge. Universities with Zionist Administrators, professors, and chair positions.
A front to take over all. No communication system available that the Zionist Leaders can’t shut down on a moments notice. Not a transportation system
that can not be shut down in a short period of time. No energy grid that can not be shut down immediately. PLEASE PEOPLE, 1776–1956 AMERICA THE FREE.
1956–2008 DEVELOPMENT OF TREASON, & FASCISM, and CORRUPTION. HOMELAND SECURITY, IN CHARGE OF ALL FEDERAL AGENCIES. TOP POSITIONS
OCCUPIED BY DUEL CITIZENS WITH ISRAEL. DIRECT PIPE LINE. OUR LAWS CHANGED, OUR CONSTITUTION IGNORED.

THIS IS SOMETHING WE ALL NEED TO DO. UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. WE ARE FALLING FAST. ZIONIST HAVE CONTROL OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY, AND THEY WILL BE COMPLETELY IN CHARGE OF DISTRUPTION and OBSTRUCTION BEGINNING JANUARY OF 2015.

PRESIDENT OBAMA IS THE ONLY LEADER, THAT FIGHTS FOR AVERAGE MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE, WE NEED TO SUPPORT HIM AND THE PEOPLE THAT ASSIST HIM.

MAKE THE DEMOCRAT PARTY OUR PARTY, TAKE IT OVER BY VOTES, DEMANDS, AND UNITY. AMERICA OUR COUNTRY, NO ONE ELSES !!

IT NOW IS EVERY AMERICAN’S RESPONSIBILITY and IT’S UP TO YOU.

WE HAVE DONE ALL WE CAN–WE ARE BURNED-OUT–NO ONE IS LISTENING.

YOU TAKE IT FROM HERE. GOOD LUCK !! WE FAILED–WILL YOU ??

Christians are, and have been leaving the church, most would like to worship in
the NEW Testament. Only the preacher may want to learn about the history
of the OLD, but so much time is spent on the Jewish religion, when the only
part of the Bible that should concern us is the NEW.
U.S.: Palestinian UN bid fails to account for Israel’s security needs. w why would it ? The Genocide of
Palestinians, and the illegal occupation, destruction, and blockades are the SECURITY issues to be dealt with.
The Death of Christianity, and the USA if the corruption & support for ISRAEL’S atrocities continues .

The pro-Israel creature who wants to be the next “American President” is GOP (Likud Light) Gov Mike Pence form Indiana.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 2, 2015
Reply

US finds Israel fourth most ‘unacceptable’ country:

Foreign Policy article examines number of times state department referred to ‘unacceptable’ behavior this year; Israel ranked between North Korea and Pakistan.How-ever, do to the partnership with the Republican party, there is no change in policy.
The US State Department described Israeli actions as “unacceptable” 87 times in 2014, with only three countries being more “unacceptable,” according to a Foreign Policy article published last week.
Journalist Micah Zenko searched the State Department’s website for usage of the term, and his “top ten” list shows Israel sandwiched right between North Korea and Pakistan. Zenko pointed that the US officials regularly use the phrase “but then do very little in response to prevent or deter those actions from reoccurring.”
The US State Department is not the only entity in the international diplomacy arena that tends to recycle certain phrases. Ynet found that UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon used the word “concerned” 140 times in 2014 in statements responding to events. Israel and Palestine were the most concerning places of 2014, with 19 press releases using the term.We the American People are very much concerned, find Israel totally “Unacceptable”, find them ugly disgusting habitat, illegally occupying and spoiling Palestinian Lands. No-Mads, using some kind of squatters rights, while the Zionist take all. Leaving the Jewish people abandoned again.
It is time for the true Jewish people to step up, demand the Genocide stops, that the Atrocities stop, that a two state solution, and a Peace agreement is made. Where are your Rabbi’s that actually believes and lives by the Torah??

No more cry’s, lies,or ZIONIST ties. You are victims as long as you allow it..

Ronald L. Waldron
January 4, 2015
Reply

How do we stop Zionism conducting Genocides:

Deal with Israel, the same as any other rogue regime, Sanctions, Blockades, Bomb the Hell out of them.

Of course we have to get rid of their partners in America FIRST, prosecute any member of congress that
accepts them as an Ally, when in fact they are our worst ENEMY. ” Collusion, and Treason”.

Separation of Church & State, that was always policy before 1948. There is no other religious State in
the World. WHY, should we accept a Country that the Zionist Leadership created the Holocaust in the
first place. Nothing but false propaganda since. The only people supporting such are people who are
benefiting from it. Legal or not, 90% is illegal gains. Organized crime syndicate. Rid ourselves of
the foreign lobby AIPAC, never should have been registered as an American Lobby in the first place.

AIPAC leader Mr. A. D. Esq.: Sexual Abuse of children.
Rabbi’s sucking infants penis

The Israeli guns that took part in the Rwanda genocide, as in all genocides.

kosher arms industry
The Israeli’s express pride in their actions in the valley of death because the arms
help the victims die quickly — a bullet to the head instead of hacks by a machete.
“We’re actually doctors,”They say. We harvest all the good parts, and recycle them.

THE “UNITED-STATES OF ISRAEL”

VETO’S UN Palestinian Statehood bid

at UN Security Council

Much to the dissatisfaction of the
“American people” It will not change
until ALL Americans unite against IT. .
The above tact-tic is designed very close to the same used by Zionist Israel & their foreign
lobbies in the USA, for the last sixty years.

Both Political parties have faced such, along with many others. Going way back to the
fifties & sixties.People having their entire careers and lives turned up-side down, when
exposed to the Public, if the person didn’t do as was expected.

Others have accepted huge campaign funds, others with insider information from Wall Street. The corruption with in the Republican Party is now
ramped. To the real point of TREASON. Media is completely become owned by Zionist, journalist have been assassinated, black mailed, destroyed,
or absolute controlled, and censored by the Zionist Editors in charge. Universities with Zionist Administrators, professors, and chair positions.
A front to take over all. No communication system available that the Zionist Leaders can’t shut down on a moments notice. Not a transportation system
that can not be shut down in a short period of time. No energy grid that can not be shut down immediately. PLEASE PEOPLE, 1776–1956 AMERICA THE FREE.
1956–2008 DEVELOPMENT OF TREASON, & FASCISM, and CORRUPTION. HOMELAND SECURITY, IN CHARGE OF ALL FEDERAL AGENCIES. TOP POSITIONS
OCCUPIED BY DUEL CITIZENS WITH ISRAEL. DIRECT PIPE LINE. OUR LAWS CHANGED, OUR CONSTITUTION IGNORED.

THIS IS SOMETHING WE ALL NEED TO DO. UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. WE ARE FALLING FAST. ZIONIST HAVE CONTROL OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY, AND THEY WILL BE COMPLETELY IN CHARGE OF DISTRUPTION and OBSTRUCTION BEGINNING JANUARY OF 2015.

PRESIDENT OBAMA IS THE ONLY LEADER, THAT FIGHTS FOR AVERAGE MIDDLE CLASS PEOPLE, WE NEED TO SUPPORT HIM AND THE PEOPLE THAT ASSIST HIM.

MAKE THE DEMOCRAT PARTY OUR PARTY, TAKE IT OVER BY VOTES, DEMANDS, AND UNITY. AMERICA OUR COUNTRY, NO ONE ELSES !!

IT NOW IS EVERY AMERICAN’S RESPONSIBILITY and IT’S UP TO YOU.

WE HAVE DONE ALL WE CAN–WE ARE BURNED-OUT–NO ONE IS LISTENING.

YOU TAKE IT FROM HERE. GOOD LUCK !! WE FAILED–WILL YOU ??

Christians are, and have been leaving the church, most would like to worship in
the NEW Testament. Only the preacher may want to learn about the history
of the OLD, but so much time is spent on the Jewish religion, when the only
part of the Bible that should concern us is the NEW.
U.S.: Palestinian UN bid fails to account for Israel’s security needs. w why would it ? The Genocide of
Palestinians, and the illegal occupation, destruction, and blockades are the SECURITY issues to be dealt with.
The Death of Christianity, and the USA if the corruption & support for ISRAEL’S atrocities continues .

The pro-Israel creature who wants to be the next “American President” is GOP (Likud Light) Gov Mike Pence form Indiana.

US finds Israel fourth most ‘unacceptable’ country:

Foreign Policy article examines number of times state department referred to ‘unacceptable’ behavior this year; Israel ranked between North Korea and Pakistan.How-ever, do to the partnership with the Republican party, there is no change in policy.
The US State Department described Israeli actions as “unacceptable” 87 times in 2014, with only three countries being more “unacceptable,” according to a Foreign Policy article published last week.
Journalist Micah Zenko searched the State Department’s website for usage of the term, and his “top ten” list shows Israel sandwiched right between North Korea and Pakistan. Zenko pointed that the US officials regularly use the phrase “but then do very little in response to prevent or deter those actions from reoccurring.”
The US State Department is not the only entity in the international diplomacy arena that tends to recycle certain phrases. Ynet found that UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon used the word “concerned” 140 times in 2014 in statements responding to events. Israel and Palestine were the most concerning places of 2014, with 19 press releases using theterm.We the American People are very much concerned, find Israel totally “Unacceptable”, find them ugly disgusting habitat, illegally occupying and spoiling Palestinian Lands. No-Mads, using some kind of squatters rights, while the Zionist take all. Leaving the Jewish people abandoned again.
It is time for the true Jewish people to step up, demand the Genocide stops, that the Atrocities stop, that a two state solution, and a Peace agreement is made. Where are your Rabbi’s that actually believes and lives by the Torah??

No more cry’s, lies,or ZIONIST ties. You are victims as long as you allow it..

Ronald L. Waldron
January 6, 2015
Reply

Meet the Falics: West Bank settlement funders, Netanyahu backers, and owners of Duty Free America:

http://mondoweiss.net

Simon Falic, chairman of Duty Free Americas, introduced Senator Kelly Ayotte at a ceremoney giving former Israeli President Shimon Peres the Congressional Gold Medal in 2014.

The name Sheldon Adelson, the right-wing, pro-Israel casino mogul who has bankrolled the Republican Party, rings a bell for close observers of American politics. But how about the Falic family?

The Falics should be just as well known. Members of the family have donated millions of dollars to pro-Israel U.S. politicians from both parties. Beneficiaries of their largesse include GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney; Democrats Debbie Wasserman Schultz and Eliot Engel; the Republican National Committee; and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. In addition, the family has given hundreds of thousands of dollars to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s political campaigns.

They have made their money through Duty Free America, which operates stores in airports around the U.S and the world where consumers buy tax-free products.

Leon Falic and his brothers bought the company in 2001. The Florida-based Falic Family Private Foundation, which receives the bulk of its funds from Duty Free Americas, has given money to a variety of pro-Israel causes, including West Bank settlements. And on December 28, the family is set to donate a Torah to Ariel University’s synagogue in honor of Fima Falic, who died in 2012. Israeli politicians will join the family in a ceremony that day. Nily Falic, the wife of the late Fima, is the national chairperson of the Friends of the IDF, a multi-million dollar operation that gives tax-free donations to the Israeli army.

The Falics are one of a number of wealthy, right-leaning Jewish American families that fund Israel’s and America’s right-wing politicians and illegal settlement projects. Hundreds of millions of dollars from U.S. tax-free foundations are poured into Israeli West Bank settlements every year. Taken together, the funds that originate in the U.S. are used for everything from infrastructure to business to security, solidifying Israeli control over the West Bank and putting a Palestinian state further out of reach.

A Duty Free Americas’ employee told me over the phone the Falics were not available for comment until Monday.

In addition to boosting the coffers of Netanyahu, Romney and Wasserman Schultz, the Falic Family has sponsored students to take a Zionist Organization of America-sponsored trip to Israel, where they visited the Falic-owned Psagot Winery, located in the settlement of Psagot, near the West Bank city of Ramallah. After Fima Falic died, the Zionist Organization of America released a statement extending “condolences to the entire Falic family on the sudden passing of Fima Falic, true Zionist and generous Israel supporter.” And as Mondoweiss’ Allison Deger reported in 2012, the family also funded an archeological dig in the settlement of Shiloh.

Tax forms I reviewed provide more details on the Falic family’s wealth, but the only detailed accounting of where donations went is in the records for fiscal year 2006. That year, the foundation gave hundreds of thousands of dollars to a range of groups related to Israel, including: $43,000 to the American Friends of Ateret Cohanim, which funds East Jerusalem settlements; $15,000 to the American Friends of Likud; $104,000 to a U.S. charity that funds a yeshiva in the Hebron settlement of Kiryat Arba, populated by the most extreme Israeli settlers; $85,000 to the Central Fund of Israel, another settlement fundraising vehicle; and $63,600 to Manhigut Yehudit, the Jewish Leadership movement run by Member of Knesset Moshe Feiglin, who has proposed paying Palestinians to move out of Gaza and called for the “conquest” and “annihilation” of people in Gaza.

On December 28, the Falic family will make another show of support for West Bank settlements. Nearly 20 Falic family members are set to participate in a ceremony at Ariel University marking the donation of the Torah, according to a press statement sent by Ariel University. The family members who will participate include Nily, national chairperson of the Friends of the IDF, and Simon, the chairman of Duty Free Americas. Also participating in the ceremony will be Likud Member of Knesset Limor Livnat (who announced her retirement earlier this month), the mayor of Ariel and Rabbi Shmuel Rabinovitch, the religious leader for the Western Wall.

Ariel University is in the mega-settlement of Ariel, located deep in the occupied West Bank. In late 2012, the Israeli military recognized the university as an accredited Israeli school, the first school in a settlement to receive that recognition. (The Israeli military has authority to over the West Bank, which includes the granting of accreditation for schools.) That decision led 165 professors to publicly calling for the boycott of Ariel University.

Related Posts

Our Year-End Campaign: What Mondoweiss Means To Me
Invest in thorough, accurate news to build a fair future for Israel/Palestine
US elites are vulnerable to donor pressure on Israel question
No Surprise Dep’t: David Brooks’s son is in Israeli arm

“tax-free donations to the Israeli army,” does this mean that Americans can deduct contributions to the IDF when calculating their federal income tax? It makes sense, I guess, since Congress directly appropriates billions from tax revenue; so logically Congress critters would figure, why not indirectly subsidize private contributions too? Still, I find it jarring. I make my little contributions to charities like MSF, Red Cross, etc. I think of them as charities. I don’t regard the IDF as a charity. December 27, 2014, 6:54 pm

Contribution to settlement activity is tax exempt thanks to the jargon and obfuscation and legal wording
December 29, 2014, 5:43 am

Yes, the US goes out of its way to deny favorable tax treatment to any NGO charity remotely connected in any way to helping Palestinians under the logic US won’t contrite to terrorists or their aider and abettors; conversely, the US goes out of its way to reward illegal settlers and support the IDF, a foreign army, with favorable tax treatment. This is just another example of US taxpayers funding Israel and its whims indirectly which supplements said taxpayers direct annual foreign aid to the Israel Project. US picks the pockets of increasingly impoverished Dick and Jane in a myriad of ways with very few being the wiser. All donations to Israel, direct and indirect, are fungible to the max.

Pro-Israel Congress members threaten aid cut-off in response to Palestinian ICC bid….

Ronald L. Waldron
January 10, 2015
Reply

Suspected Sex Offender Alan Deshowitz on France and Terrorism.
Fireworks Erupt BETWEEN DERSHOWITZ, O’DONNELL OVER FRENCH HANDLING OF TERRORISTS .

Put this child molester and Zionist Terrorism organizer in Guantanamo, along
with all his perverted groupies at AIPAC, Harvard, 400 at GOP, 50 at DCCC, The
blood sucking Rabbi’s, and followers from Sodomy Israel. 2000 years and the genetics don’t change. Of course it is the family tree of Lucifer.

Sad to see how Washington, D.C. has absorbed the same moral code & conduct.

Which now is being perpetrated though out our society by Zionism’s propaganda,
Las Vegas , Hollywood, TV, and Media, owned & controlled by Zionist Billionaires.

Even Alan has to admit that Israel has but one Ally, that being the United States Congress. Such comes with a large financial arrangement involving Wall Street.

All the Kings Republicans, and the Kings 35 Democrats can’t put Israel together again. Amen.

Lest we forget–Jesus Didn’t Warn Us About the Muslims. He Warned Us About the Jews

Allen D. Post
January 10, 2015
Reply

(The above Posting)
Reality Check for all Islamophobic Christians:
That’s right, for all you folks out there in the Christianite community frothing at the mouth and getting yourselves all hot-n-bothered these days over “THEM MOOZLIMS” taking over America, implementing Sharia law, cutting off heads, circumcising our women, forcing us to wear burkhas and all the rest, as much as I hate to douse your much-anticipated version of Armageddon with the cleansing waters of reality, nevertheless for the sake of posterity, it’s got to be done.
The fact is (and as disappointing as it will no doubt be for those of you out there sitting anxiously on the brink of your war-gasm) Jesus never mentioned them–meaning words such as “terrorist”, “jihad”, “Islamo-fascism”, or any of the other sweet nothings constantly shouted into our ears by our friends in the Jewish mainstream media that we are taught (forced) to memorize and recite these days. Not once. In fact, if we are to go by what the Bible says–the same book you say “proves” it took exactly 168 hours to create the entire universe and which some of you use in justifying handling poisonous snakes–He never even murmured any such thing under His breath. Based on the only “historical record” you use in understanding the big, bad world around us, The Prince of Peace wasn’t even MILDLY concerned with the situation involving one Mohammad ibn Abdullah or his followers. Not only did He–Jesus Christ–not emphatically say these kinds of things, He never even ALLUDED to them…NEVER warned His flock about a period in the future where the world would be threatened by those you all disaffectionately (and with the assistance of your Jewish-dominated media) refer to as “towel-heads”, “sand niggers”, “hajjis” and “camel jockeys”.
I find that rather interesting, don’t you?

Allen D. Post
January 13, 2015
Reply

We could go on and on, but that is a conversation for another time when you have eyes to see and ears to hear, & some BRAIN function might help.
Israel, U.S. always prevents Geneva Convention summit on occupation:The USA has vetoed every sanction against ISRAEL from the united Nations for ever. Americans seem to have developed A.D.D. ( Attention Deficit Disorder) on a large scale, generation after generation . If not that then it is Bipolar Disorder, what the Hell is in their food?
Four attempts have been made to convene the Fourth Geneva Convention:
This move brought to a head the crisis that led to the collapse of U.S. efforts to extend the talks between Israel and the Palestinians. A few weeks later the Palestinians and Arab League asked Switzerland officially to call a conference of the convention signatories to discuss the Israeli occupation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well as the damage Israel caused civilians in Gaza.
So far four attempts have been made to convene the Fourth Geneva Convention – all of them in regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The last attempt was made in 2009 after Operation Cast Lead in the Gaza Strip. In 2001, after the outbreak of the second intifada, such a conference was held. Israel and the United States boycotted it. The biggest and most frequent violators of human rights, killing 2 + million civilians beginning 2003 this time. Continued violations since 1940, who are the actual victims of WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDES, and PROPAGANDA.
The conference cannot make binding decisions, but could increase international criticism of Israel’s policy in the territories, especially regarding the settlements, and Death Squads.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 13, 2015
Reply

US govt. serves as rubber stamp for Israeli policy: Richard Forer:

The government of the United States basically serves as a rubber stamp for Israeli policy, says Richard Forer, a political commentator.

Israel could not have maintained its occupation without both the moral and the financial support of the United States, Forer, author of Transforming Fear into Compassion, said in an interview with Press TV on Tuesday.

The United States gives Israel more money for their defense, for their military, than Israel itself spends out of its own coffers, he said.

As part of efforts to put more pressure on the Palestinians for joining the ICC, Israel has also decided to impose economic sanctions against the Palestinian Authority (PA). It has already frozen the transfer of monthly tax revenues and customs payments it collects on behalf the PA. The freeze involves 127 million dollars worth of value-added tax (VAT) and customs duties on Palestinian goods that pass through Israel.

The freeze involves 127 million dollars worth of value-added tax (VAT) and customs duties on Palestinian goods that pass through Israel.

After freezing the transfer of tax revenues to the PA, Israel is taking additional steps to punish the Palestinians for their request to join the International Criminal Court at The Hague.

A senior Israeli official said on Sunday that Tel Aviv would be contacting pro-Israel members of the US Congress to ensure the enforcement of legislation stipulating that if the Palestinians initiate any action against Israel at the ICC, the State Department would have to stop American aid to the PA, which comes to some $400 million annually.

Forer also noted the extent of US devotion to Israels interests, pointing to a new article written by Dennis Ross, former chief negotiator for the United States for the Middle East. The article, titled Stop Giving Palestinians a Pass, was published by the New York Times on Sunday.

Forer said that other members of the US negotiating team described Ross as Israel’s lawyer while Israeli negotiators admitted that Dennis Ross is more pro-Israel when it comes to negotiations than they are.

Basically Israels attitude [towards the Palestinian people] is How dare you complain about our oppression of your people? How dare you complain about the fact that we have killed, ethnically cleansed and dispossessed your entire people? You should keep your mouth shut and let us continue treating you like second-class citizens, he said.
America is a rubber stamp for Israel, because the agents of Israel have occupied every cornet of power in the government, corporations, and media of USA..When Israel speaks, it does so thru the mouth, and fist of USA.. I am simply aware that Israel, controls the monetary power of the world, and with that monetary power, they control the political power, the economic power, and the military power, so they get anything they want.

Israel and policies of the USA congress will lead to a nuclear war and destroy our planet several times over, Israhell says so, they will blow us all up if they don’t get it all, THEIR terms.
The United States has given them enough nuclear power to do so.
The disrespect for the American people after all the money taken
by Zionist criminals. Our being considered as 3rd class people ” Gentile-Slaves”
it is time for AMERICA to Boycott Israel, and rid ourselves of AIPAC lobby +++

Ronald L. Waldron
January 14, 2015
Reply

Ronald L. Waldron says:
January 1, 2013 at 6:20 pm

President Obama :

Now is the time. Demad an audit of the Fed. There is no better
time then right now!!

Petitions to follow..
Ronald L. Waldron says:
January 13, 2014 at 4:20 pm

President Obama:

We the people are requesting an Audit of the Fed. There is no better time
then right now. The last Audit was 1953 by president Eisenhower.

It certainly warrants an Audit. The claims are that Fort Knox was emptied by
the Johnson administration.

Several request have been made over the years. Ron Paul made such a request
a few years back. None has been considered.

January 14, 2015.
We Demand an Audit
of America’s Gold in Fort Knox!
SIGN THE PETITION TO CONGRESS:
Several signatures on this PETITION !!!!!!!!!!

Ronald L. Waldron
January 19, 2015
Reply

Rabbi Fischer and guest, Concern-Troll over House Intelligence Committee “Moooz-Lum”.

Comments (3)

#1 by Mark Propheter on January 18, 2015 – 6:04 pm

OH MY GOD!
THE MUSLIMS ARE COMING! THE MUSLIMS ARE COMING! THE MUSLIMS ARE COMING! THE MUSLIMS ARE COMING! THE MUSLIMS ARE COMING!
RING THE CHURCH BELLS!

#2 by CK on January 19, 2015 – 2:56 am

Two whole Muslims in the House of Representatives? Yahwah help us! They’re taking over!

#3 by Ron Wal on January 19, 2015 – 6:42 am

So What! After the Republicans & Zionist partners corruption and Stealing
us blind, we need change. There isn’t much left for us Americans, anyhow.

#4 by Allen D. Post on January 19, 2015 – 11:09 am

You are so right Ron. If a Zionist can’t Eat it, Drive it, or Screw it .They kill it, steal it or sell it to China.

The Number one thing we need to fight in America is the
occupation of congress by the Zionist organized crime
syndicate, AIPAC, Israel, and Republicans..

Ronald L. Waldron
January 24, 2015
Reply

Taking Millions in Payoffs: USA political culture of most politicians & Zionism.

U.S. Says Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver Took Millions in Payoffs, Abusing Office. Zionist Syndicate involvement that has become a standard practice in local, state, and federal politics. It will take a government shutdown to clean it up, but with their control of all agencies under Homeland Security. The leadership being duel citizens loyal to Israel it will not happen. The only way is to do away with the “Bush-Cheney” agency .
President Obama should by executive order demand that each agency with-out mossad, aipac, Israeli involvement clean house. Top to bottom.

Watch out. They will sacrifice Minions to protect the top
leadership. The foreign lobbies such as AIPAC has to be
dissolved.

Of course the Republican Party will be at a loss, their
complete leadership will be gone, gone, gone.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 25, 2015
Reply

Israel’s Netanyahu Was Imported by GOP to Ensure a War With Iran:

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyah

They have a need to continue WAR, murder and mayhem, who is speaker of the HOUSE, Republican Crime boss. Bossman Netanyahu spends more time
on The Zionist owned Media than any one else. Foreign leader running our congress. IF that is not TREASON by Boehner, it is dam QUEER.
John Boehner secretly invited Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu to Washington to help him craft a super-majority in Congress to join his veto over-ride effort of Obama’s new sanctions on Iran. Will he succeed?
Published: January 24, 2015 | Authors: Juan Cole | Truthdig | Op-Ed

Republican House Majority leader John Boehner secretly invited Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu to Washington to address Congress and then once it was set up he let Barack Obama know about it.

The reason for bringing Netanyahu is that Boehner wants to craft a super-majority in Congress that can over-ride Obama’s veto of new sanctions on Iran. He doesn’t have enough Republican votes to do so, but if he can get Democrats beholden to the Israel lobbies of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee to join the veto over-ride effort, he might succeed.

This sure shows that the Republican Drunks can not do the jobs
they are elected or court appointed to do.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 25, 2015
Reply

To bring the leader of our worst enemy before congress to
convince congress to vote for foreign interest over our own,
to vote against our President, to vote with a Party that has an
AGENDA completely inconsistent with the needs of US the
American people. WE WANT ARREST MADE FOR TREASON.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 27, 2015
Reply

AIPAC: The Israeli Foreign Lobby with chapters in all States.

They have representatives such as Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver Took Millions in Payoffs, Abusing Office. Zionist Syndicate involvement that has become a standard practice in local, state, and federal politics. It will take a government shutdown to clean it up, but with their control of all agencies under Homeland Security. The leadership being, duel citizens loyal to Israel, it will not happen. The only way is to do away with the “Bush-Cheney” agency .Home-Land Security, a direct pipe-line to Israel. LARGEST SYNDICATE LOBBY, WORLD-WIDE. Many more Sheldon’s in each City, State, and Federal governing agencies.

There is no denial from any USA, UK, Canadian, or Israeli official.

There is a great deal of concern regarding infiltration into our educational institutions, such as Harvard Law, and many more. Professors & Molesters. On our campuses, AND our Congress, corporations, Banks, Wall Street, and evidently our Courts, even our Supreme Court with the decision regarding campaign financing.

The Republican Party, completely influenced by Zionist AIPAC and other such organizations loyal only to Israel.. CONGRESS, accepting a foreign dictator, Israel’s Netanyahu Imported by GOP to Ensure a War With Iran: An attempt to influence (BUY_OFF) enough Democrats to give them 60+ votes to over-ride our president. Note: Our president has a 50% approval rating, compared to a15% approval of this Republican controlled Congress. A leader of our worst enemy, speaking on the floor of OUR congress. “WHAT TO HELL” Invited by our Treasonous republican crime bosses..

Americans, taking surveys, polls, and interviews. We see the results. We also hear the bitching in the work place, at home, at the coffee shops, bowling alleys, clubs, organizations and Union meetings.

YET, when it comes to registering to vote, getting off your couch potato asses to vote, we see a completely different result.

IF YOU DON’T VOTE, DON’T BITCH, THE RESULTS COMES DOWN TO THIS FACT. ANY UNSATISFACTORY ELECTION IS YOUR FAULT IF YOU DO NOT VOTE.

WHAT WILL YOU DO TO CHANGE IT ???

Ronald L. Waldron
January 28, 2015
Reply

SWINDLER’S LIST: A BRIEF LOOK AT THE RACKET: WHO is in charge of most everything ? WHO really won the WAR, & War, & War, and now we want another for them to win and more War after that. Who is kidding WHO.AFTER several years of watching the concern of the American PEOPLE, I began to question, to read, to studying the changes I have watched happen during my years on earth. Born 06/28/1943. My Dad fought in that WAR, he was a tail-gunner for the ARMY AIR CORP. He received sever injuries, he had a large % of disability that he would never ask for any payment. If asked why he always replied, I gave what I gave for My God & Country.
I remember listening to our then President Truman on the radio, back prior to TV. Next was President Eisenhower, the first president I saw on a TV. THE NATIONAL patronage by voters, a government that seen real hard times yet brought the USA into OUR industrial age. Bi-Partisan politics. American at the time.You think back to Schools, Teachers, preachers, Business (private family owners), the corner store, the communities, Bankers, Brokers, and Auto Dealers. ” real unions”. Fair wages for A GOOD DAYS WORK. (Two way street then was meant to be “Good–Business”, “Good Government”.)
NOW JUMP AHEAD TO NOW..WOW !! (SYNDICATE) (MEDIA-CONGLOMERATE) (BILLION DOLLAR CAMPAIGN “DONATION” ONE SOURCE) (TAX, TAX, TAX, MORE TAXES–WHAT? NO TAX FOR WHO,TAX EXEMPTIONS, HOW MUCH!) WOW!! (WHO, WHO IS GOING BEFORE CONGRESS TO CONVINCE Them about going into another WAR–Netanyahu–really, some one must be kidding no one could be that dam stupid. Well, I guess when it comes to funds and other bennies, they justify such on the only bi-partisan agreements we see and witness. TREASON
We elected several women from both parties in Nov. I’m sure they ran for office to Help Break the glass ceiling all the WAY. They came to serve the American people, and the communities they each came from.They came to help solve problems not create more. A bi-partisan unity, moral values, ethics, integrity, with out Party Politics and foreign agendas. I think and believe they will read the bills, research, investigate, and will be transparent to the PEOPLE OF THESE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
Human rights will matter, the Middle Class does matter. I think that the 15% approval rating does matter, and change is coming.
MAY PEACE FOR ALL PEOPLE BE THE AGENDA. I TRUST THAT IT WILL BE–I TRUST THE JUNIOR CONGRESS TO DO THE CORRECT THING ACCORDINGLY. THEY WILL STAND UP TO THE GIANTS WITH A SLING SHOT IF NECESSARY. THEY WILL FIGHT AGAINST THE CORRUPTION WE HAVE WITNESSED FOR THE PAST 67 YEARS. 1948–2015. RE-THINK ZIONISM….I HOPE THE CHALLENGE IS RECOGNIZED FOR WHAT IT IS, AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE ABOVE ALL ELSE.

R.L.W.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 30, 2015
Reply

There’s a long list of potential GOP presidential candidates out there none with proper ethics.

the WORST Republican potential presidential candidates ever

Jeb Bush
Chris Christie
Ted Cruz
Mike Huckabee
Sarah Palin
Rand Paul
Rick Perry
Mitt Romney
Marco Rubio
Rick Santorum
Donald Trump
Scott Walk

Voting for a Republican is like taking a P&J sandwich to a
Banquette.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 4, 2015
Reply

Subject: ” Massive Cover-up” Everything Government Top to Bottom..
Date: Wed, 04 Feb 2015 11:30:49 -0500
From: Ronald L. Waldron

JFK Shooting Was a Conspiracy: Warren Commission Member.

Many other killings, RFK–MLK +++

What we have always suspected. Israel’s mossad & USA-CIA did it.
Then the attack on the USS Liberty. 911 . WMD , Heroine, Terrorism.
Our worst enemy, the team of AIPAC, Israel, and USA congress.
The Trinity that does exist. (The Zionist syndicate).

Warren Commission staffer David Slawson, now an 83-year-old retired
law school professor, has come to believe that he and the
were victims of a “massive cover-up”,reports former New York Times
correspondent Philip Shenon.

” Massive Cover-up” Everything Government Top to Bottom..
Shamefully begins with controlled MEDIA & Bought out Congress.

Zionist Republican Party accepts 225 Million in bribes 2014.
Now accepting 890 Million more in bribes. Nothing more then TREASON.

( AIPAC – ISRAEL puppets on a string)

Ronald L. Waldron
February 9, 2015
Reply

DEAR JOHN:

We imagine you learned to day dream and fantasize a long time ago in your time of isolation.
(BUT) to state that the World needs American Leadership, when you and your party have a 15%
approval rating here in America is quite out there. “low-life scum” begins with our occupied
congress and AIPAC, Israeli leadership of our corrupt officials. Which includes you as being
Corrupt with the rest. You did not deserve to be a prisoner of WAR, (BUT) You certainly deserve
to spend the rest of your time in a Federal Prison along with the rest of the Republican Zionist
Syndicate and Treason committed on a regular basis.

We need officials that support America, and Americans. SCREW ISRAEL, and the rest of the
World. We don’t give a DAM for your globalization at the expense of us, our jobs,and our
standard of living.

IF YOU LISTENED to the People, us “Low life Scum”, you would find that 80% of America
are WAR PROTESTORS. Sick as hell of you DAM republican Zionist WAR MONGERS.
Only people that benefit, Israel, AIPAC, Oil Corps. OFFICIAL GREASED Palms, YOURS!!

AMERICA SHOULD SNUB, BOYCOTT, SANCTION, and BLOCK ISRAEL, AIPAC, AND ZIONISM. ” THAT IS EVERYTHING CORRUPT AND REPUBLICAN”

Biden to Snub Netanyahu, Skip Speech to Congress

Vice President Joe Biden will not attend a controversial speech Benjamin Netanyahu
is scheduled to make to Congress next month, in a new White House snub of the Israeli
prime minister.

No Democrat should be there for any pleading, begging, lying , distorting facts, or manipulation
by the prime minister of our worst enemy, Nut any a hu.

No more, no more, no more war, money, weapons, aid, or support for any reason.

Send any one attending, home with the trash that was invited as a slam against our president.

The corrupt money path for the Republican Party, and Zionist movement.

Vote the Bastards out of office. They should be charged with TREASON.

From our forefathers to 1948, It was freedom OF religion. Now because of Anti-Christian, Anti-Christ Zionism, We Americans need freedom FROM A RELIGION !!

Voting for a Republican is like taking a P&J sandwich to a Banquette.

REPUBLICANS CAN NOT LEAD, THEY FOLLOW ZIONIST LEADERS, AND THE JEWISH LOBBY AIPAC. ”

Remember: Governor Jeb Bush, State of Florida during the 2000 Election Fraud, The corrupt chad count, and Brother George being appointed by a COURT as
president. The most corrupt Election and handling ever. Involvement Family Friend Whacken-Hut Security, and Mr. Rider ” Rider-Truck”. Corruption ? WHAT ELSE..
We do not need more of the same syndicate corruption and BUSH family connection to it. ” FAITH_BASED–no–ZIONIST_BASED.”
DO AWAY WITH DHS, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY, THE PIPE LINE STRAIGHT TO ISRAEL..CREATED BY BUSH/CHENEY.

Homeland Security Chief Johnson: Terrorist Sleeper Cells in US Now: That is for certain, they are called Mossad,or IDF, Intel4Israel, sanctioned here by our ” D.H.S.”,
COMPLETELY RUN BY AND FOR ISRAEL. TREASON BY OUR CONGRESS STAFFERS DO THE WORK??

SWINDLER’S LIST: A BRIEF LOOK AT THE RACKET:
WHO is in charge of most everything ? WHO really won the WAR, & War, & War, and now we want another for them to win and more War after that. Who is kidding WHO.AFTER several years of watching the concern of the American PEOPLE, I began to question, to read, to studying the changes I have watched happen during my years on earth. Born 06/28/1943.
My Dad fought in that WAR, he was a tail-gunner for the ARMY AIR CORP. He received sever injuries, he had a large % of disability that he would never ask for any payment. If asked why he always replied, I gave what I gave for My God & Country.
I remember listening to our then President Truman on the radio, back prior to TV. Next was President Eisenhower, the first president I saw on a TV. THE NATIONAL patronage by voters, a government that seen real hard times yet brought the USA into OUR industrial age. Bi-Partisan politics. “American at the time”. You think back to Schools, Teachers, preachers, Business (private family owners), the corner store, the communities, Bankers, Brokers, and Auto Dealers. ” real unions”.
Fair wages for A GOOD DAYS WORK. (Two way street then was meant to be “Good–Business”, “Good Government”.)
NOW JUMP AHEAD TO NOW..WOW !! (SYNDICATE) (MEDIA-CONGLOMERATE) (BILLION DOLLAR CAMPAIGN “DONATION” ONE SOURCE) (TAX, TAX, TAX, MORE TAXES–WHAT? NO TAX FOR WHO,TAX EXEMPTIONS, HOW MUCH!) WOW!! (WHO, WHO IS GOING BEFORE CONGRESS TO CONVINCE Them about going into another WAR–Netanyahu–really, some one must be kidding no one could be that dam stupid.) ” Maybe the majority leader, or speaker of the house.”
Well, I guess when it comes to funds and other bennies, they justify such on the only bi-partisan agreements we see and witness. TREASON AMERICAN POLICY HAS IN REALITY BEEN A FOREIGN POLICY THAT STINKS. IT has made many more enemies then it has made Friends, because of illegal occupation. Make PEACE the AGENDA. Sanctions have worked many times on others.
We elected several women from both parties in Nov. I’m sure they ran for office to Help Break the glass ceiling all the WAY.
They came to serve the American people, and the communities they each came from.They came to help solve problems not create more. A bi-partisan unity, moral values, ethics, integrity, with out Party Politics and foreign agendas. I think and believe they will read the bills, research, investigate, and will be transparent to the PEOPLE OF THESE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
Human rights will matter, the Middle Class does matter. I think that the 15% approval rating does matter, and change is coming.
MAY PEACE FOR ALL PEOPLE BE THE AGENDA. I TRUST THAT IT WILL BE–I TRUST THE JUNIOR CONGRESS TO DO THE CORRECT THING ACCORDINGLY. THEY WILL STAND UP TO THE GIANTS WITH A SLING SHOT IF NECESSARY.
THEY WILL FIGHT AGAINST THE CORRUPTION WE HAVE WITNESSED FOR THE PAST 67 YEARS. 1948–2015. RE-THINK ZIONISM….I HOPE THE CHALLENGE IS RECOGNIZED FOR WHAT IT IS, AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE ABOVE ALL ELSE.
Please be the leaders you were elected to be. Not lead by the elite purse STRAPS of the corrupt.
R.L.W.

There’s a long list of potential GOP presidential candidates out there none with proper ethics.

The WORST Republican potential presidential candidates ever

Jeb Bush
Chris Christie
Ted Cruz
Mike Huckabee
Sarah Palin
Rand Paul
Rick Perry
Mitt Romney
Marco Rubio
Rick Santorum
Donald Trump
Scott Walker

Voting for a Republican is like taking a P&J sandwich to a Banquette.

From our forefathers to 1948, It was freedom OF religion. Now because of Anti-Christian, Anti-Christ Zionism, We Americans need freedom FROM A RELIGION !!

Following the Zionist leaders—AND—Not a DAM thing they represent is Kosher .

On 2/9/2015 9:59 AM, John McCain wrote:
> GOP
> Ronald L.,
> Last month, a group of anti-war protestors burst into a critical Senate committee hearing.
> Some people were surprised to hear me call these radical protestors “low-life scum.” But I stand by those comments.
> I refused to sit silent while our former secretaries of state were physically threatened as they testified about the global challenges to our national security.
> It was the most disrespectful, disgraceful and despicable thing I’ve ever seen.

Allen D. Post
March 13, 2015
Reply

FACE IT!! This is now, very much FRIDAY the Thirteenth,
and we are now the UNITED STATES OF ISRAEL.
OUR congress bought and sold 2014. Made legal by Our ? Supreme Sleeping Court.
Now 2015–600 Million already committed to the Republican
party campaigns. DONATIONS or CORRUPTION..

” WE KNOW IT IS JUST THE S.O.P. for the G.O.P.”

Ronald L. Waldron
March 15, 2015
Reply

ZIONISM, AIPAC, Israel, All main stream Media owned by Zionist
with foreign interest, and by HUGE CONTRIBUTIONS OWN THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, AND A PERCENTAGE OF DEMOCRATS.

The most disrespectful, disgraceful and despicable thing we’ve ever seen is the foreign influence on our congress, and the foreign
infiltration into all of our regulatory agencies, including our educational institutions, of law, political science, medical, financial
institutions, and last but certainly not the least of importance is the
religious propaganda, and the stealing of JEWISH IDENTITY BY
the ” Zionist organized crime syndicate GOD-FATHERED by AIPAC.”

President Obama, who will not and has not accepted the influence
of Zionist money or bowed down to their demands. Who also, like
Hillary Clinton, avoids the internal links of the corruption, and the
PIPE LINE directly to Israel. THE SAME ISRAEL, that maintains
NUCLEAR weapons, with out signing a non-proliferation agreement,
allows no inspections, and runs a complete GENOCIDE against
Palestine. (OUR CHRISTIAN HOLY-LAND).

WHICH, by the way is done so against the belief of the TRUE
JEWISH people and their FAITH.

ZIONISM, is the Worlds worst enemy, and presently is the
only ally of the USA republican congress.

Will the American people wake up and recognize who has and
is taking everything away from us for the benefit of ZIONIST
ISRAEL and the Syndicate that is DRUGGING our Society.

GET OUT THE VOTE, VOTE AGAINST THE FOREIGN
INTEREST. VOTE FOR AMERICA AND AMERICANS.

AMERICA, should be our only interest. Stay with in our own
borders, and protect what remains with-in our own borders.

DEMAND SANCTIONS ON ISRAEL. DISMANDLE AIPAC, and
any other such treasonous organization with-in our borders.

My letter to congress, Please feel free to sign it.

Ronald L. Waldron

Rolans
March 17, 2015
Reply

‘Anti-Semitism’ was never, is not now and never will be some ‘unsolved mystery’. Zionist Jews have been hated throughout history because of their behavior which is a product of the way they think. Their thinking is rooted in self-worship (God’s chosen people) mixed with criminal inclinations as inculcated into their ‘value system’ via the Torah and its various heroes and heroines who all engaged in criminal, illicit behavior. The very first recorded instance of ‘Anti-Semitism’ was Abraham and Sarah being kicked out of Egypt after Pharaoh discovered that he got snookered by Abraham who sold his own wife Sarah to him as a concubine under the guise that Sarah was Abraham’s ‘sister’. The infamous ‘enslavement’ of the Israelites as recorded in the Old Testament was the result of Pharaoh coming to understand that they were a treacherous, double-dealing people who could not be trusted, and especially during a time of war. This holds true to today, our officials hood winked. All do to their own greed, and self-interest.

The only ‘madness’ that needs to be tackled is Zionist Judaism, Zionism thinking and the criminal behavior that it has always produced throughout history. Once this has been accomplished, those who have been prisoner to this form of mental illness will be freed of their bondage and thus, ‘Anti-Semitism’ will be eradicated. In America, THE PEOPLE need to realize how they have been SOLD out by their Government officials and religious leaders, that now are all wrapped up in “FALSE-HOODS”. Which has led to 19 Trillion National Debt. Out sourcing of thousands of jobs. Reduction of our own security, while fighting, and paying all cost and loss of life, wealth, and resources all for the benefit of the ZIONIST ISRAEL. Zionism is a political movement by the 1% and wealthy for globalization and World-wide dominance with Fascist control of ALL.

We the PEOPLE have to STAND UNITED, and fight against the Zionist. The same Zionist that have gained such power by corruption,
the illegal markets, and the control they have of congress and the Republican Party.

Allen D.
March 18, 2015
Reply

The Jews rejected Christ and God rejected them. The Gospel had been taken away from them and given to the Gentiles to preach to the world. More missionaries have come out of the United States over the past century than any other nation throughout history! God is using the Gentiles to get the job done! The Jews meanwhile are angry, jealous and still living in total rebellion against the Scriptures of God. It’s not just the Jews. South Korea is a hateful nation against the Lord, Japan, China, Russia… all hateful against Jesus Christ. In fact, the Lord said THE WORLD hates Him and will also hate Christians (John 15:19). The nation of Israel is no more righteous today than Communist Russia. You actually have more religious freedom as a Christian in Russia than you do in Israel today.

Having said all this, let me say, God does NOT tell us in the Scripture to idolize Israel. It’s just as sinful as for Roman Catholics to idolize Mary. Jews are dirty, rotten, hell-deserving sinners just like YOU and ME (Romans 3:10,19-23; Ecclesiastes 7:20). As sinners, we all need the Savior, Jesus Christ. Acts 10:43 says that the Old Testament prophets preached the same Gospel as in the New Testament. Acts 10:43, “To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.” You won’t even find the Gospel on the Christians United For Israel (CUFI) website, because they don’t care about the Gospel.

The only mention of Jesus and the Gospel on CUFI.org were in the blog (forum) section by web visitors, arguing over Zionism. Israel rejects Jesus Christ!!! CUFI promotes… Israel, Israel, Israel!!! Jerusalem is their god! They’re exploiting the precious name of Jesus to promote Zionism, which is a horrible religion of worshipping the Jews and the nation of Israel. This is a false religion, totally unbiblical and the abominable sin of idolatry. Not one Verse in the Bible tells Christians to idolize the Jews nor Israel; nor Mary nor the pope; nor anything nor anyone else other than Jesus Christ, God in the flesh (1st Timothy 3:16 – King James Bible for all Scriptures), Who is the Word of God (John 1:1-3,14; Revelation 19:13).

Born-Again Christians Are God’s People

The Bible plainly teaches that one is not a true Jew biologically, but spiritually, that is, only if you’ve been born-again and thus, are now related to Abraham by both having the same heavenly Father…

Romans 2:29, “But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.”

The Lord chose Abraham’s seed because He knew that Abraham would teach His children His Commandments (Genesis 26:5). The promise was always through a line of faith. Although Esau was Jewish, the promise only applied to Jacob because he had faith in Jesus Christ (the coming Messiah) and Esau didn’t. Because of their rebellion, God has set Israel aside until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled (which means until the Rapture occurs). In the Tribulation period, God will once again deal with Israel. 144,000 saved Jews will preach the Gospel to the world. God will purge Israel to prepare her to receive her King at the Second Coming, when Jesus returns to establish His literal reign from the throne of David in Jerusalem over the entire world. Christ will reign for 1,000 years (called the Millennium). Every born-again believers is joined to Israel…

Zechariah 2:10-12, “Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the LORD. And many nations shall be joined to the LORD in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto thee. And the LORD shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

Galatians 3:26-29 explains…

Galatians 3:26-29, “For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.”

Did you read that? Every born-again person will be heirs of the promises made to Abraham’s seed. All Christ-rejecting Jews will be cast into the Lake of Fire to suffer the wrath and vengeance of God for ever and ever with no hope of redemption. You can escape this coming wrath through faith in the blood of Jesus Who died, was buried and rose again for our sins (Romans 5:9; 1st Corinthians 15:1-6; Romans 1:16; Ephesians 2:8-9 – references to King James Bible only).

All the promises made by God to Israel apply to you too as a Gentile if you are saved. African-Americans have a Biblical right to claim all the promises made to Israel in the Scriptures. That’s exactly what Galatians 3:29 says. I am of the seed of Abraham, and a heir according to God’s promise to Abraham. Now you know why the Jews hate the New Testament so much! It bursts their bubble that Jews are not gods walking the earth after all. God is NO respecter of persons (Romans 2:11; Colossians 3:25; Acts 10:34).

Israeli Intelligence Assets In America

Ever since the Federal Reserve Bank was started in 1913, America has been taken over by the Rothschild banksters and their allies. Thankfully, God is still on His throne and our time is very short during this temporal life. I’m ready to go when the Lord wants me home in Heaven. God is in control of eternity, where NO ONE can conspire against him, nor usurp His authority. One day EVERY knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is King of kings and Lord of lords (Philippians 2:9-11). It’s a certainty!

Everyone from Larry King, to Gene Simmons, to Jerry Lewis, to George Burns, to Woody Allen… and hundreds more Jews have changed their names to conceal their Jewishness. Again, the issue is not about being Jewish, it is simply the fact that few Americans realize the Jewish control over America. We have lost control of our country. Our economy has been hollowed out, we are in massive debt, our jobs are all gone, tens-of-millions of people have either lost their home or will never be able to afford one one, and things are going to get MUCH worse. What a joke to hear Jack Chick and others ministers claim that the U.S. doesn’t help Israel enough. Israel controls America!!!

The facts cannot be denied. The newsmedia is Jewish controlled and lies to the public continually. When I went to get my neck surgery in 2009, I stayed in West Hollywood, California, where I saw Jewish temples all over the place. It is no secret that Hollywood movies are saturated with Zionist propaganda, blasphemy against Jesus Christ, cursing in God’s name, sexual filth and perversion, and every form of sin imaginable. Do a web search under “Jews control American government.”

As noted in the book, “In Search of Anti-Semitism,” by Leonard Dinnerstein, former U.S. President Nixon acknowledged the Jewish Media Barons influence in America. President Nixon said:

“Politicians are often controlled by the media … People have to realize that the Jews in the U.S. control the entire information and propaganda machine, the large newspapers, the motion pictures, radio and television, and the big companies. And there is a force that we have to take into consideration.”

Now you know why they ousted Nixon as President. He was too honest, which is exactly why they killed Kennedy.

—webservant of Jesus-is-Savior.com

Who Is A Liar?

By David J. Stewart

The Bible warns that any religion which denies that Jesus came in the flesh is an antichrist. Mormons believe that Gabriel became Jesus, and that Adam will be the coming Messiah. Jews, Jehovah’s Witnesses and Muslims all deny the Son.

1st John 2:22-23, “Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son. Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father: (but) he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.”

Anyone who denied that Jesus is the Messiah is a liar and antichrist. There are many antichrists; but only one ANTICHRIST (the Beast who is coming). The whole Judaic religion is of antichrist.

Definition of Zionism: an organization of so-called Jews whose goal is to create a nation for Jews.

Definition of Judaism: Jews collectively who practice a religion based on the Torah and the Talmud.

The Talmud is supposedly oral tradition which God spoke to Moses and then was passed down from one generation to the next, finally written in the form of a book when the Jews were taken into Babylonian captivity. The Talmud is a fraudulent manuscript, a fake, which claims that Jesus was the bastard child of a Roman soldier, calling Mary a whore. The Talmud hates Jesus Christ, claiming that He is boiling in Hell in urine and excrement. This is what Jewish rabbis in Judaism think of Jesus Christ our Lord.

The true purpose of the Zionists are to SUBVERT ETHICS, POLICIES, MEASURES, RELIGIONS, GOVERNMENTS AND BANKS. All influential people trapped into coming under the control of the Illuminati, plus the students who had been specially educated and trained, were to be used as agents and placed behind the scenes of all governments as experts and specialists. This was so they would advise the top executives to adopt policies which would in the long-run serve the secret plans of the Illuminati one-world conspiracy and bring about the destruction of the governments and religions they were elected or appointed to serve.

Collectively, all Christ-rejecters are referred to as antichrist in the Bible. This is not THE ANTICHRIST (who will be a literal man, a world leader during the Tribulation period). As Born-again Christians we are all a part of the Body Of Christ. Likewise, all those on Satan’s side who confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh are considered, antichrist.

Israeli Intelligence Assets in America (entire newsmedia controlled by evil, Dr. Texe Marrs)

A lot of Christian churches are holding hands with Jews today. In reality they’re holding hands with Sodom and Egypt (Revelation 11:8). The coming Antichrist will likely be a Jew. If are a involved with Freemasonry, then you are yoked together with Sodom. Demonic Kabala (Jewish mysticism). Judaism is Freemasonry and Freemasonry is Judaism. We should not stay too long in Sodom, or Hell will erupt. Folks, get separate. God commands us to COME OUT FROM AMONG THEM (2nd Corinthians 6:14-17).

COME OUT!!! We should be friends with Jews and Freemasons, to try to lead them to the Lord; but you can’t be in bed with their evil deeds and devil gods. It’s sickening what they’re getting away with; but my heart rejoices to know that God will not let them get away with evil for ever. Judgment Day is coming (Ecclesiastes 12:24).

I’m not calling anyone a liar. I’m standing behind the Bible. The Word of God is calling anyone a liar who denies that Jesus is the Son of God, the Christ (Messiah). Jehovah’s Witnesses teach that Michael the archangel became Jesus. Seventh Day Adventists believe the same exact heresy. END

Christians, and all others should reject ZIONISM, they are criminals,
They stolen all that is GOOD, and are destroying our nation.

DEMAND total reform of government, the officials, and the propaganda of Zionist.

Practice reading and researching the TRUTH about ZIONIST.

Allen D.
March 22, 2015
Reply

GREAT DAY IT IS THIS MORNING: 3/22/15

Israel, Aipac, MOSSAD, Republicans, and CORRUPTION. After 14 years of the attempts to wake the International community to
the disasters of ZIONISM, the stealing of the actual Jewish Identity, and the forming of the largest world wide
organized crime syndicate. We are seeing a complete INTERNATIONAL DEMAND FOR Sanctions, Boycotts, Blockades, and Inspections of ISRAEL’S Nuclear Arsenal, and such facilities.

American people have begun to demand an end to the foreign policies, and the occupation of our congress, and our Home-Land Security
Agency by Israel and Zionism.

Question the Zionist contributions to the Republican Candidates, $300 Million 2014 to control the Senate. Now, prior to 1/01/15,
commitments of $600 Million Plus to the Republican candidates with out knowing who is running, what their policies and ideals
are. They already know they will be PUPPETS of ISRAEL regardless. Also evident with individual Democrats.

We never have had real support for the WAR on DRUGS, and OIL consumption. We have WARS for the control of OIL & DRUGS by the
syndicate. RESULTS OF CRIMES COMMITTED — $21 trillion NATIONAL DEBT left for us lower class GENTILES. YET the 1% that controls
85++ of the MONEY have gotten TAX breaks to 0% in some cases.

Out-sourcing of our economy & jobs for slave labor, inferior products & parts creating huge losses for us the consumers.
Such has been done by faulty TRADE agreements, and no enforcement of the terms of agreements. If you would look around,
investigate you will fine that ALL regulation agencies have been cut & cut to the point of elimination.

ONLY recourse is for US, the working class, unemployed, seniors, Minorities, House wives, mothers, VETERANS working women,
and the TRUE MORAL JEWISH PEOPLE to stand united. UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL. OUR Political Party is the Labor Party which is represented by Democrats.

OUR ONLY CHANCE TO CHANGE IS TO VOTE FOR LABOR INTENSE DEMOCRATS, AND DEMAND, DEMONSTRATE, PICKET, and BOYCOTT AIPAC & Israel.

What makes government believe we support more WAR, that we support ZIONISM, and that we should not place sanctions on Israel.
That Israel is an Ally, when they are our worst enemy, right here with in our own boarders, Congress, Universities, State
Capitols. Religious Institutions, Wall Street, and Banking.

WHY? is it that our FED has not been Audited since 1950’s, and a complete refusal to do so. DEMAND IT AND NOW..

WE DEMAND AN AMERICAN ONLY GOVERNMENT. WE ARE NOT THE WORLD’S POLICE FORCE. WE DON’T POLICE OUR OWN..

Remember when you are listening to the main stream MEDIA,
just who owns the MEDIA. Who owns the Internet Servers.

Think, we use to get free TV, we use to have competitive
broadcasting. Competitive NEWSPAPERS once upon a
Time. AP. Editors all on the same ZIONIST page.

UNITE FOR PEACE, HERE, THERE, AND PALESTINE.

NO MORE OCCUPATION OF PALESTINE, OR WASHINGTON..

Bryant
March 23, 2015
Reply

This is actually a good A to Z on how to establish a strong online presence! Wonderful info, very newbie-friendly, comprehensive and thorough!

Allen D.
March 25, 2015
Reply

Thank You Bryant:

I have worked very hard for several years to get this information
out there. I actually began in 1966 after completing an Academy
for police, Taught at the time by FBI agents, along with other
enforcement agencies.

I had several conversations that verified my thinking, now all
those agencies are controlled by HOME-LAND SECURITY,
SUPPORTED by Republicans & foreign Zionist, and as you
have read AIPAC & Israel.

I also try to research the truth & facts & report such. After publishing six books, and facing all types of censorship, I found that this is
the only way to make a record of such.

I’m very disappointed with our occupied congress as 70% of people
are..

At least we have one President, President Obama that is willing to
fight the established corrupt system, doing so himself.

We were warned by President Eisenhower about this lobby, and
the foreign nature of it.

President Carter, both as president, and up to this date has
fought for PEACE. Peace for Palestine, and the World.

How-ever with the controlled MEDIA, and many other forms of
propaganda. The message fails reaching many people.

BUT There is a movement started. HELP spread the word.

RLW

Ronald L. Waldron
April 3, 2015
Reply

Republicans continue to receive an “F”, failure to represent the American people. We the American
people have spoken out by giving the republicans a less then 15% approval rating.

Their sole purpose is to represent foreign special interest, that being AIPAC and Israel. As we have
witnessed for several years their only leader is Netanyahu, inviting him to give congress his State of Israel
address. He spoke of the agenda he expects & demands from them, as usual they give him 100% and more.

Now spending 70% of the USA tax revenue for military operations, 300 foreign bases while closing BASES
here, making them into prisons for any civil disturbance that they expect.

A national DEBT of near 20 TRILLION. 47 Million Americans living below the poverty level, human needs here takes 5% of the budget.

Foreign policy: Military aid, foreign Aid, Private non-bid contracts. Triples the cost of WAR and Security for the Middle East. When sanctions and boycotts against Zionist Israel is the necessary action needed. Our worst enemy not ally. Billions accepted by the Republican Party from foreign interest groups. One example of the Treason
committed, Corruption and scandals smearing the United States. Such puts us all at risk, our Security is at risk
more from our own elected officials that bow down to Zionist Israel, Wall Street, and the idea of complete
globalization by Zionist.

Look close at your community. Each State has an AIPAC foreign lobby chapter with-in it. Involved in all
elections, national, State and local. All educational institutions, Medical Facilities, Banks, Legal & courts,
media, you name it legal or not. Illegal dominance in drug markets, prostitution, Gambling, Human
trafficking, Human organs, fraud, assassinations ( Journalist, Politicians, any critic), movies. Propaganda
specialist.

Now look close at the tax exemptions and prime properties with-in YOUR community. Reform is needed. All faiths, all religions, and all these FAITH BASED BUSINESSES. We middle class tax payers PAY.

HUGE corporations run by Zionist CEO’S & investors. Involves all industries. All chain stores & Business.
All regulatory agencies now run by their Home-Security Agency and pipe line.

If any law restricts them, they lobby and get it change. Power & Influence even over the SUPREME COURT.

The most sickening is the control over religious leaders, many are now millionaires, as is over one-half
of congress for the first time. Even though they murdered Christ, are nothing but evil, Churches also support
Zionist Israel. Please examine the World for the last 2015 years, and the changes of the last 65!!

The biggest joke of all this is calling Israel a Democracy and an Ally.

They control our lost assets, economy, and joblessness. We are all Gentiles (Their Slaves).

Why do they, Zionist & Republicans, hate President Obama, & representatives and Democrats that support
him?? BECAUSE HE IS NOT THEIR PUPPET, NOR ANY ONE ELSE’S. He is the American peoples leader.

He knows what needs to be done, he can not do it alone, he needs our support in return.
By donations we can afford, even if there is some sacrifice. BUT the following is what is really needed.

I say it, and most likely for the last time. I personally have a huge TARGET on my back. As you should
have figured by now. STAND UNITED—DIVIDED WE FALL. All your VOTES is what is needed.

Vote Republicans out. Vote Democrat, become informed, study the facts. Stay involved and DEMAND
the necessary reforms so needed. Demand check & Balance, Demand prosecution of corruption.

THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERING, AND YOUR COURTESY IN READING MY POST, AND DEDICATION FOR
THE LAST FOURTEEN YEARS WRITING & PREVIOUS WORK ON THE STREETS , FOLLOWING SUCH FROM
1966.

Just 3 years after President Kennedy was murder by Zionism. Why, because he was the other President
that was not their puppet.

There are no moral codes, ethics, or integrity in Zionism. Christians, get out of the old Testament

Try to stay safe, Happy, and Healthy. TRY to get it back, take it back. Register and vote, we win.
Don’t and we all lose.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 13, 2015
Reply

United WE Stand–Divided WE FALL !! We Stand behind You Hillary “Madame
President”.

Dear Hillary Clinton:

My name is Ronald L. Waldron. I’m sure you never have heard of me, but since
the 2000 Election Fraud in Florida. I became interested , and have done some activism. It angered me along with millions, to have a President appointed
by the COURT. From that date we have seen nothing but Caius in Washington,
DC, across the USA, and the WORLD.

We have developed a considerable amount of followers regarding policies of
the past that certainly, we as regular Americans recognize the failures of the last 60 years,
from the killing of President Kennedy on, the largest corrupt Foreign Special Interest
groups in the World donates Hundreds & Hundreds of Billions to the Republican Party
with-out knowing who is running. Who is in control ? You certainly have learned all there is
to know about TODAYS American Peoples determination to fight for what is right.

Which as we see it, the 14 Characteristics of Fascism have developed in the same period.

Please just ask the people to Stand-United behind you and Democrats to stop
the special interest and the power from it. Together, we can bring back the American
Ethics & Integrity to do the job of government by its people, all people.For AMERICA.
Ask them not for Billions of dollars, yes we need operating money, but what you are asking for
as a priority, is to Stand United, be registered to vote now, and I ASK from the bottom of
my heart, I want and need your votes, I promise you, I will be working for you the people
of America.

We are asking you to lead US, you know the real underneath truth, you know the
concerns we have regarding HOME-LAND SECURITY–Pentagon, and several committees.
Out-sourcing jobs, no-bid contracts, no regulation agencies, no real amount of
TRADE AGREEMENTS terms being enforced. WE WILL UNITE WITH YOU.

We as Americans can run the Governments Business, we have enough strong mined
people, with out Duel Citizenships in office, elected or appointed. It ends up foreign
policies & interest. We don’t need that type of leadership.

Sanctions seem to work well in all other incidents. No more Vetoes of what is right.

We supported Barack Obama, we stand with him. We will support & stand with you,
the heads to roll is already known by you & your team .

Stay safe, Healthy, and Happy;

We are praying Christian PRAYERS for you. God Bless the Clinton Family.

WE ask for all in the name of Gods SON, Jesus Christ.

Ronald L. Waldron
48 Hammond Street
Jamestown, N.Y. 14701

leadfoot1@twc.com

SEE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog

PEACE for ALL. NO MORE WAR. Protect our boarders, Globalization of Corruption by
the Syndicate of Zionism should END.

Please join this campaign. United–We Stand.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 16, 2015
Reply

DECEPTION, CORRUPTION, TREASON, AND DEFLECTION.

FALSIFIED MEDIA REPORTING BY ZIONIST OWNED NEWS CONGLOMERATES:
( All major news sources in the USA is owned and controlled by them)+++

Homeland Security AgencySad smile Developed by G.W. Bush, taking over all Federal
regulatory agencies. (And controlling Local & State agencies)

AIPAC (Syndicate Lobby), Israel (Our Worst Enemy), Zionist arranged & paid for
the murder of Devil(6) million True Jews that objected to forced take over of Palestinian
lands. The occupiers of the Republican Party, strictly foreign interest, Theft of the
Jewish Identity to develop such Religious State. The largest and corrupt group of
organizations with the financial means, and intent to take over control globally.

These people and their minions’ (R/Congress) have obstructed Democrats and
President Obama from doing anything benefitting We the American People.
Duel citizenship people placed in high offices dictating Foreign Policies.
Corruption wide spread across our country, chapters every-where.

Hillary Clinton has/is attacking these Special Interest groups, and the corruption
involved. Special FOREIGN interest groups, only interest being ISRAEL.

Today, after several notices of intent by the individual to fly his helicopter onto
capital lawn. Undetected, by the Security system. BULLSHIT—Set up and allowed
to follow through with an attack on Hillary Clinton’s campaign. Donations from
special interest from Saudi Arabia. Have the Saudi’s received anything from Hillary.

We have seen nothing from Republicans for the American people. 19 Trillion in Debt
for the WARS, and AID to & for Israel alone. Treason should be charge against them ,
what do we get? SILENCE on those issues. BUT stand-by. THE BUBBLE WILL BURST !
False Flag operations, again & again. We are just beginning the wake up call.
Years & years of developing the proof. This is not just a Conspiracy Theory.

This is the most important Election in our History. We must win as Americans.

United We Stand—Please Stand-up, Stand United. Stand with Hillary and Democrats.

It will not be easy to win this

Enough evidence of this issue is there to begin charges & prosecution. It will not happen
with Homeland Security in charge of all our Agencies.

The United Nations, Interpol, the International Court and Community must stop the
occupations, the preemptive Wars, The Genocides, and create World Peace for survival
of us all. Sanctions, Boycotts, Marshall Law, our entire existence DEPENDS ON IT !!

We all feel it. We all know it. Too many deny our governments involvement.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 18, 2015
Reply

IT IS TIME, GET BUSY WITH PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATION, BY RLW

Students- will there be any jobs ? People working for minimum wages- many with degrees’.
The unemployed- jobs outsourced-bad trade agreements. The disabled-Veterans & The Sick-
cutting benefits & treatment. The 47 Million living at or below poverty level- now they cut
food stamps & assistance. The Unions-most destroyed by past administrations, wages &
benefits cut. Factory workers-Plants closed. Call India for unemployment-Can they speak
English’e. Farmers see the Middle-man broker make money, while they see their own
profits drop, while cost GO higher. Seniors that have witnessed all of the American decline,
since World War 11. Economy, moral values, Ethics, Integrity, and fascism grow by leaps &
bounds.”Zionism”. 90% of Americans see the Elite 2% gain ownership of 85% of our money.

Women, minorities, all that face the discriminations of Zionism. Need to join with us.
United We Stand—Divided We Fall. Unite behind Hillary & The Democrats. Take control.

Most of them claim to be survivors of they own planned “Holocaust”—Zionist that were
the architects of murdering the True Torah Jews. That now control the Fed, Wall St.
Universities, The medical fields, Legal, media, Religious Institutions, and our congress
with a 15 % approval rating.

Picket & Demonstrate in front of these lobbies, in front of all Republican Campaign
head-quarters, in front of the CEO’S offices. In front of every AIPAC chapter offices in
your State, across our COUNTRY. In front of every major Media office.

Let Netanyahu know he is not welcome in OUR Country. That he does not control
our government, our beliefs, we recognize the motives & propaganda.

Let Hollywood know that the trash & immorality they promote will be demonstrated
against. Picket every event of promotion for Zionism.

Photograph the condemned builds, communities, the poor & suffering, the homeless,
the Hungary, the bridges, roadways, the infrastructure. The polluted rivers, lakes, and streams.
The poor air quality. Examine the cancer rates in communities such as West Valley, New York,
and the leaking nuclear waste site.

It is time for us to stand-up, stand united, now that they have moved everything out,
the money is in off shore accounts, we need to take what is left back and rebuild.

Demand reform after reform, and as HELEN stated, you’re not satisfied with our
system of Democracy, go back where you came from, SHOW THEM THE WAY OUT.

They have all the money. BUT we have the POWER to change it.

Demand that our Military returns home. Protect us and our boarders.
Demand sanctions, inspections, and return to the 67 Boarders, a Peaceful settlement.
No more vetoing UN sanctions. We will boycott them and the supporters of such.

Exercise your rights under the Constitution, before you lose them.

PLEASE STAND WITH US, DEMOCRATS FOR A BETTER TOMORROW.

Register—Volunteer, Demonstrate, Picket, write, voice, and VOTE.

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
April 30, 2015
Reply

UNITED WE STAND !! It is happening, we the people are uniting
and we will be heard. KEEP IT GOING.
.
WE will not be beaten by the 2%. their false religion, their stolen
assets or their bought .republican party.

Not a WAR, but by the coming revolution. SCORE 98 to 2.

JOIN us now,help us all win..

Ronald L. Waldron
May 7, 2015
Reply

WHAT CAN YOU & I DO TO HELP CHANGE THE POLITICAL
LANDSCAPE .

First Thing. Register to vote. Stand with us vote with us. Please
help to defeat the BIG money. Get involved your votes will
count toward Peace. GRASS ROOTS for Democrats & AMERICA.
Foreign Policies must change..

What Can WE Do ?

[Suggest a link for this category] [Notify a broken link]

Help BETTER WORLD LINKS & Spread the Word
WE ARE WHAT WE DO – how to change the world
Follow us on TWITTER and RETWEET good tweets
Like us on FACEBOOK and SHARE posts you like
“All that is necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing”
Support Better World Links – Volunteers & Coworkers Wanted !
HELP US build a better world – one LINK at a time !
10 Things You Can Do Now – and Feel Better!
Top 10 ACTIONS for a Better World
DO Something – Act Now!
LIVE SIMPLY !
GIVE More (UK)
STOP Watching TV ! – a waste of your precious time
HELP other DO-GOODERS! – Some INITIATIVES to SUPPORT! (by Norbert)
VOLUNTEER ! – do community service
Be an ETHICAL Consumer !
Buy FAIR TRADE
SELL your CAR
Eat LESS MEAT ! – for your health, the animals & the planet
EAT LESS – if you are overweight
67 WAYS to Change the World ! – Mandela Day
DO SOMETHING ! – Michael Moore on the (next) Financial Crisis
JUST DO IT – a tale of modern-day outlaws (2011 UK Film)
Every monday Matters – 52 ways to make a difference (Oprah)
CREDO Action (USA)
GREEN GUIDE – Greenpeace (USA)
NO PLASTIC BAGS Pledge – Leonardo Di Caprio (Archive)
11 Realistic Ways You Can Help Reduce GLOBAL WARMING
The Idealist.org Handbook to Building a Better World ! 3/09 (amazon)
Use BICYCLE, PUBLIC Transport or ECO-friendly CAR !
UK Carbon Footprint Project – Google (Archive)
Ecological Footprint Quiz – disposable planet (Archive)
The Green Ribbon Pledge – conserving energy, securing our future
Demand a World Without Nuclear Weapons: Sign the Declaration
A to Z of WATER SAVING Tips – BBC 5/03
Do Not Drink BOTTLED WATER ! (unless your local water supplies are unsafe)
Water Footprint (Archive)
11th HOUR – ACTION (Archive)
Stop SMOKING !
EXERCISE
Compass Online (UK) – direction for the democratic left
Find a PARTNER in Life
Kids Call – Save Life on Earth
Forget Shorter Showers: Why Personal Change Does Not Equal Political Change 7/09
Join the PEACE Movement
Join an ENVIRONMENT Group
Join a HUMAN RIGHTS Organization
Join the ONE WORLD Movement
Join a SOCIAL JUSTICE Organization
Noam Chomsky – What Can I Do?
IPPNW Peace Raffle (trusted)

ENCOURAGE ALL FAMILY MEMBERS, FRIENDS,AND
ASSOCIATES TO REGISTER TO VOTE., AND GET OUT AND
VOTE DEMOCRAT WITH US.

UNITED WE STAND..Fight against the corruption. VOTE

Ronald L. Waldron
May 15, 2015
Reply

Heroin Epidemic reaches our area High Schools:

No politician, Enforcement Agency, or media Journalist investigates the NSA & Pentagon’s “ Black Hole Money”.

The production of Heroin has more than Quadrupled, since the invasion of Afghanistan (2003) .

Many articles have been available that describes , Who, What, Where, when, & Why.

Start with a “complete” investigation of Richard Armitage, all his activities PAST & PRESENT.

Another top Republican appointee, with-in the “insider group” ( Zionist Crime Syndicate).

Racism, Genocide, murder, your choice. Ideology—both religious and secular Zionism.

They dump their products cheap into “Black & Hispanic” communities, most arrest are again
made there, on the street where most addicts purchase them. Blame those communities,
Create unrest and attention by media on it while “Black flag operations” continue such as
money for pervasive activities continue. JUST WATCH THE BOBBLE HEADS GIVE THE SAME
CANNED NEWS REPORTS. Same group with Cocaine some years back.

Zionist will make every attack they possible can from now until after Nov. 2016.
They will make every attempt to keep the working class, and the poor from voting.

PLEASE, all Americans do your absolute civic duty, take charge, NOW!!

STAND-UP: UNITED WE STAND__DIVIDED WE FALL.

WHAT can you & I do ?

First Thing. Register to vote. Stand with us vote with us. Please
help to defeat the BIG money. Get involved your votes will
count toward Peace. GRASS ROOTS for Democrats & AMERICA.
Foreign Policies and racial issues must change..

Republicans have blocked spending on our infrastructure for 16 + years.
Spending all on foreign projects, Foreign Defense, and foreign nation
building.

PEACE4ALL.COM

Allen D. Post
May 15, 2015
Reply

Absolutely, Democrats are the only ones that will ” BRING HOME THE BACON”.

People, lets do as this MAN advocates.

We can do this by STANDING UNITED.

i WILL JOIN THIS MOVEMENT, WILL YOU ALL DO THE SAME?

SAVE WHAT IS LEFT, REFORM ALL ASPECTS OF GOVERNMENT!

Katie Reed
May 15, 2015
Reply

I agree also. I’am a recent retired nurse.I will work my Butt off
campaigning for Hillary, and ALL other Democrats.

I REMEMBER all from the 50’s on. This is the truth, not to be
brushed off as being a Conspiracy Theory.

Even the Churches today do not represent the body of Christ,
nor the New Testament.

I know the difference when the communities were supported,
and now 47 million Americans live at or below the proverty
line.

Reforms are needed all the way around.

We have to get this information out there. We need to get
involved.

Get ready, Get set, GO_GO_GO.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 17, 2015
Reply

CHRISTIANS LEAVING ORGANIZED RELIGION, NOT THEIR MORAL STANDING AND DUTY TO MAN KIND:

President Jimmy Carter,is the most well know Church member that left the Church.
We all know some of the reasoning, and many more of us agree, and have done the same.
You should ask him for his reasoning. As for me, and many I know, here are some of the
reasons.

1. We believe in separation of Church & State. We never would have thought that
tax exemption was anything more than to invest such into the community we were to
assist. Or that leaders would be so greedy as to make themselves millionaires, at the
expense of the poor, the afflicted, the unemployed, those at & below the poverty
level.

2. We never thought that what we gave for such purpose, would be invested with Wall
Street, and that such would go toward the support of Defense contractors, and War
mongers. Or that our taxes would go 70% for defense of a foreign land, with a faith
completely contrary to our own.

3. We recognize who our true enemy is in this world. Yet our Church, organized religious
leaders, support the Enemy, and the Wars and loss of life they created. Palestine is only
one example of the False Flag operations of Zionist Israel. The Zionist of Russia supported
the Murdering of 6 million Torah Jews by Hitler, because they refused to go against what
they firmly believed in.

4. In 1948, the Palestinians fled their land. They did not fight, they did not resist, they
did not receive HELP. They were residing on what we called the Holy Land “THEN”.
A very peaceful community, as was the middle East.

5. We are disappointed with our government and religious organizations that will not
recognize the destruction they have created World Wide. GET THIS—The republicans
that receive countless funds from foreign interest lobbies, from huge monopolies,
and accept such bribes, will some day be prosecuted for the TREASON they are
committing .

6. The greatest Republican President we have seen, President Dwight D. Eisenhower,
advised Congress not to accept AIPAC as an American Lobby. That Israel’s interest
was their only aim. Now today, the largest foreign interest lobby in the world.
Near 50 Chapters in the USA. All over Europe, and Canada.
You check them out and what they are involved with. THEN you will understand
the controls, the human suffering & the tragedies they are totally responsible for.

7. The greatest Democrat President, President John F. Kennedy. He was murdered
at the hands of Zionist orders. He would not allow them to have nuclear war heads,
which they received from Mr. Johnson. 300 War heads, no non-proliferation agreement
to this day. No admitting it to this day. No inspections allowed. No friends, except
the bought out corrupt officials, not just here but China, Russia, and next N. Korea.

8. President Obama has made every attempt possible to bring back the America we
once knew. He has been blocked on almost every turn. The Republican Party will
only spend money on Defense, and Wars for Israel. As if it were our Defense.
Such would not be possible if it were not for the Zionist Organized Crime
Syndicate “Jewish—Mob” receiving full support of the Organized Religious Sector,
and the corrupt Republican Party, the Tea Party, and some members of the
Democrat Party. I Thank Him for all he has done and attempted to do.
I don’t believe the racist Churches or politicians realize the threats from Israel,
and Mossad our President has faced. I personally question Home Land Securities
loyalty to him or us. So many duel citizens with Israel involved with such.

9. It is Israel that will use Nuclear weapons in the future, not Iran. Iran like every
other Country in that World, seek to defend themselves against Israeli dominance.

10. We the people have the power to stop it. We are the majority, our votes together
count. Will we Stand United as one people against it, or will they destroy the entire
creation?

I wish for PEACE, LOVE, & HAPPINESS for all man kind. We should give all we can for
that goal. No more WAR, that has been dammed from the beginning of time.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 22, 2015
Reply

WE WANT A REAL DEBATE OF THE ISSUES !! CONSPIRACY THEORIES OR NOT. QUESTIONS GO UNANSWERED.

A MIDDLE CLASS REVOLT ? YOU BET !

Robert Reich, Op-Ed
While small business owners have contributed to the same Republican candidates and committees favored by big business
they are finally waking up to the fact they’re being screwed by big businesses. Is a revolt in their future? You-Bet !

Not only business, but the entire population of America are worried as Hell, the way our
government “ Republican Party” has abandoned America and We the people in general.

We want a true debate on the issues that to this point, politicians & media completely
ignore,”Stay Silent on”. Our foreign Policies, aid policies, influence of lobbies. Also foreign Lobbies, and
the power & influence their political contributions make. Duel citizenship voting in our
elections, plus holding government positions in all agencies, influence on our education
institutions, banking, and on & on.

The Kennedy assignations , witnesses of New Orleans, The USS Liberty, 911, weapons of mass destruction
intelligence or lack there of, False Flag operations of different categories such as terrorism,
weapon deals etc. etc. etc. The absolute need for reform in almost all areas. Infrastructure,
Employment, Trade agreements, military spending that is out of control, Home-Land Security
Espionage by duel agents in charge. Treason by congress taking bribe money.

We once had check & balance system. A transparent system of government.

We have gone from writing a CHECK and BALANCE the books. To writing CHECKS and JUGGLING the books.
To writing CHECKS for foreign development and protection, providing their complete
defense. Our loss of Life, injury, natural resources, and finances for their wars. All resting on our kids
for the next 10 generations. Now at 23+ trillion for national Debt which we can’t pay the Interest.

Lets really look at the BOOKS, and facts all the way around.

GO TO : GOOGLE and READ GO TO THE END & READ BACK. GAIN KNOWLEDGE BY SCANNING IT.

Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad peace blog.

Then distribute the information. Encourage all to register & vote accordingly !

UNITED WE STAND—STAND WITH US. PROGRESSIVE DEMOCRATS FOR AMERICANS.

THEN WE WILL TALK ABOUT WHY THIS CONGRESS HAS A 15% APPROVAL RATING !

Ronald L. Waldron
May 27, 2015
Reply

GOVERNMENT, ORGANIZED RELIGION, AND CORPORATE AMERICA: MARRIAGES MADE IN HELL TO BENEFIT ZIONISM:

When we talk about three things that should never be combined, government, Organized Religion, and Corporations . The massive power held by U.S. global corporations and the rich and powerful have made irreparable damage to America. Such organized Syndicate includes our Major Media System.
It’s only those who accept the very real possibility of Fascism and a Police State, that are the likely ones to carry out the self-sacrifice necessary for revolt.
The government will throw the book at or assassinate anyone who embarrasses them, Whistleblowers, alternative Journalist, or Activist.

If you have followed the events since the 2000 Elections, and Court appointment of the President, you can quite easily recognize the absurd power of
Zionist AIPAC, Israel, fascism, and the platform of the Republican Party. Total obstruction against repairing our infrastructure, or anything benefiting
the American people. Spending 70% of our budget on their foreign policy of WAR after War, and foreign aid to Israel. Increasing our National Debt
to such degree that we can never bail out of it.

This Republicanism makes the 2016 ELECTIONS the most important in the HISTORY of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

IF WE DO NOT STOP THEM BY VOTING THEM OUT OF OFFICE IN THIS ELECTION PERIOD. THE SHINGLE WILL READ: “

THE UNITED STATES OF ISRAEL
HOMELAND SECURITY: Formed by the Bush administration, top positions,
duel citizens with Israel and direct pipe line to Israel.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 30, 2015
Reply

A message from Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC)

Thank you for activating your 2015 DSCC membership. More than 99% of our donations come from grassroots supporters like you. Your support will help us hold Republicans accountable for their outrageous policies and their attacks on President Obama and Democrats. Thank you for your support.
I just gave to Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC)..
To see details and contribute now please go to:
https://secure.actblue.com/contribute/page/dsccmembershfcode=DPE-20150530-Rapid-ProsHV

An ActBlue fundraiser has sent you this email inviting you to join
their action. Your email address has not been added to any ma
list. If this email has reached you in error, we apologize.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 31, 2015
Reply

HOW MANY ISRAELIS ARE VOTING IN YOUR ELECTIONS BY.

Duel Citizenship, and absentee Ballots.?

Ronald L. Waldron
June 11, 2015
Reply

MY REPLY TO THE FOLLOWING LETTER:

THE DEMOCRAT PARTY, ELECTED DEMOCRATS, LOCAL, STATE, & FEDERAL,,AND 2016 CANDIDATES STEP-UP. “NOW”
The reform of the most Corrupt Government representing AMERICA in History, is the number one issue
that candidates will face in 2016. Not listed on any surveys to date. HOW EVER the coming demonstrations
have not started yet either.
All non-Zionist people need to step-up and demand an end of the silence regarding the Foreign Policies
regarding Israel, AIPAC, J-Street, lobbies, contributions, Pork Barreling, fraud, Treason, and the
Trade Bills, propaganda, False flag operations. Homeland Security, Defense spending, foreign Bases,
Veterans Affairs, FOR STARTERS.

Next will be. Separation of Church and State. Then separation of the Zionist syndicate from “CHURCH AND STATE”.

ZIONISM IS THE ENEMY OF ALL RELIGIONS, AND FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. EXILED FOR GOOD REASON !!

GOOGLE: Fighhting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog.

Dear Ronald L.-
Did you hear about Sheldon Adelson’s “secret summit” last week?
Last week, Adelson and other far-right billionaires gathered at a casino in Vegas to fund-raise to try and stop the growing movement for Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS). Why? Because we’re racking up grassroots victories, and our opponents are running scared.
But we can’t afford to be complacent. Adelson’s summit raised over $20 million to try and fight BDS, and Netanyahu has chipped in another $20 million on behalf of the Israeli government.
Our opponents have deep pockets, and the ear of politicians in the US and abroad. But we’ve got you, Ronald L..
Can you join us with a $36 donation today?
I don’t want to underestimate what a difficult task we’ve taken on. The ongoing displacement of Palestinians on both sides of the Green Line, the collapse of Israeli politics into the hands of far-right extremists, the intransigence of US policymakers – all of that is real.
But I also know that without a vision we can’t get anywhere at all. And that’s what makes JVP different.
JVP is the only major Jewish organization whose approach to Israel and Palestine is grounded in the most important thing of all: our shared values. The inherent dignity and equality of all people. The necessity of taking principled, non-violent action to make change. And the importance of taking responsibility for our own voices.
And we know that acting from those values is the most strategic way forward.
Here’s what’s true. JVP’s power has doubled or even tripled over the last 12 months. And if you join us now with a $36 donation, we’ll be able to usher in an entirely new era in this justice movement.
We’ve done remarkable things – even in just the last two months.
The #SkiptheSpeech campaign, led by JVP and a broad coalition, made history breaking decades of bipartisan consensus, when nearly 60 Members of Congress boycotted Prime Minister Netanhayu’s speech to a joint session in March.
Our North Carolina chapter won – and then successfully defended – a campaign to force Durham County, NC to sever a 13 year old, $1 million security contract with G4S specifically because of that company’s complicity in Israeli human rights violations.
And in just 48 hours this May, we collected 20,000 signatures on a Thank You letter to hip hop and R&B superstar Lauryn Hill when she made history canceling a Tel Aviv concert after our partners in Palestine and the US asked her not to cross their picket line.
The bottom line is this: JVP is a unique engine of change.
We’re organizing rabbis. Academics. Artists. Thousands of members nationwide. Young adults. We’re organizing on campuses, online, and in ascendant multiracial and interfaith coalitions.
And we need you to be a part of it.
Can you become a JVP donor today with a $36 donation? (YES!! I CERTAINLY WILL AS A MEMBER OF JVP).R.L.W.
With hope and gratitude,
Rebecca Vilkomerson
Executive Director
Contact Info:
Jewish Voice for Peace
1611 Telegraph Ave, Suite 1020
Oakland, CA 94612
510.465.1777
info@jewishvoiceforpeace.org
Connect with Us:
Facebook | Twitter | Forward

Ronald L. Waldron
June 17, 2015
Reply

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL:

WE must vote 2016. It is our right to vote. For the 2016
elections it is our duty. The most important elections in
our Countries History.
GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog.
Please Scan, and read the last postings & back.
BEAT: The Corporations challenge and the corruption we
face, with the buy out of the Republican Party.
SUPPORT our Democracy and Democrats representing the
Middle Class.
NO ONE denies the facts you will see & read.
BRING back the America we all love. Back from foreign
leaders, policy, aid, lobbies. Some with a chapter in
all 50 States.BACK from the corrupt officials and Party
committing treason for self interest. Not Americas
interest.

Ronald L. Waldron

Dear Ronald:

When we think about the summer of 2014, one thing looms large: Israel’s brutal all-out assault on Gaza. But something else happened last summer — something huge. Last June, the Presbyterian Church (USA) voted to divest from companies that profit from the Occupation — and we were honored to stand by their side. That victory sent an incredible message — that faith communities around the world won’t stay silent when Israel commits human rights violations.
Stand side-by-side with faith communities working for divestment – add your name to the Interfaith Network for Justice in Palestine
Our movement is growing, and the Presbyterian Church isn’t the only faith group stepping up and debating these tough issues. Next weekend, JVP delegations will be travelling to Cleveland and Salt Lake City to support our partners in the United Church of Christ and the Episcopal Church as they seek to align their values with their investments.

Question from Rabbi Wise for Ronald

Optional: What’s your faith background, and how does it inspire you to be a partner for justice in Palestine?

I was Baptist until 2003.I quit the Church, because of their support of the Republican Party, Zionism,Wars,Tax exemptions, and investing
funds given for other priorities. I’m Christian worshiping alone. I pray for Palestine, and for peace & equality for all people.
I believe in separation of Church & State, with both having a moral code, integrity, and ethics. Something we find hard to find in either.

Ronald L. Waldron

Democrat PARTY, ELECTED DEMOCRATS, LOCAL, STATE, & FEDERAL,,AND 2016
CANDIDATES STEP-UP. “NOW”
The reform of the most Corrupt Government representing AMERICA in History, is
the number one issue
that candidates will face in 2016. Not listed on any surveys to date. HOW EVER
the coming demonstrations
have not started yet either.
All non-Zionist people need to step-up and demand an end of the silence
regarding the Foreign Policies
regarding Israel, AIPAC, J-Street, lobbies, contributions, Pork Barreling,
fraud, Treason, and the
Trade Bills, propaganda, False flag operations. Homeland Security, Defense
spending, foreign Bases,
Veterans Affairs, FOR STARTERS.

Next will be. Separation of Church and State. Then separation of the Zionist
syndicate from “CHURCH AND STATE”.

ZIONISM IS THE ENEMY OF ALL RELIGIONS, AND FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. EXILED FOR
GOOD REASON !!

GOOGLE: Fighhting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog.

Ronald L.-

We’re building our Interfaith Network for Justice and Palestine, and it’s fantastic to have you standing with us. When people of all faiths, and other people of conscience, stand together, there’s no limit to what we can achieve — I’m so excited for the progress that our movement is going to make.

At Jewish Voice for Peace, we’re inspired by Jewish tradition to work together for peace, social justice, equality, and human rights. Click here to support our work with a donation.

Thank you for all that you do,

Rabbi Alissa Wise

This POST is posted by. Tonto & The Lone Ranger

Ronald L. Waldron
June 21, 2015
Reply

HYPOCRISY OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY AND ELITE THEY REPRESENT:

Separation of Church and State. The meaning of such is not just against the Church involvement in government affairs. It is a two way
street. Government and officials should stay away from involving themselves in the Church business, or propaganda of their Christian
faith.
Our Constitution gives us all the right of freedom of religion, or none. That is for all beliefs, not just Christians, we are not just a
Christian Country, and never have been. Only atelection time does the Church get bombarded with Republican Candidates. Yet during their
term of office we never see such. Look at our national debt, look at the lack of doing anything for us the American people, all for
corporations & lobbies. Look at the 70% of our federal budget going to Defense with them wanting to spend more there. 300 foreign bases
while our own borders are completely open. No infrastructure here, while they spend all on nation building in the Middle East. Look at all
the corruption and WAR crimes involved along with their so called Ally, that in reality is everyone’s number one enemy.
They, (the Church & Republicans) claim all this belief in right to life. How about all the murders in a preemptive War,based on false
intel from a rogue state. Supported by both, with an all out attack on the Muslim Faith. In Iraq and here in America.
Their past history will show how they would attack and disrespect the Catholic Faith. Now they fully support Zionism, not the true
Torah Jewish people,middle class.Instead both support the organized syndicate that developed in Russia for world dominance,the Zionist
ELITE, where all their campaign donations come from. Over ONE BILLION ALREADY.
Of course for all the tax exempt property the Church receives from us. In return our tax dollars go to AIPAC, J-Street, Israeli projects,
the Church now invest in Defense contractors for more war, neither investing in our communities.

PLEASE GET OUT AND VOTE AGAINST SUCH. This is not a conspiracy theory. Its fact that neither will debate.

WHO MURDERED CHRIST. WHO WAS EXILED FROM ISRAEL. WHO IS COMMITTING GENOCIDE. WHO IS OCCUPYING ILLEGALLY. WHO IS DESTROYING OUR HOLY LAND.

By the way, we see and hear all the Media interviews with Republican Candidates over the racist murders in racist So. Carolina, why not
their representative in Federal government mr. king pin of it Linsey Graham. Why not?

Ronald L. Waldron
June 23, 2015
Reply

STORY OF AN EX MOSSAD AGENT—CENSORSHIP IS LIVE & WELL–IT CLOSED THE MORELAND COMMISSION:

Excerpt from Victor Ostrovsky’s, “By way of deception”

NOTE: Needless to say, the Israeli Lobby has demanded (and gotten) a total ban on this book in all major bookstore chains, while pro-Israeli experts have trashed it at every opportunity. Ostrovsky’s book is available only online at places like Amazon
Revealing the facts as I know them from my vantage point of four years spent inside the Mossad was by no means an easy task.

Coming from an ardent Zionist background, I had been taught that the state of Israel was incapable of misconduct. That we were the David in the unending struggle against the ever-growing Goliath. That there was no one out there to protect us but ourselves – a feeling reinforced by the Holocaust survivors who lived among us.

We, the new generation of Israelites, the resurrected nation on its own land after more than two thousand years of exile, were entrusted with the fate of the nation as a whole.

The commanders of our army were called champions, not generals. Our leaders were captains at the helm of a great ship. I was elated when I was chosen and granted the privilege to join what I considered to be the elite team of the Mossad.

But it was the twisted ideals and self-centered pragmatism that I encountered inside the Mossad, coupled with this so-called team’s greed, lust, and total lack of respect for human life, that motivated me to tell this story.

It is out of love for Israel as a free and just country that I am laying my life on the line by so doing, facing up to those who took it upon themselves to turn the Zionist dream into the present-day nightmare.

The Mossad, being the intelligence body entrusted with the responsibility of plotting the course for the leaders at the helm of the nation, has betrayed that trust. Plotting on its own behalf, and for petty, self-serving reasons, it has set the nation on a collision course with all-out war.

One of the main themes of this book is Victor’s belief that Mossad is out of control, that even the prime minister, although ostensibly in charge, has no real authority over its actions …

Victor Ostrovsky, a former Israeli Mossad agent, wrote two books about Israel’s terror against their enemies. In one of them, he discusses the fate of Palestinians who illegally cross the border in search of work in Israel. Many thousands of these young men simply are never heard from again after being captured by Israel’s forces. Some of them are taken to the ABC research facilities where they endure the indescribable terror of chemical, nuclear or biological warfare.

The Mossad – believe it or not – has just 30 to 35 case officers, or katsas, operating in the world at any one time. The main reason for this extraordinary low total, as you will read in this book, is that unlike other countries, Israel can tap the significant and loyal cadre of the worldwide Jewish community outside Israel. This is done through a unique system of sayanim, volunteer Jewish helpers.

My first six weeks were uneventful. I worked at the downtown office, essentially as a gofer and filing clerk. But one chilly day in February 1984, I found myself joining 14 others on a small bus. … This course was to be known as Cadet 16, as it was the sixteenth course of Mossad cadets.

He walked briskly to the head of the table while the other two sat at the back of the room. “My name is Aharon Sherf,” he said. “I am the head of the Academy. Welcome to the Mossad. Its full name is Ha Mossad, le Modiyn ve le Tafkidim Mayuhadim [the Institute for Intelligence and Special Operations]. Our motto is: ‘By way of deception, thou shalt do war.’

“It’s the old Trojan dick trick.” He lit a cigarette.

“What’s that?” I couldn’t help smiling; I’d never heard it called that before.

“I knew that would get your attention,” he said, grinning. “Shimon activated Operation Trojan in February of this year.”

I nodded. I’d still been in the Mossad when that order was given, and because of my naval background and acquaintance with most of the commanders in the navy, I participated in the planning for the operation as liaison with the navy.

A Trojan was a special communication device that could be planted by naval commandos deep inside enemy territory. The device would act as a relay station for misleading transmissions made by the disinformation unit in the Mossad, called LAP, and intended to be received by American and British listening stations. Originating from an IDF navy ship out at sea, the prerecorded digital transmissions could be picked up only by the Trojan. The device would then rebroadcast the transmission on another frequency, one used for official business in the enemy country, at which point the transmission would finally be picked up by American ears in Britain.

The listeners would have no doubt they had intercepted a genuine communication, hence the name Trojan, reminiscent of the mythical Trojan horse. Further, the content of the messages, once deciphered, would confirm information from other intelligence sources, namely the Mossad. The only catch was that the Trojan itself would have to be located as close as possible to the normal origin of such transmissions, because of the sophisticated methods of triangulation the Americans and others would use to verify the source.

In the particular operation Ephraim was referring to, two elite units in the military had been made responsible for the delivery of the Trojan device to the proper location. One was the Matkal reconnaissance unit and the other was Flotilla 13, the naval commandos. The commandos were charged with the task of planting the Trojan device in Tripoli, Libya.

On the night of February 17-18, two Israeli missile boats, the SAAR 4-class Moledet, armed with Harpoon and Gabriel surface-tosurface missiles, among other weaponry, and the Geula, a Hohit-class mlsslle boat with a helicopter pad and regular SAAR 4-class armament, conducted what seemed like a routine patrol of the Mediterranean, heading for the Sicilian channel and passing just outside the territorial waters of Libya. Just north of Tripoli, the warships, which were vlsible to radar both in Tripoli and on the Italian island of Lampedusa, slowed down to about four knots – just long enough to allow a team of twelve naval commandos in four wet submarines nicknamed “pigs” and two low-profiled speedboats called “birds” to disembark. The pigs could carry two commandos each and all their fighting gear.

The birds, equipped with an MG 7.62-caliber machine gun mounted over the bow and an array of antitank shoulder-carried missiles, could facilitate six commandos each, while towing the empty plgs. The birds brought the pigs as close to the shore as possible, thus cutting down the distance the pigs would have to travel on their own. (The pigs were submersible and silent but relatively slow.)

Two miles off the Libyan coast, the lights of Tripoli could be seen glistening in the southeast. Eight commandos slipped quietly into the plgs and headed for shore. The birds stayed behind at the rendezvous pomt, ready to take action should the situation arise. Once they reached the beach, the commandos left their cigarlike transporters submerged in the shallow water and headed inland, carrying a dark green Trojan cylinder six feet long and seven inches in diameter. It took two men to carry it.

A gray van was parked on the side of the road about one hundred feet from the water, on the coastal highway leading from Sabratah to Tripoli and on to Benghazi. There was hardly any traffic at that time of night. The driver of the van seemed to be repairing a flat tire. He stopped working as the team approached and opened the back doors of the van. He was a Mossad combatant. Without a word said, four of the men entered the van and headed for the city. The other four returned to the water, where they took a defensive position by the submerged pigs. Their job was to hold this position to ensure an escape route for the team now headed for the city.

At the same time, a squadron of Israeli fighters was refueling south of Crete, ready to assist. They were capable of keeping any ground forces away from the commandos, allowing them a not-soclean getaway. At this point, the small commando unit was divided into three details – its most vulnerable state. Were any of the details to run into enemy forces, they were instructed to act with extreme prejudice before the enemy turned hostile.

The van parked at the back of an apartment building on Al Jamhuriyh Street in Tripoli, less than three blocks away from the Bab al Azizia barracks that were known to house Qadhafi’s headquarters and residence. By then, the men in the van had changed into civilian clothing. Two stayed with the van as lookouts and the other two helped the Mossad combatant take the cylinder to the top floor of the five-story building. The cylinder was wrapped in a carpet.

In the apartment, the top section of the cylinder was opened and a small dishlike antenna was unfolded and placed in front of the window facing north. The unit was activated, and the Trojan horse was in place.

The Mossad combatant had rented the apartment for six months and had paid the rent in advance. There was no reason for anyone except the combatant to enter the apartment. However, if someone should decide to do so, the Trojan would self-destruct, taking with it most of the upper part of the building. The three men headed back to the van and to their rendezvous with their friends on the beach.

After dropping the commandos at the beach, the combatant headed back for the city, where he would monitor the Trojan unit for the next few weeks. The commandos wasted no time and headed out to sea. They didn’t want to be caught in Libyan waters at daybreak. They reached the birds and headed at full speed to a prearranged pickup coordinate, where they met with the missile boats that had brought them in.

By the end of March, the Americans were already intercepting messages broadcast by the Trojan, which was only activated during heavy communication traffic hours. Using the Trojan, the Mossad tried to make it appear that a long series of terrorist orders were being transmitted to various Libyan embassies around the world (or, as they were called by the Libyans, Peoples’ Bureaus). As the Mossad had hoped, the transmissions were deciphered by the Americans and construed as ample proof that the Libyans were active sponsors of terrorism. What’s more, the Americans pointed out, Mossad reports confirmed it.

The French and the Spanish, though, were not buying into the new stream of information. To them, it seemed suspicious that suddenly, out of the blue, the Libyans, who’d been extremely careful in the past, would start advertising their future actions. They also found it suspicious that in several instances Mossad reports were worded similarly to coded Libyan communications. They argued further that, had there truly been after-the-fact Libyan communications regarding the attack, then the terrorist attack on the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin on April 5 could have been prevented, since surely there would have been communications before, enabling intelligence agencies listening in to prevent It. Since the attack wasn’t prevented, they reasoned that it must not be the Libyans who did it, and the “new communications” must be bogus. The French and the Spanish were right. The information was bogus, and the Mossad didn’t have a clue who planted the bomb that killed one American serviceman and wounded several others. But the Mossad was tied in to many of the European terrorist organizations, and it was convinced that in the volatile atmosphere that had engulfed Europe, a bombing with an American victim was just a matter of time Heads of the Mossad were counting on the American promise to retaliate with vengeance against any country that could be proven to support terrorism. The Trojan gave the Americans the proof they needed. The Mossad also plugged into the equation Qadhafi’s lunatic image and momentous declarations, which were really only meant for internal consumption.

It must be remembered that Qadhafi had marked a line in the water at that time, closing off the Gulf of Sidra as Libyan territorial waters and calling the new maritime border the line of death (an action that didn’t exactly give him a moderate image). Ultimately, the Americans fell for the Mossad ploy head over heels dragging the British and the Germans somewhat reluctantly in with them. Operation Trojan was one of the Mossad’s greatest successes. It brought about the air strike on Libya that President Reagan had promised – a strike that had three important consequences. First, it derailed a deal for the release of the American hostages in Lebanon, thus preserving the Hizballah (Party of God) as the number one enemy in the eyes of the West. Second, it sent a message to the entire Arab world, telling them exactly where the United States stood regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. Third, it boosted the Mossad’s image of itself, since it was they who, by ingenious sleight of hand, had prodded the United States to do what was right. It was only the French who didn’t buy into the Mossad trick and were determined not to ally themselves with the aggressive American act. The French refused to allow the American bombers to fly over their territory on their way to attack Libya.

On April 14, 1986, one hundred and sixty American aircraft dropped over sixty tons of bombs on Libya. The attackers bombed Tripoli international airport, Bab al Azizia barracks, Sidi Bilal naval base, the city of Benghazi, and the Benine airfield outside Benghazi. The strike force consisted of two main bodies, one originating in England and the other from flattops in the Mediterranean. From England came twenty-four F-111s from Lakenheath, five EF-111s from Upper Heyford, and twenty-eight refueling tankers from Mildenhall and Fairford. In the attack, the air force F-111s and the EF-111s were joined by eighteen A-6 and A-7 strike and strike support aircraft, six FA-18 fighters, fourteen EA-6B electronic jammer planes, and other support platforms. The navy planes were catapulted from the carriers Coral Sea and America. On the Libyan side, there were approximately forty civilian casualties, including Qadhafi’s adopted daughter. On the American side, a pilot and his weapons officer were killed when their F-111 exploded.

After the bombing, the Hizballah broke off negotiations regarding the hostages they held in Beirut and executed three of them, including one American named Peter Kilburn. As for the French, they were rewarded for their nonparticipation in the attack by the release at the end of June of two French journalists held hostage in Beirut. (As it happened, a stray bomb hit the French embassy in Tripoli during the raid.)

Ephraim had spelled it all out for me and confirmed some of the information I’d already known. He then went on. “After the bombing of Libya, our friend Qadhafi is sure to stay out of the picture for some time. Iraq and Saddam Hussein are the next target. We’re starting now to build him up as the big villain. It will take some time, but in the end, there’s no doubt it’ll work.”

“But isn’t Saddam regarded as moderate toward us, allied with Jordan, the big enemy of Iran and Syria?”

“Yes, that’s why I’m opposed to this action. But that’s the directive, and I must follow it. Hopefully, you and I will be done with our little operation before anything big happens. After all, we have already destroyed his nuclear facility, and we are making money by selling hlm technology and equipment through South Africa.”

In the following weeks, more and more discoveries were made regarding the big gun and other elements of the Saddam war machine. The Mossad had all but saturated the intelligence field with information regarding the evil intentions of Saddam the Terrible, banking on the fact that before long, he’d have enough rope to hang himself. It was very clear what the Mossad’s overall goal was. It wanted the West to do its bidding, just as the Americans had in Libya with the bombing of Qadhafi. After all, Israel didn’t possess carriers and ample air power, and although it was capable of bombing a refugee camp in Tunis, that was not the same. The Mossad leaders knew that if they could make Saddam appear bad enough and a threat to the Gulf oil supply, of which he’d been the protector up to that point, then the United States and its allies would not let him get away with anything, but would take measures that would all but eliminate his army and his weapons potential, especially if they were led to believe that this might just be their last chance before he went nuclear.

See also: I was there when the Americans bombed

WHAT REALLY HAPPEN:
WAR IS MASS MURDER WRAPPED IN A PRETTY FLAG.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 23, 2015
Reply

press-release/moreland-commission-investigate-public-corruption-releases-report was not found.

On July 2, 2013, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo appointed Regina Calcaterra as the Executive Director of the Moreland Commission to Investigate Public Corruption. The Commission was established “to probe systemic public corruption and the appearance of such corrcommendations to reform any weaknesses uncovered in existing State laws, regulations and procedures.

The previous year, in November 2012, Governor Cuomo appointed Regina as the Executive Director of the Moreland Commission on Utiluption in state government, political campaigns and elections in New York State”. The Commission will also make reity Storm Preparation and Response which was established to investigate the response, preparation, and management of New York’s power utility companies with respect to several major storms impacting the State including Hurricanes Sandy and Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee and to review and make appropriate recommendations regarding the state’s energy agencies.

As Executive Director, Regina managed a staff of energy policy experts and litigators as she worked under the guidance of the Moreland Commission’s prestigious Commissioners. On January 7, 2013 the Commission released its Interim Report which identified options for consideration regarding the restructuring of the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA). It also put forth recommendations on strengthening the regulatory oversight of the NYS Public Service Commission and many of those recommendations were enacted in law in 2013.

In June 2013, the Commission issued its final report which disclosed LIPA’s financial irregularities and lack of oversight and accountability. It also provided policy recommendations on investment infrastructure, energy efficiency programs and consumer representation before the state’s utility regulatory body and outlined its investigatory findings of all New York’s utilities responses to the most recent devastating storms.

In January 2012, Suffolk County Executive Steve Bellone appointed Regina the first woman to serve as Chief Deputy County Executive. Upon taking office, the County Executive was faced with a budget deficit exceeding $500 million dollars. With a substantially reduced management staff, Regina assisted the County Executive in addressing the county’s fiscal challenges by workforce reduction, employee concessions, streamlining and restructuring government services, merging government agencies and working closely with the State Legislature and the Governor to identify and implement revenue generating initiatives to reduce the budget deficit. Under the direction of the County Executive, Regina also administers the day to day operations of a 9,600 employee workforce and oversees a $2.7 billion budget that serves a population exceeding 1.6 million residents. Alongside the Suffolk County’s emergency response leaders, Regina managed the emergency preparedness and storm response recovery for Superstorm Sandy.

Regina served as partner to Barrack, Rodos & Bacine an internationally recognized corporate fraud litigation firm, representing US and European public employee pension funds in cases where those funds have been defrauded. Among cases on which she worked, Regina was part of the team that represented the New York State Common Retirement Fund in the lawsuits against WorldCom- litigation which led to a historic $6.13 Billion recovery – and McKesson/HBOC which led to recovery of more than $1 billion to injured investors. More recently, she was on the litigation team that recovered over $500 million from Merrill Lynch resulting from their role in the mortgage crisis. Her early career included successfully advocating for public policy issues on the national, state and local levels regarding disabled veterans, all people with disabilities, accessible transportation, prevailing wage, municipal revenue generating initiatives and streamlining of government operations.

Robert Addolorato, Chief of Investigations
Kelly Donovan, Chief Counsel
John Amodeo, Legislative Director

Ronald L. Waldron
June 24, 2015
Reply

STOP, LOOK, AND LISTEN, A MONSTEROUS, RUNAWAY TRAIN IS COMING !

This MONSTER developed in the middle EAST over the past 67 years. Developed by runaway leadership of greed and deception.
leadership with out integrity, ethics, accountability, or moral values. What we all call ZIONISM.

Unity of the people, all people, is the only way to stop the MONSTER. UNITED WE STAND FOR PEACE AND RESPECT FOR EACH
OTHER. Stop the WARS and the profiteers of such. We can only exist through PEACE, and change in leadership. Be it head
of households, religious, EDUCATION, HIGH COURTS, MEDIA, CEO’S,UNIONS, or governments. Check & Balance as in the past !!

Respect for majority vote at the UNITED NATIONS and sanctions set, can we all exist. NOT by the corruption of WASHINGTON DC,
WALL STREET, and the manipulation by LOBBIES, FOREIGN OR DOMESTIC.

We must stand united, vote against the corrupt money flow to the Republican Party and treason of the obstructionist.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 27, 2015
Reply

THE FACTS CAN NOT BE DENIED;

The facts cannot be denied. The newsmedia is Jewish controlled and lies to the public continually. When I went to get my neck surgery in 2009, I stayed in West Hollywood, California, where I saw Jewish temples all over the place. It is no secret that Hollywood movies are saturated with Zionist propaganda, blasphemy against Jesus Christ, cursing in God’s name, sexual filth and perversion, and every form of sin imaginable. Do a web search under “Jews control American government.”

Ronald L. Waldron
June 27, 2015
Reply

Optional: What’s your faith background, and how does it inspire you to be a partner for justice in Palestine?

Dear Ronald:

When we think about the summer of 2014, one thing looms large: Israel’s brutal all-out assault on Gaza. But something else happened last summer — something huge. Last June, the Presbyterian Church (USA) voted to divest from companies that profit from the Occupation — and we were honored to stand by their side. That victory sent an incredible message — that faith communities around the world won’t stay silent when Israel commits human rights violations.
Stand side-by-side with faith communities working for divestment – add your name to the Interfaith Network for Justice in Palestine
Our movement is growing, and the Presbyterian Church isn’t the only faith group stepping up and debating these tough issues. Next weekend, JVP delegations will be travelling to Cleveland and Salt Lake City to support our partners in the United Church of Christ and the Episcopal Church as they seek to align their values with their investments.

Question from Rabbi Wise for Ronald

Optional: What’s your faith background, and how does it inspire you to be a partner for justice in Palestine?

I was Baptist until 2003.I quit the Church, because of their support of the Republican Party, Zionism,Wars,Tax exemptions, and investing
funds given for other priorities. I,m Christian worshiping alone. I pray for Palestine, and for peace & equality for all people.
I believe in separation of Church & State, with both having a moral code, integrity, and ethics. Something we find hard to find in either.

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL:

I will support the Democrats in 2016. I ask every one to do the same. Unite for the better ethics & integrity and values for us,
the American people.

PLEASE TAKE BACK AMERICA FROM THE ZIONIST
SYNDICATE OF INJUSTICE,

Ronald L. Waldron
July 2, 2015
Reply

To Our Friends in the United Church of Christ:

We write to thank you as Jews, Muslims, Christians, atheists and others; as mothers and fathers, daughters and sons; and as people united in our belief in justice and liberation for all peoples.

We thank you for your historic and moral vote to divest from the Israeli occupation. Your vote is a profound act of solidarity with Palestinians who have suffered decades of occupation, dispossession, and discrimination.

And it is a source of great friendship to the countless Jews who believe our liberation is inextricably tied to Palestinian liberation. Speaking is not enough, only courageous actions can help us create the conditions for a lasting and just peace.

We also thank the Democrat Party for not accepting donations from the Zionist lobbies & sources of corruption.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 11, 2015
Reply

Presidential candidates are lining up to declare the fight against Palestinian rights a major priority.
Candidates are again raising money by proving how little they care about Palestinian human rights
Tell the candidates: universal human rights are our priority.
Take Action!
Dear Ronald L.,

Monday, major newspapers published a letter from Hillary Clinton to Democratic party mega-donor Haim Saban. In it, she weighed in on the growing Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement – by committing to fight it.

She wrote “to express my alarm over the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement….I know you agree that we need to make countering BDS a priority.”

Similarly,Ted Cruz told the crowd at a recent Sheldon Adelson-funded event that “in 2017 we need a president who will stand up directly and confront the [BDS] movement.”

Click here to tell all Presidential candidates: We support equal rights for all peoples of Palestine and Israel. And we’re not alone.

The BDS movement is becoming a very public conversation topic in US politics. We know this grandstanding against BDS is first and foremost about the hunt for billionaire mega-donors – whether they be extreme right-wing fanatics like Sheldon Adelson, or Haim Saban, whose ultra-conservative streak is more specifically focused on opposing Palestinian rights.

Candidates need to know that selling out Palestinian rights doesn’t curry any favor with us. Polls repeatedly show that growing numbers of all Americans – even and increasingly Jews—have had it with Israel’s endless settlement expansion, inequality, and denial of rights. They recognize that Israel is not interested in peace, and don’t want US policy to give Israel a free pass anymore.

Sign here to show how many of us want a new path for US policies toward Israel and Palestine.

If we raise our voices, there’s actually reason to believe we can make a difference.

Just 4 months ago, working with many partner organizations, we helped convince 60 Members of Congress to boycott Netanyahu’s speech to Congress. And days ago, a new survey showed only 48% of Democrats think Israel wants peace with its neighbors, while 47% think Israel is a racist country.

Sign here to show how many of us want an end to Israeli policies of occupation, official discrimination, and expulsion.

If we get 10,000 signatures, we’ll deliver your message to all the candidates.

This is a critical moment for broad education about what Israeli policies are doing, and how we can work with people around the globe to transform them. We need to seize it!

Stefanie Fox
Co-Director of Organizing
Donate Now!
Contact Info:
Jewish Voice for Peace
1611 Telegraph Ave, Suite 550
Oakland, CA 94612
510.465.1777
info@jewishvoiceforpeace.org
Connect with Us:
Become a JVP Member | Facebook | Twitter | Flickr | Forward
JVP does not endorse or oppose electoral candidates.

We need to demand a debate over these issues.
We need to demand no more then 40% of budget be spent on
defense. Our defense, not wars for a rogue state of illegal
occupation.
Send letters & petitions to all senators, congressmen,State
representatives, and governors. NO MORE SENDING OUR
NATIONAL SECURITY, THE NATIONAL GUARD TO FOREIGN LANDS, LEAVING US WITH OUT PROTECTION FROM TERRORIST ACTIVITIES HERE AT HOME.
The national guard was put in place for each state for OUR
SECURITY .

please raise complete HELL with the Zionist puppets in State
capitols and the sick lame brains in Washington, DC.

NEXT, WE NEED TO SET TIME LIMITS, AND BETTER WAYS
OF IMPEACHMENT OF ANY REPRESENTATIVE NOT REPRESENTING THE AREA THAT ELECTED THEM.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 11, 2015
Reply

Hillary Clinton just lost the 8% edge she had over any candidate
from either party. The seven percent leaving churches because
of investments in Wall Street and support for war.& Israel.
Also losing the voters registered as Republican but are not
favorable of the obstructionist congress, giving them a 9%
favorable rating.
The candidate that stands against the atrocities carried on by
Israel,, and represents the Human rights of the Palestinian
people against the genocide, Will win the nomination, nd the
PRESIDENCY.
Accepting $85K from the Zionist Lobbies caused her failure
in 2008. Many Peace organizations thought she learned a
lesson from that, and the experience of being Secretary of
State, Seeing the truth first hand.
The SUN comes up in the EAST, a new day is born,
BUT yesterday will not be forgotten by its victims, or
by the moral voters of America at election time.

Allen D. Post
July 12, 2015
Reply

Fwd: Jim Webb just announced…

Ronald L. Waldron
July 14, 2015
Reply

FASCISM, ZIONISM, THE REPUBLICAN, ISRAELI PARTNERSHIP.

Where Does Bernie Sanders,and Jim Web Stand on Israeli Settlements in the West Bank?

Israel runs one of the most aggressive and damaging espionage networks targeting the U.S., yet public discussion about it is almost nil.

The American Israel Public Affairs Committee [AIPAC] has been campaigning to erase the distinction in U.S. policy between Israel and Israeli settlements in the West Bank, under the guise of “combating the global BDS movement.” As part of this campaign, AIPAC recently pushed language through Congress that defines the “global BDS” which the U.S. should oppose as including boycott, divestment, and sanctions against enterprises in “Israeli-controlled territories” — that is, enterprises in Israeli settlements in the West Bank. According to the AIPAC provision, Israel and Israeli settlements in the West Bank are the same thing. J Street and Americans for Peace Now opposed the AIPAC provision. As everyone dam well should.

The Obama administration denounced the AIPAC provision, saying, “by conflating Israel and ‘Israeli-controlled territories,’ a provision of the Trade Promotion Authority legislation runs counter to longstanding U.S. policy towards the occupied territories, including with regard to settlement activity…The U.S. government has never defended or supported Israeli settlements and activity associated with them and, by extension, does not pursue policies or activities that would legitimize them.”

By condemning “BDS” without distinguishing between Israel and Israeli settlements in the West Bank, Clinton is supporting — whether intentionally or not — the
Where Does Bernie Sanders, and Jim Web Stand on Israeli Settlements in the West Bank?

AIPAC campaign to erase the distinction between Israel and Israeli settlements in the West Bank.

Given that major media coverage of this issue has been virtually non-existent, it seems unlikely that major media will successfully press Hillary to clarify her position on Israeli settlements in the West Bank unless the issue is raised by another candidate.

But another candidate could find that the issue resonates among Democrats. A recent study found that 45 percent of Democratic “opinion leaders” said they would be more likely to vote for a candidate who criticized the Israeli occupation and mistreatment of Palestinians, while only 23 percent said they would be less likely to vote for such a candidate.

Bernie,and Jim are the main Democratic challengers to Hillary, seems like a logical address for this concern. If you would like Bernie to say that Israeli settlements in the West Bank are not Israel, you can tell them so. END all wars, end the Israeli atrocities & genocide. They need to sign the same agreements as Iran.

Inspections and all, no more veto’s of sanctions from the UN. Israel’s form of
governing is fascism, and is pressuring our congress to do the same. Americans
are very much aware that they are our enemy, not ally.

Scratch a counterintelligence officer in the U.S. government and they’ll tell you that Israel is not a friend to the United States.

This is because Israel runs one of the most aggressive and damaging espionage networks targeting the U.S.. The fact of Israeli penetration into the country is not a subject oft-discussed in the media or in the circles of governance, due to the extreme sensitivity of the U.S.-Israel relationship coupled with the burden of the Israel lobby, which punishes legislators who dare to criticize the Jewish state. The void where the facts should sit is filled instead with the hallucinations of conspiracy theory — the kind in which, for example, agents of the Mossad, Israel’s top intelligence agency, engineer the 9/11 attacks, while 4,000 Israelis in the Twin Towers somehow all get word to escape before the planes hit. The effect, as disturbing as it is ironic, is that the less the truth is addressed, the more noxious the true facts become.

ZIONIST ISRAEL—-THE ANTICHRIST

Ronald L. Waldron
July 15, 2015
Reply

POPE Calls on World Youth to Rise Up Against Global Capitalism

POPE FRANCIS
Pope Calls on World Youth to Rise Up Against Global Capitalism
Pope Francis is calling for a youth uprising against global capitalism saying it’s their time to “make a mess.”

The GOP’s billionaires aren’t going anywhere. But if we can raise the $29,600 we need by midnight, neither will their Senate candidates.

Pitch in TODAY to give Democrats a fighting chance in 2016. HELP BRING BACK AMERICA THE BEAUTIFUL.

If you can afford to give money we certainly will need such, and will appreciate it. How-ever what we need is your vote, and help by
encouraging everyone you know, to register and vote with and for us. Make a commitment to help change things.
Peace for all, and a government of the AMERICAN PEOPLE,For the American people, and by the American people.

REFORM OF GOVERNMENT, AND BETTER REGULATION IS THE PRIORITY REFORMS FOR THE FUTURE. MANY MORE ISSUES. TERM LIMITS AND CORRUPTION BY
OFFICALS THE AGENDA.

Arab League chief says Israel must declare nuclear weapons

3M Votes in agreement .( 1967 Border agreement-no other)

Arab League Secretary General Nabil Elaraby has called on the international community to pressure the Israeli regime into declaring its nuclear weapons.

“It’s time for the international community… to stop its policy of double standards and to undertake its responsibilities by pressuring Israel to join the non-proliferation agreement (NPT),” Elaraby said in a statement released on Wednesday.

All of Israel’s nuclear facilities must be placed under the supervision of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), he added.

Israel is widely believed to be the sole possessor of a nuclear arsenal in the Middle East and has so far blatantly violated the international rules regarding nuclear non-proliferation.

GODS EXILE IS STILL IN EFFECT, AND NO MAN SHALL
PUT IT UNDER. THE REIN OF TERROR IS OVER, ISRAELI’S
IS THE ONLY ONES STILL IN DENIAL.

NO MORE TRUST, NO MORE FALSE FLAG, NO MORE
LIES BELIEVED. NO MORE THIEF OF OUR RESOURCES.

GOD BLESS THE PEOPLE WITH PEACE ON EARTH.
GOOD WILL TO ALL MAN KIND.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 15, 2015
Reply

In December 2014, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution urging the Tel Aviv regime to join the NPT and put its nuclear facilities under the safeguards of the IAEA.

The Tel Aviv regime reportedly maintains between 200 and 400 atomic warheads

It is time for real international action.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 25, 2015
Reply

YES WE CAN, YES WE CAN, PLEASE READ– UNITED WE STAND.

We the AMERICAN people understand things are plain wrong in Washington D.C.
The average person does not think they can help change it. BUT yes we can.

Starting right now, we can demonstrate our power and strength.

Show every politician, CEO,Lobby-(Foreign or domestic),leaders of all
organizations, corrupt or not, we want accountability of all, top to
bottom.

We the people will protect our CONSTITUTION, our rights as AMERICANS,
and our Democracy free from foreign influence for WAR rather than PEACE

Our representatives need to know what we the people expect, and why
they are in office.

Thus one month from today, Aug. 25th 2015 we will demonstrate such
unity. PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR TV,S, RADIOS, BETWEEN 5PM AND 7PM.EST

SEE THE IMPACT. FORWARD THIS MESSAGE TO ALL YOUR CONTACTS, GROUPS,
FAMILY & FRIENDS, ORGANIZATION S, CLUBS, AND MEDIA.

WE WILL FIGHT THE FASCISM WE SEE BEING DEVELOPED, WE WILL GET RID
OF THOSE COMMITTING TREASON IN THE HOUSE & SENATE.

THANK YOU FOR READING UNITED WE STAND.

ALSO GOOGLE: FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD PEACE BLOG

GO TO THE LAST POSTING AND READ BACK. SEE YOU AT THE POLES.

BUY THE 2016 ELECTIONS YOU WILL KNOW WHO TO VOTE FOR, AND WHY..

Al;en D. Post
July 25, 2015
Reply

Buy the 2016 elections , should not be. That is republicans are and have been bought, the party hhas been.

By the Elections you will know, vote for democrats, then weed out
the rest of the corrupt from there.

I;m in Ronald L., and I will also pitch-in and help.

I also was a Republican once upon a time. Also not since 2000 Elections, if you want to call it that.
Demonstration (s) for sure man!

Al

Ronald L. Waldron
July 30, 2015
Reply

Debates, facts, and evidence of Congressional Treason.

Foreign and corporate Interest before the interest of WE the people
of these “THE UNITED STATES”.

It is time for a true survey of issues that are a concern of the
people, where we ask the questions. We are sick of surveys that
the questions pertain only to questions that are a concern of
special interest groups. Media being silent on all issues that concern US.

It is time for each candidate to prepare answers for our questions.

When congress has an approval rating of 9 to 15%, there is a very BIG, problem with-in our system of government. We have many questions relating to Israel, AIPAC, J-Street, Duel citizens appointed to positions with-in our government, or elected . Amount of our tax dollars squandered for a rogue state. Our government officials accepting campaign financing from a state that is by far the worst violators of international laws. Human rights violations, WAR crimes, and genocide. Fraud, monopolies,organized crime, drug dealers, gambling industry, human trafficking,on & on. It is sickening to see how many of our officials are partnered with them. t now has come to a point where our governors and mayors are highly involved with the chapters of these organizations. Appointed shy-locks running our governments business, while officials campaign 60 % of the time. Term-limits have to be put in place. There is only one candidate that stands out as not being a Zionist puppet.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 1, 2015
Reply

CANDIDATES: YOU CAN NOT AVOID US ANY LONGER. NOR CAN THE MEDIA CENSOR THE TRUTH ANY
LONGER !

We are appalled by attacks on the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement.
Whether motivated by the desires of your donors or not, standing against this
ethical, nonviolent movement working for justice and equality puts you at odds
with a fast-growing number of Americans.

We, and the BDS movement, stand for full equality for all people of Israel and
Palestine, and do so proudly.

We will make the difference in winning or losing the elections.If you are not
prepared to answer our questions regarding Israel, AIPAC &
Chapters, J-Street, Wall Street, War VS. Peace,fair taxation, fair trade
agreements with terms enforced, out-sourcing, infrastructure,
education for Americans, equal justice, duel citizens in our government having
foreign interest as their agenda. Think Tanks, advisers,
staffers with foreign interest, college & universities with chair positions
being Zionist puppets with foreign interest, get out now,
we are coming after YOU. Your usual rhetoric and false agendas will not carry
you through. Regardless of your corrupt system and support.

90% of you in Washington know longer recognizes the truth, or care to. The truth
you refuse to discuss will prevail in the end. WHY?
BECAUSE 65% of voting Americans recognize the corruption, who has been in charge
of the agenda, and see each of you as Zionist robots
with rings in your noses, that we intend to get RID OF. We will not rest until
our DEMOCRACY prevails over all else. OUR constitution
prevails with all amendments with out change. That integrity, ethics, honesty,
and conviction to do what is right for AMERICA returns.

We do not want, need, or support the present foreign intervention we have in all
things. We will not put up with the likes of yo u
obstructionist that have done nothing for Americans over the last 20 years. You
bow down to the anti-christ in the middle east, and
do so for SELF-INTEREST, as sick as it sounds media and higher education
facilities are right behind you.

Wait until you really, MEET THE PRESS, OR FACE THE NATION . THE RESTRAINTS WILL
COME DOWN TO TELLING THE TRUTH & soon

Ronald L. Waldron I remember, the same as any one over 70 remembers the last 60 years ,

Leadfoot1 Dog
August 17, 2015
Reply

Mr. Donald Trump. No Contact information out?

Dear Mr. Trump:

You are campaigning as a Republican. WHY would you do that..? That is the biggest down fall WE see with your
Campaign.

We stand against the corruption of the Zionist organized
syndicate that are the supporters ,benefactors , and
controllers of the Party, and several Democrats.

They are the politicians voting against the Iran Deal.
Influenced and work for Israel & AIPAC only. They will
work at starting another WAR for foreign leadership.

We want them prosecuted for treason.

Be prepared to answer those questions, just who will you
serve. We are well aware of the coming conflicts . We are
prepared to fight against the corrupt, and certainly will be
demanding Sanctions and divestment from Israel, and
dismantling of the foreign lobby.

We will protect our Constitution and all amendments, at
all cost.

No duel citizens elected or appointed to any position with-in
our American , and only American Peoples Government.

The media & owners minions will not cover & report or ask
the questions WE HAVE FOR EVERY CANDIDATE.

ISSUES WE WANT DEBATED, AND QUESTIONS ANSWERED.

Accountability from all, something we haven’t seen much of
since the Fraudulent election and appointment of Election,
2000.

All such problems developing from 1948 on.

Ron Waldron and followers
September 23, 2015
Reply

Fighting for a U.S. federal budget that works for all Americans.

1. USA Military Spending: 2014–610 Billion.
2.Canada Military Spending 2014–17.5 Billion.

2001–$307.8
2002–$328.7
2003–$404.91
2004–$455.91
2005–$495.31,2
2006–$535.91,2
2007–$527.41,2
2008–$494.41,2
2009–$494.3
2010–$708.3
2011–$709.2
2012–$652.6
2013–$614.0
2014–$610.0
$7 Trillion-339 Billion–700 Million wasted on needless WARS.
ss Watch: A Conservative Total for U.S. Aid to Israel: More Than $130 Billion, Why? Campaign money, staff to do 85% of
the work for them, FREE trips to Israel.ETC– ETC.
There has never been a benefit for the American people with these
“SPECIAL INTEREST” transactions.

President Obama needs to call for (demand) a complete investigation
into the Malfeasance in office, or official misconduct, is the commission of an unlawful act, done in an official capacity, which affects the performance of official duties. Malfeasance in office is often grounds for a, for cause removal of an elected official by statute.
The Republican congress has openly defied the PEOPLE
that elected our President twice. By direction of the
majority leaders, they have blocked every proposal
and action the President attempted for the benefit
of we the people. Such has hampered the economic
progress and National Security at home. At the same
time spending outrageous amounts for foreign land
& lobby. Making personal gains for themselves.

Use the Canadian economic recovery, and amount
spent on Defense, as a guide . Next being the difference
of monies spent on infrastructure USA & Canada.
Please start sending petitions to President Obama,
and our Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch.

Next,compare money spent on National Security by all other
Countries. USA-$610 Billion. Next highest China–$132 Billion,
Third highest Russia–$83.7 Billion.
Next–Sale and distribution of weapons and to who.
Who profits by such sales & Give away.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 30, 2015
Reply

There will be no Rapture.

There is no mention of Rapture in the Bible. Rapture was never taught
or mentioned until the 1950’s. Another Deceptive Myth.
The anti-knowledge crowd has created an immense ecosystem of political disinformation.This effect is fortified by the-overlap between Republicans and fundamentalist Christians.
To believe that the Republican Party is the party of Christian people,
is a deceptive falsehood. It’s like saying Zionism recognizes the
son of God, as being Jesus Christ.
The truth being Republicans are financially supported by Zionism,
which is not supported by the true Jewish people that suffer under
their leadership. Check out (The Jewish Voice for Peace). Check out
the Jewish web sites of (Jews Against Zionism) and (Rabbi’s against
Zionism).
Buyer beware of the Deception, as you would the Wolf in sheep’s
clothing. Your community is a much better investment then the
promised GOLD of Wall Street, and the 2%.
Your present investments will soon be worthless.And your communities
will resent your leadership of greed all the more.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 7, 2015
Reply

Israel is seeking a 60 percent increase in annual military aid from the US:

Ronald L. Waldron
November 7, 2015

GO BACK SIX POST AND READ ON>

Ronald L. Waldron
November 13, 2015

TOTAL AID TO ISRAEL:

Sixteen U.S. Senators called on President Obama on November 10, 2015, to draft a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), strengthening security assistance and strategic ties to Israel. Included in this letter was a recommendation to provide Israel with the “necessary and appropriate measures to deter Iran,” as well as increased missile defense funding.
Which was a request for 60% more a total of $5 Billion for the next ten
years. It has been $3 Billion for the last 10 years.
A total of $126,572 Billion in aid from USA tax-payers in Rogue Nation
building. That does not include the Investments from other American
sources, such as religious organizations, and business Investments,
or the illegal trade of drugs, gambling, and weapons trade.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 13, 2015

Unanswered Questions, Who & Why ? Who has the Training?

France condemns settlement activities, which are illegal in international law

Israel settlement building in the territories of the future Palestinian State constitutes illegal appropriation of lands, which should be addressed in peace negotiations between the parties on the basis of the 1967 lines. Settlement activities threaten the viability of a two-state solution.
Concrete measures were taken at European level to address the acceleration of settlement activities. EU guidelines adopted in July 2013 do not allow any Israeli entities with activities in settlements to be awarded European funds as from January 2014. Many Member States, including France, issued recommendations warning of the financial, legal and reputational risks related to pursing activities in settlements.
What solution does France defend?

France considers that the conflict can only be resolved by the creation of an independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State living in peace and security alongside Israel.

The two-state solution is one that fulfils the national aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians. With this in mind, France has defined, with its European partners in a number of conclusions of the Foreign Affairs Council of ministers of the European Union since 2009, the parameters that should govern resolution of the conflict:
– Borders based on the 1967 lines with equivalent land swaps;
– Security arrangements preserving the sovereignty of the Palestinian State and ensuring the security of Israel;
– A just, fair and agreed solution to the refugee problem;
– An arrangement making Jerusalem the capital of the two states.
France considers that Jerusalem should become the capital of the two states, Israel and the future State of Palestine

Pending a negotiated settlement of the conflict and under internationally recognized resolutions, France does not recognize any sovereignty in Jerusalem. It calls for the easing of tensions and particularly respect of the status quo on holy sites. Any challenging to the status quo would pose a major threat to stability.
France plays a driving role in European and international diplomatic forums seeking a two-state solution.

It works closely with Israeli and Palestinian governments to encourage them to resume negotiations and reach a final agreement ending all the claims. It calls on them to avoid any unilateral action and any incitement to violence that could jeopardize a two-state solution.
France provides its support to the Palestinian Authority and Mahmoud Abbas, who is on the side of peace.

France encourages inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

France advocates urgent mobilization of the international community.

France will recognize the Palestinian State.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 15, 2015

Who is financing ISIS.?
Who supplied the amount of weapons they have?
Who provides the technology for the recruiting, 5,000 to 40,000 plus.?
Who is doing the amount of training they have gotten, very advanced training?
Who is it that gains from creating another WAR in the region?
What does ISIS gain, or is it their supporter that gains?
What reasoning is there for poking a stick into the hornets nest?
Where has the action been, and who gains from the action the most?
Where else but the Middle East, would a claim of being the forever victim, that victimizes?
Why would France be the target, is it to silence their view point for Peace for Palestine?
When will the next attack occur and the reasoning behind the possible target?
When the USA 2016 elections are well underway, will interruption of such be the target?
When in six months such begins, will the fear keep voters from the polls & help keep the
losing corrupt party and partners gain the MOST by keeping them in office?

TIME WILL TELL, in the mean time keep aware of your surroundings, stay safe, and
pray in the name of JESUS that such attack does not happen. Pray for PEACE
in the MIDDLE EAST, and an end to False Flag & Black opps operations, and TERRORISM.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 16, 2015

Accepting Syrian refugees:

IF any are brought into this Country,they all should be housed in the FEMA camps.
All guarded under maximum security. Upon clearing ISIS from Syria, return them to their own Country.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 16, 2015

List Of Zionist Crime Syndicate
Organizations In The USA
From John Churchilly
3-23-9

Ameinu
American Friends of Likud
American Gathering/Federation of Jewish Holocaust Survivors
America-Israel Friendship League
American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC)
American Jewish Committee
American Jewish Congress
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee
American Sephardi Federation
American Zionist Movement
Americans for Peace Now
AMIT
Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
Association of Reform Zionists of America
B’nai B’rith International
Bnai Zion
Central Conference of American Rabbis
Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America
State of Israel Bonds/Development Corporation for Israel
Emunah of America
Friends of Israel Defense Forces
Hadassah, the Women’s Zionist Organization of America
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society
Jewish Community Centers Association
Jewish Council for Public Affairs
Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs
Jewish Labor Committee
Jewish National Fund
Jewish Reconstructionist Federation
Jewish War Veterans of the United States of America (JWV)
Jewish Women International
MERCAZ USA, Zionist Organization of the Conservative Movement
NA’AMAT USA
NCSJ Advocates on behalf of Jews in Russia, Ukraine, the Baltic States & Eurasia
National Council of Jewish Women
National Council of Young Israel
World ORT – ORT America branch
Rabbinical Assembly (RA)
Rabbinical Council of America (RCA)
Religious Zionists of America (RZA or Mizrahi)
Union for Reform Judaism (URJ)
Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America (Orthodox Union or OU)
United Jewish Communities (UJC)
United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism (USCJ)
Women’s International Zionist Organization (WIZO)
Women’s League for Conservative Judaism (WLCJ)
Women of Reform Judaism (WRJ)
Workmen’s Circle (Arbeter Ring)
World Zionist Executive, US
Zionist Organization of America (ZOA)

And here is the good bit …

Every organisation above is ALSO a member of what is called :

“The Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organisations”

The Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations (CoP; often referred to as the Presidents’ Conference) is a “non-profit organisation” that describes itself as “a central address for key American, Israeli and other world leaders to consult on issues of critical concern to the Jewish community.” The Conference meets to make major statements or meet with important leaders. The Conference was founded to promote the state of Israel in the USA and that remains its primary task.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 19, 2015

ARE YOU COMPLETELY PREPARED? THIS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT PREP YOU CAN DO! A TRUE AND ETERNAL INVESTMENT!

Stephen Lendman

The Bible tells us that every human has sinned and fallen short of the glory of God which is is a heart-penetrating truth. He has provided a way to cleanse us of our sins since we can never be “good enough” to cleanse ourselves. That avenue to God’s grace, mercy and forgiveness (the cleansing of our sins) is through His only begotten Son, Jesus Christ of Nazareth Who is equally God.
Not one of us are guaranteed a “tomorrow”. Has your time run out? Will you continue to ignore the promptings of God the Holy Spirit or have you awakened to the essential need for God?
God the Holy Father, God the Holy Son and God the Holy Spirit are One God, the true, living, uncreated God Who is ever-present, all knowing, all powerful and all loving. He desires that every single person be forgiven, saved and to live eternally with Him. He is our only real protection and His love for you is unchanging. Accept Jesus Christ as your Savior, the true Messiah, today.
You can’t take your salvation for a test drive. You’re all-in or not.
Admit to Him that you are a sinner in need of forgiveness, that you are truly sorry for your sins. Acknowledge that He died for your sins, rose from the dead and lives forevermore. Invite Him into your life and to help you to turn from sin. Rejoice! You just became a Christian! Now trust in Him and get to know Him through the Bible which tells us everything we need to know and through prayer/talking to Him. He eagerly desires relationship with you.

Leadfoot1 Dog
August 17, 2015
Reply

“Conspiracy Theorist. ”

“Conspiracy Theorist. ”

There was a time when if someone dared say that the Earth was not the center of the universe, they were a “Conspiracy Theorist.” Later in humanity’s history, if someone said the Earth was not flat they were a “Conspiracy Theorist.” Even later if someone said man could reach the moon, they were a “Conspiracy Theorist.”

The term “Conspiracy Theorist” is nothing more than a derogatory title used to dismiss a critical thinker. Be thankful for them, and more importantly, you might want to start paying attention to them. In my most recent post titled, Egypt’s Great Pyramid at Giza Not Oldest Pyramid on Earth Anymore, I am sure I’ll hear those two words more than once, however I encourage you to remember what Albert Einstein once said:

“Condemnation without investigation is the height of ignorance.”

In addition the list below, the following video also sheds light on several other “Conspiracy Theories” proven to be “Conspiracy Fact” with the assistance of the Freedom of Information Act.

Leadfoot1 Dog
August 19, 2015
Reply

SUNDAY MORNING SESSION

SEN. BEN CARDIN (D-MD) AND SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC)
SUNDAY AFTERNOON SESSION

TOM DONILON AND MAJ. GEN. (RES.) YAACOV AMIDROR

REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY (R-CA) AND REP. STENY HOYER (D-MD)
MONDAY MORNING SESSION

U.S. PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS SAMANTHA POWER

ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU

CZECH REPUBLIC PRESIDENT MILOŠ ZEMAN

FORMER SPANISH PRESIDENT JOSE MARIA AZNAR AND FORMER CANADIAN MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS JOHN BAIRD
MONDAY AFTERNOON SESSION

U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR SUSAN RICE

SEN. ROBERT MENENDEZ (D-NJ)
TUESDAY MORNING SESSION

SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY)

REP. RUBEN GALLEGO (D-AZ) AND REP. EVAN JENKINS (R-WV)

CONFERENCE OF PRESIDENTS OF MAJOR JEWISH ORGANIZATIONS CHAIRMAN BOB SUGARMAN

Leadfoot1 Dog
August 20, 2015
Reply

Mr. Donald Trump:

We nominate you as our Candidate for President of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. “AMERICA”.
We at the “Can-Dem” will ask that you do just what you are
known for. “can-Dem”. Tell them all now “YOU’RE FIRED”
Then to be yourself tell them to get to “HELL OUT OF HERE !!!

republiCAN-DEMocrat–You could represent AMERICA.

Ronald L. Wqldron
August 23, 2015
Reply

TRUMP WILL BE OUR NEXT PRESIDENT

We the PEOPLE, Democrat, Republican, Independent, conservative, liberal,
green party, man, woman, young, or senior; are sick of the ignorance of the
INSIDERS. The attitude toward the bottom 90% as low class worthless GENTILES .Mr. Trump will not give up. He has started the fight for America & Americans, thatno one has done, except for all the empty promises of the last 52 years.No attack on him has any substance. He is a brilliant, successful, and trusted businessman & community leader. A man that we the people will support.WHY, because for a change, we know & believe he will consider us first ,not last. The infamous big LOBBIES are meaningless to him.This is the most important election in Americas history. UNITED WE STAND.He will bring in new people, new ideas, new advisers, new think tanks, newapproach to handling immigration, foreign policy, trade agreements, out-sourcing,employment, duel citizenship, education, tax reform.Is Trump a true Republican, do nothing but fight? NO! Is Trump a true Democrat ?Full time campaigners! NO. Will he continue allowing lobbies to run our business.Is Trump a true American? YES. Will he secure our borders. YES. Can heprovide our National Security with in our boarders, with out spending 70%of our federal budget on 300 foreign bases, and foreign Country defense .Dam right he can. WHY, he will have our support. NOT FOREIGN MONEY & SUPPORT. All at our exspense.OUR DUTY–Register to vote, get out and vote, protect our well being,our Security, our HOME LAND.KNOW who your enemies are. Show them the EXIT door.

Ninety-Nine
September 20, 2015
Reply

I IF AMERICANS KNEW:

If Americans Knew is a nonpartisan educational organization. We are happy to provide information and speakers on Israel-Palestine to individuals and groups of all religious, ethnic, racial, and political backgrounds. If Americans Knew supports justice, truth, equal rights and respect for all human beings, and we oppose racism, supremacism, and discrimination of any and all forms.

DIVEST FROM ISRAEL:

Ronald L. Wqldron
August 31, 2015
Reply

CIVIL-UNREST:

AMERICAN FIRST–THEN party affiliation.(corruption ramped in both).

The CONSTITUTION is and will always be for the american people.
It was not designed for foreign or domestic corporations, their lobbies,
or any special interest group, or their THINK TANKS, leadership, or
appointment.

If there is a 2016 Election, there must be complete reform of government.
Many speculate that civil unrest will be so strong, that such serious neglect
of congress to do anything for Americans, will end up with marshal law
being enacted, and Elections won’t be held.

Foreign policies must change drastically.The idea that our government has
contracted with CANADA to send in troops to quell civil disturbance is
preposterous . Of course we all know how AIPAC has infiltrated CANADA
also.

The first foreign troops to step into this Country will cause a complete civil
WAR.

We also believe that Donald Trump will be elected, not as a DAM republican,
or Democrat, but as an enforcer of our Constitution and laws. SUCH as
A COMPLETE audit of the FED. Investigation of the relationship of our
congress with a foreign interest syndicate. The treason and complete
disregard for our well being and DEMOCRACY.

Out of all the politicians now in office, only a handful are truely working
for America and Americans.

The rest would face a firing squad in any other place in the World.

Follow the MONEY trail you will find the (5) (W’s).

WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, & WHY.

From Street crime, Blue Collar crime, White Collar crime, to the most
unconscionable OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT & TREASON.

Ronald L. Wqldron
August 31, 2015
Reply

LARGEST CRIME OF THE CENTURY::

ZIONISM: International Syndicate, beginning 1917 in Russia,
backing Hitler in the Holocaust, developing AIPAC from 1948
in Europe , USA with 50 chapters one in each State, now
developing across CANADA.

Ronald L. Wqldron
September 1, 2015
Reply

SERVERS across the USA are blocking people from getting on
this site. Censorship is LIVE & WELL.

Allen D. Post
September 3, 2015
Reply

FLYING INAPPROPRIATE FLAGS:

As long as flags are coming down . We are sick of the Israeli flag
flying on any American Public Building, or behind our President,
or displayed any where public.

A foreign flag of a Country that violates human rights, creates Wars
based on lies. Possesses Nuclear Weapons.and will not sign a non-
prolific agreement, Will not allow inspections.

The political establishment in Washington,DC, and the lobbies
are beginning to see what their syndicate is coming up against.

Remove the criminals, and prosecutors need to investigate
and prosecute them all.

Audit the Fed.and then Wall Street insiders next.

Mr. Donald Trump, do not back down, keep the pressure on.

GET OUT AND VOTE FOR DONALD TRUMP

Allen D. Post
September 4, 2015
Reply

NEXT ON OUR AGENDA:

Next on our agenda. Tax reform.. Same rate for all people.

Full tax rates for all corporations that have outsourced.

Tax exemptions reforms. IRS AUDITS of all churches in five yr
increments. Auditors paid out of the fines & penalties.

Cut Defense budget to 50% of the federal budget. 60 % of that
to be spent with-in our Countries borders . All new facilities should
be built on our North and South borders..

The same with any federal prisons,and camps for immigrant
illegals that may be incarcerated.

Any child born as an American of illegal parents, shall automatically
be wards of rhe State, and taken into protective custody for their
well being.

Accountability for all that are on government payroll,

Allen D. Post
September 8, 2015
Reply

Working for Gov. Andrew Cuomo:

Regina Calcaterra Working for Gov. Andrew Cuomo , as an executive director investigating public corruption,”THE MORELAND COMMISSION”, a closed shop, no comments, only one completed investigation into the Political corruption.”
She was surrounded by New York’s powerful elite. Once the corruption led to the Zionist elite of New York and across the Country. The Moreland Commission was closed with no explanation, yet the Political corruption continues in high gear. How can anyone make claim of success with such. One arrest, no intense investigation, the Zionist Syndicate stronger then ever.
Mr. Cuomo said early on that the commission would be “totally independent” and free to pursue wrong doing anywhere in state government, including in his own office. “Anything they want to look at, they can look at — me, the lieutenant governor, the attorney general, the comptroller, any senator, any assemblyman,” he said last August.

The short Life of an Anti-corruption Commission:Established to investigate corruption in
the State’s scandal-plagued government, the Moreland
Commission developed a long list of promising
investigative targets before it was abruptly disbanded
by Gov.Andrew M Cuomo.
The commission had obtained a considerable amount of evidence of corruption dealing with campaign finance,
and the return of favors for special interest foreign
lobby AIPAC, and others ” Billions of tax payer funds”.
Evidence of treason among politicians of both parties,
local, State, and Federal.

Cuomo’s Office Hobbled Ethics Inquiries by Moreland Commission.
Check out Cuomo’s support for AIPAC,
J-Street, Netanyahu, and Israel. The Zionist Syndicate. Of course, after all the threats, false flag operations,
human rights violations, Gov. Cuomo visits Netanyahu
in Israel. Another FOR SALE SIGN ON HIS FOREHEAD.

Andrew M. Cuomo’s trip to Israel, his first travel abroad as governor and affiliated with the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, or Aipac, .

A complete transcript of evidence produced and
presented to the commission is available.

Published and copyrighted: Not yet circulated.

Ninety-Nine
September 9, 2015
Reply

All federal Investigative agencies find it much harder to find an
official that is not involved with the foreign lobbies AIPAC & J-Street.

Homeland Security micro-manages all federal agencies, reporting
all to their homeland ISRAEL.

A clean sweep will be necessary, before we can move forward.

We need to petition and demand term limits for Congress.

DUMP THE INCUMBENTS–ONE AND ALL

Ninety-Nine
September 10, 2015
Reply

GOP running MATES:

Donald Trump for President. Ann Coulter for Vice President.

A team new in the Political Arena. New Agenda to bring back the America we
once knew. With the same Constitution. No more WAR unless fired upon.

Strengthen our borders. Work for America and Americans.

FREEDOM from a baseless religion—No more Zionist propaganda.

Two very intelligent candidates with considerable knowledge of what is
needed, with integrity and ethics. Rare in todays Political realm.

Ann Coulter:

15 mins ago:
Why do we allow dual citizenship? “Fishenko lined his pockets at the expense of our national security” –

10 mins ago:
One of our smart immigrants who contribute so much! CNN: Russian pleads guilty in multimillion $ military scheme –

Ninety-Nine
September 11, 2015
Reply

CHANGE–WHAT IS CHANGE ? IT IS UP TO US!!

New Faces, New ideas,New way of doing Business.

TRUMP__COULTER

All the professional politicians from both parties have a combined
approval rating of 9 to 15 %. Spending 80% of their time, campaigning,
visiting Israel, or at lunch, dinner, or parties with lobbies, most of that
foreign.
Of course their staff, advisers, sTINK-Tanks, and pay masters take
care of business for them. At the expense of middle class tax payers,
with no benefit for America.
70% of the budget for national defense, with 85% overseas..
Even our National Guard Units ship out to foreign lands????
Let the foreign lands care for themselves, they create 100%
of their problems, and demand we tend to it.
NEVER abiding by international laws, or moral conduct.

After they blow all that money..Watch the coming video’s.

Ninety-Nine
September 13, 2015
Reply

European Jews conceal their religion

Some 200 rabbis and Jewish community leaders report a 75% increase in the number of Europeans hiding their Jewish identity; only 15% of the continent’s Jews plan to attend synagogue prayers during the High Holidays.

About 70 percent of Europe’s Jews conceal their religion and avoid any activity which may uncover their Jewish identity, likely for fear of being harassed, according to reports from rabbis and leaders of Jewish communities in the continent.

Ahead of the Jewish New Year and High Holidays, the Rabbinical Center of Europe (RCE) and European Jewish Association (EJA) asked a representative sample of 197 community leaders in Western and Eastern Europe how many people plan to visit synagogues during Rosh Hashana. According to the findings, only about 15% of Europe’s Jews plan to attend the prayers and shofar blowing with their children, while 85% will stay away.

Ninety-Nine
September 17, 2015
Reply

REMEMBER THIS POST__PLEASE DO__BE PREPARED..

Ronald L. Waldron says:
August 1, 2015 at 12:19 pm
CANDIDATES: YOU CAN NOT AVOID US ANY LONGER. NOR CAN THE MEDIA CENSOR THE TRUTH ANY
LONGER !

We are appalled by attacks on the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement.
Whether motivated by the desires of your donors or not, standing against this
ethical, nonviolent movement working for justice and equality puts you at odds
with a fast-growing number of Americans.

We, and the BDS movement, stand for full equality for all people of Israel and
Palestine, and do so proudly.

We will make the difference in winning or losing the elections.If you are not
prepared to answer our questions regarding Israel, AIPAC &
Chapters, J-Street, Wall Street, War VS. Peace,fair taxation, fair trade
agreements with terms enforced, out-sourcing, infrastructure,
education for Americans, equal justice, duel citizens in our government having
foreign interest as their agenda. Think Tanks, advisers,
staffers with foreign interest, college & universities with chair positions
being Zionist puppets with foreign interest, get out now,
we are coming after YOU. Your usual rhetoric and false agendas will not carry
you through. Regardless of your corrupt system and support.

90% of you in Washington know longer recognizes the truth, or care to. The truth
you refuse to discuss will prevail in the end. WHY?
BECAUSE 65% of voting Americans recognize the corruption, who has been in charge
of the agenda, and see each of you as Zionist robots
with rings in your noses, that we intend to get RID OF. We will not rest until
our DEMOCRACY prevails over all else. OUR constitution
prevails with all amendments with out change. That integrity, ethics, honesty,
and conviction to do what is right for AMERICA returns.

We do not want, need, or support the present foreign intervention we have in all
things. We will not put up with the likes of yo u
obstructionist that have done nothing for Americans over the last 20 years. You
bow down to the anti-christ in the middle east, and
do so for SELF-INTEREST, as sick as it sounds media and higher education
facilities are right behind you.

Wait until you really, MEET THE PRESS, OR FACE THE NATION . THE RESTRAINTS WILL
COME DOWN TO TELLING THE TRUTH & soon

Ronald L. Waldron I remember, the same as any one over 70 remembers the last 60 years ,

THANKS RON

Ninety-Nine
September 19, 2015
Reply

We heard it today:

Trump,another empty head, brain washed by his so called
Christian heritage and Zionist propaganda gives his
full support to ISRAEL.
NOT one will Stand up for America, and not bow to AIPAC,
the top 2%, Israel-Our worst enemy, biggest human rights
violators, destroying our Holy-land,Genocide of Palestine.
Then turn around and claim they are such victims

NOW–RIGHT NOW!! We need a third party candidate ,
some one will to stop the ZIONIST SYNDICATE that
occupies OUR total government.

NO DONALD TRUMP, you are a fraud, you are not near the
man you profess to be.

We so called gentile middle class means nothing to you and
your kind.

UNITED WE STAND Against the Foreign Lobby, and we
support Divestment from the illegal occupiers, and the
treason of all officials.

Donald you deflated yourself.

You are fired before you get started.

Ninety-Nine
September 20, 2015
Reply

IF AMERICANS KNEW:

If Americans Knew is a nonpartisan educational organization. We are happy to provide information and speakers on Israel-Palestine to individuals and groups of all religious, ethnic, racial, and political backgrounds. If Americans Knew supports justice, truth, equal rights and respect for all human beings, and we oppose racism, supremacism, and discrimination of any and all forms.

DIVEST FROM ISRAEL:

Ron Waldron and followers
September 21, 2015
Reply

WE PROMOTE PEACE FOR ALL
We believe that these times of unprecedented global insecurity – environmental, economic, social, and political – call for imaginative and dramatically new ways to promote peace and justice.

We condemn all forms of terrorism. Further, we believe that war and oppression are acts of terror because they victimize innocent civilians in overwhelming numbers. The best way to fight terrorism, therefore, is not to participate in it by waging war but, instead, to respect global human rights and work to reduce the economic and social conditions that cause poverty and injustice in the world.

We believe that it is imperative to use non-violence and non-military actions – through grassroots activities, diplomacy, and international law – to settle local, regional,
and global differences.

We call for the end of all US military engagement in Iraq and Afghanistan, including all permanent bases.

We believe that military actions by recent US administrations have caused the destruction of international law, weakened the peacekeeping and humanitarian roles of the United Nations, and made Americans less secure at home and abroad.

We believe that our country does not have the right to global military supremacy, the right to preemptively attack any sovereign nation assumed to be a potential threat, or the right to first use of nuclear weapons.

We are alarmed about the use of drones to kill people in other sovereign countries and anywhere.

We believe that the explosive Israeli/Palestinian conflict remains a major barrier to peace in the Middle East and that the US must support and work for peace, dignity, and justice for all parties. We denounce US support for Israel’s occupation of Palestine and its oppression of the Palestinian people.

We believe that the US must explore responsible peaceful solutions made visible by the Arab Spring.

We denounce US practice of being the world’s largest supplier of weapons at home and abroad, often to undemocratic regimes and gross abusers of human rights.

We denounce the manufacture and use of depleted uranium weapons. Their use in Iraq in the Gulf Wars I & II, Kuwait, Bosnia, Kosovo, and Afghanistan has brought untold harm to people (all troops, including our own, innocent civilians, and the unborn) and caused extensive damage to the environment now and into the future.
We demand that our government act responsibly and clean up the soils and waters radiated by depleted uranium, in other countries and in the United States We oppose any use of nuclear weapons and call for global nuclear disarmament.

We condemn the reckless waste of our country’s human and economic resources by the military-industrial complex.

We believe that these billions of our tax dollars should be invested in sustainable energy, education, health care, jobs, housing, and support for global human rights.

We support major increases in veterans’ benefits, especially programs that treat war-related medical and mental health problems of veterans and their families

We believe that the leaders of our government, past and present, should be held accountable for violations of the US Constitution and international law.

We support the establishment of a cabinet level Department of Peace.

We call on all citizens to reclaim our democracy – to honor dissent, vote regularly and responsibly, demand a free press, oppose abusive corporate power, and protect every individual’s right to privacy.

We stand and work for peace and justice. There is much work to do. Active peacemaking is everyone’s responsibility!
THE AMERICA WE ALL MISS. WHEN THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY “WERE” OUR ALLIES, NOT JUST THE ROGUE
AND RECKLESS OCCUPIERS, ISRAEL.

Ron Waldron and followers
September 21, 2015
Reply

The United Nations Messengers of Peace
United Nations Messengers of Peace are distinguished individuals, carefully selected from the fields of art, literature, science, entertainment, sports or other fields of public life, who have agreed to help focus worldwide attention on the work of the United Nations. Backed by the highest honour bestowed by the Secretary-General on a global citizen, these prominent personalities volunteer their time, talent and passion to raise awareness of United Nations efforts to improve the lives of billions of people everywhere.

Allen D. Post
September 23, 2015
Reply

Malfeasance in office

official misconduct: criminal conduct by a public official, criminal conduct by an administration’s member, dereliction of performance in office, deviation from rectitude, dishonest management, failing to uphold a sworn oath of office, failure in office, guilty act while a pubbic official, illegal act, illegality by a public official, improper conduct by a public official, impropriety by a public official, maladministration by a public servant, malfeasance by a pubbic servant, misadministration by a public servant, misconduct by a public official, misdeeds by a public official, misfeasance by a public official, misgovernment, misguidance by a public official, mismanagement by an office holder, misprision by an office holder, nonfeasance by an office holder, offenses while in office, transgressions by an office holder, turpitude by an office holder, wrongdoing, by a public official
Associated concepts: unlawful gratuities

JUST WHAT OUR CONGRESS IS ALL ABOUT !!

Thanks Frank, your completely right

NINETY--NINE
September 23, 2015
Reply

Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to Congressional Candidates
2014 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions and Top Ten 2014 & Career Recipients (331KB PDF)
2012 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions and Top Ten 2012 & Career Recipients (738KB PDF)
2010 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to 2010 Congressional Candidates (668KB PDF)
2008 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to Congressional Candidates (100KB PDF)
2006 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to Congressional Candidates
2004 Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to Congressional Candidates
Most Popular Articles in this Issue

U.S. Financial Aid To Israel: Figures, Facts, and Impact…
U.S. Aid to Israel…
U.S. Aid to Israel Articles…
Congressional Voting Records…
US Aid: The Lifeblood of Occupation…

Ronald L. Waldron
September 27, 2015
Reply

“WALKING TALL” —–DR. BEN CARSON

Talk soft and carry a big stick.

Beginning of the 2016 election season, I supported Hillary
Clinton. That was until she stated that she would not be
for DIVESTMENT from ISRAEL.

Next I agreed with Mr. Donald Trump, it certainly seemed like
he understood the corruption and problems that exist in
Washington, DC, That being the occupation of congress by
AIPAC & Israel, SPECIAL INTEREST, SPECIAL RETURNS.
The complete destruction of America’s reputation, values,
Integrity, & ethics. preemptive attacks & wars.
Mission Accomplished has yet to come about after 13yrs
and spending 7.5 TRILLION in debt dollars.
Loss of life, property,and economy.
Then he stands up and states that he fully supports
Israel, Worse yet that he is friends with Netanyahu.

Then I received a personal letter from Dr.Ben Carson,
stating that I, little ol” me was an inspiration to him, recognizing
me as a true Patriot, a shinning example of America.

Only one other political figure has contacted me by a
personal letter of recognition in my 15yrs of activism.
That being eight years ago from candidate Barack Obama.
Since then I have received four Thank You letters from
President Barack Obama. Which I will Cherish forever.
I’am grateful for what President Obama has done, and for
all he has attempted to do wkth a worthless republican
congress.

After reading the available material on Dr.Ben Carson,
I will from this point on support him for PRESIDENT of
these THE UNITED STATES,

The rest of the Republican Party is like a pack of wild
dogs barking up a wrong tree, looking for rewards from
our X–Holy Land. The barbarians they call GODS
CHOSEN PEOPLE. Zionist not Jewish people.

The Democrats that I have supported in the past are
polarized by False doctrine, and propaganda by our
worst enemy. Today’s Israel they call a Democracy,
that in reality is perpetrator of abuse and genocide.

The only chance for change will come to us by way
of Ben Carson for president, and a complete different
congress. One that can muster up more then a .09%
approval rating.

PLEASE CHECK OUT WHAT IS PRESENTED.

fightcorruption02@gmail.com

Ronald L. Waldron
September 28, 2015
Reply

GUESS WHAT FOLKS, THE LAST HOPE FOR AN AMERICAN
INTEREST PRESIDENT. DOWN THE TUBE.

THE ANTI-CHRIST HAS TAKEN ALL AWAY FROM YOU.!

Every Republican & Democrat candidate is totally committed to
AIPAC, J-STREET, AND ISRAEL. But that is not all.

Besides the Government, and all its agencies look at the list.

State & Local Governments.
Your Businesses Large & small.
You are the tax base, none by them.
The entire Banking system.
Unemployment rates due to their out-sourcing.
Wall Street. It will collapse, all remnants to them.
The USA education system. Universities, all chair positions.
All major media, news papers, radio, and TV. Owned by them.
All major drug trafficking, Human trafficking . Theirs.
All major insurance companies.
THE FDA and what is passed as safe.??
ALL religious leaders no longer kneel to God, but BOW & Kiss
their RINGS. Forgetting the Holy Land & Christ.
Even the theology schools have psychic classes on how to
raise money from their congregations to invest on Wall Street,
and the Zionist corporations.
Hollywood and the entertainment business.
Of course the moral decay doesn’t come from them BC & AD .
They are always the victim, and their meager existence depends
on Foreign aid & donations. LOL.
LOOK at the HISTORY of all things before & after 1948.

BEN CARSON STANDS BY ISRAEL:

Our Bulwark Middle East Ally

The United States of America has had a special relationship with Israel ever since we were the very first nation to recognize her creation. The depth of our unique bond with Israel has only strengthened over the years.

Facebook sharingTwitter sharing
Israel
Israel is our only democratic ally in the Middle East. She is surrounded by nations that threaten her very existence. We can never let her enemies believe that our deep commitment to Israel’s peace and security will waver.

We must always stand with Israel and her people. LMAO

I will NOT Stand with Ben on Israel or anyone that supports
the actions by ISRAEL and the Zionist Syndicate..

PLEDGE THE SAME

I’am sure no one is reading or listening. Americans no
longer fight for whats right, or their rights.

When the lights go out. Please put the cat out. We need to
leave some kind of life.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 30, 2015
Reply

Human rights activists are being silenced and threatened

Human rights activists are being silenced and threatened in upstate New York — add your name to our newspaper ad in support of free speech!

Dear Ronald L.,
Beverly J. Martin Elementary School is a beloved public school in Ithaca, NY. Every year, students at BJM study human rights, just like all other elementary school students in New York State. They do different activities each year: one class read Malala Yousafzai’s autobiography, and another met with clean water activists fighting to protect nearby Seneca Lake.
This year third grade students heard from Bassem Tamimi, a celebrated Palestinian human rights advocate. Bassem told the students about his own children, and the oppression they face every day. He explained to them that too many people around the world still don’t enjoy human rights that many take for granted. And he told them the best way to fight for human rights is to show love and compassion toward all people.
That sounds like a message every child should hear, doesn’t it? Some people don’t think so.
After Bassem spoke with students, a right-wing law professor at Cornell started a smear campaign in the conservative blogosphere, and a campaign of intimidation against the elementary school. Not because Bassem said anything false or inappropriate — he didn’t. Not because Bassem is in anyway unsavory — he isn’t. In fact, he’s been recognized for his human rights activism by both the European Union and Amnesty International. They objected because he dared to speak up for Palestinians.
Defenders of Israel’s illegal and racist occupation have already forced the school district to apologize. We need to send a strong message and make it clear that New Yorkers say no to censorship, and yes to human rights.
Add your name to our open letter right now — NEW YORKERS WILL NOT BE SILENCED.
We’ll be buying ads in local newspapers to share our open letter, and make it clear that human rights advocates will not be silenced. It is critical that you add your name and help us fight back.
This wasn’t the first time activists have been threatened for speaking out in New York, and it won’t be the last. Around the same time, Reverend Graylan Hagler was disinvited from speaking at a seminary in Rochester after extremists made death threats.
Let that sink in for a minute.
Death. Threats.
Rev. Hagler, a United Church of Christ minister, is a veteran civil rights activist and organizer. He was invited to give a talk — co-sponsored by JVP Rochester — about the connection between the struggle for racial justice in the U.S. and Palestine. But our opponents couldn’t bear to let that happen, so they made threats of violence. Our opponents threatened violence against a clergyman, for speaking a seminary. That’s what we’re up against.
Maybe we should be scared. Maybe we should be cowed. But I am not. I am hopeful.
I am hopeful because closed-minded extremists wouldn’t be threatening our movement if they weren’t afraid of us.
That’s why we have to keep organizing, keep fighting, and keep standing with activists like Bassem Tamimi and Rev. Hagler as they share their stories and speak out.
Please sign our open letter. We’ll be publishing it in Ithaca and in Rochester newspapers.
Say NO to censorship. Say YES to free speech. Say YES to human rights.
Our movement is growing. Our time is now. We will not be silenced.
Alana Krivo-Kaufman
Jewish Voice for Peace

Subject: Will you stand up to intimidation? +++

Message:
EMAIL

Allen D. Post
October 2, 2015
Reply

YES, and AMEN. Many have left the CHURCHES because of the
diluted and misrepresentation from the money hungry TV
Evangelist , that sell their soles to the Zionist owners of the Broad-
cast stations. Same for the Politicians claiming Religious belief.
NEXT from many pulpits with false doctrine, or picking out
selected scripture with out including the entire Chapter.

Human rights, instead of genocide. New Testament instead of
the old. The 2000 years with out an Israel, was certainly much
better than the last 67 years of Zionist BULL-CRAP !!

Ronald L. Waldron
October 3, 2015
Reply

MY JOURNEY, and CONCLUSION:

Secretary of State John Kerry recently infuriated Israeli officials by making the following statement at the Munich Security Conference about threats to boycott, sanction and divest from the Israeli occupation.
If AIPAC can lose on Syria and lose on Iran, this raises a spectacular question: Could AIPAC also lose on Israel-Palestine?

AIPAC’s problems “go beyond Iran,” citing AIPAC’s failed push for war in Syria, and their false flag arms deals.

The reach of AIPAC’s political power, long an unquestioned assumption in Washington, is now in doubt.

President Obama has raised questions about the effectiveness of AIPAC’s tactics and even its role as the unchallenged voice of the pro-Israel lobby in Washington. The control of the republican Party, individual democrats, and the corruption involved is being
unmasked.

The attacks by media, failure in reporting on issues involving Israel, false reports on others. Silencing reporters, even
by assassination, immediate removal of others. Brings about issues called ” conspiracy theories” are in fact reality.
That all major media is owned & controlled, by Zionist Syndicate members with Israel & global control as their AIM.

70 House Democrats have backed a letter supporting Obama’s diplomacy with Iran (you can urge your representative to join that effort here) and that former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also has strongly backed Obama’s Iran diplomacy and opposed AIPAC’s efforts to undermine it. We must clarify here, that Hillary Clinton has been a strong advocate for the Jewish people, their communities,
and needs. That does not equate to support for the Zionist organized syndicate. It is well known that anyone who outright
and publicly states anything negative regarding AIPAC, Israel, or Mossad is in a dangerous position, for some type of retaliation.

President Obama’s life has been threatened by Netanyahu, with-outy any mention of it by their media here in the USA.
NOT one word of it from any Republican in support of our President, even though they dam well were notified.
All they have done is obstruct all functions of our government, while giving more needless money to Israel & outrageous
defense spending 6 times that of China or Russia. One half of all the defense money spent in the entire world has been
spent by this congress. 2014-$610 Billion, $180B China. $85B Russia.
Such does not include the loans, gifts, Aid, or gratuities .

President Eisenhower gave warning back in the 50’s. President Kennedy died as a result of not cooperating with Israel.

President Obama’s Resistance has led to a 8 yr. period of total blocking anything he has attempted, or watered it down.

President Jimmy Carter just recently stated how the coalition of our officials and AIPAC has infected our democracy.

The Times cited Sen. Christopher Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut, as embodying a trend of lawmakers who are “not worried about bucking AIPAC.” Indeed, Murphy has gone so far as to co-sponsor a petition with MoveOn calling on the Senate to reject AIPAC’s position.

I took a leave of absents from the Democrat Party, and Hillary Clinton’s campaign. I wanted to check out the campaigns of
the Republican Party & candidates. With-in the parties platform, is a profound support for big business, corporations, Israel,
AIPAC, oil lobbies, and a global economy, with global take over. No bid contracts with select contractors such as Halliburton &
Black water. Nothing supporting the American people, or respect for ecology, health concerns regarding contamination’s, EPA,
FDA, Social programs, Social Security, infrastructure, the unemployment rate. Not any issue of concern for the average guy.
Nothing about the poverty rate, or any human rights issue.

Then check out the candidates. It took some time for anyone to contact a Donald Trump, or campaign. After letters
sent for forward, did a web develop in 3 days. Issues, all things, we will take care of that. We will bring in new people. I’ll
see to that. Other wise the same rhetoric and agenda set out by the Party plat form.

Ben Carson, he did appear to be the “Walking Tall–carry a big stick candidate.On the surface it may seem that way,
how ever I could not find anything to separate him from the Evangelical far right conservative regime. Of course all
other candidates have already self destructed. One being such a corporate CPO, she can not make a complete truthful
statement if her life depended on it. She like others have listened to too much FOX-NEWS or Rush Limbaugh.

NOW, I’am back, fully convinced that this coming election is the most important in the history of this OUR Country,
OUR democracy, our freedoms, our own, our children’s, our grand-children’s, our great grand-children’s and any
other generations future depends on.
That means I find that I will fully support the Democrat Party. The Democrat candidates across the board, regardless,
if any one of them does not support WE the American people, we will get rid of in the next cycle by primaries.

I will also fully support the Hillary Clinton campaign. She supports the most of the issues I’am concerned about
more then any other candidate. I also look at her history as New York Senator, as Secretary of State.
There may have been mistakes that any one else could have made. NOW, the reality.

Have the Clinton’s ,ever done anything with or with out intention, that hurt the United States or the American People,
Military family’s , our economy, our freedoms, our Democracy, or our system of justice, and Human rights.

There is no need to point out the obvious, there can be do denial, just worthless lies & attacks that just amounts to
more ZIONIST bullying that no longer is working thank GOD. & Of course the son of GOD, JESUS.

I have taken you all on this trip with me. I hope you have come to the same conclusion as I.

I’am convinced. UNITED WE STAND—–DIVIDED WE FALL !! Remember? Are you convinced.

PLEASE be registered to vote. Show up and VOTE.

PRESIDENT OBAMA just told us all. It is up to us as a people to change it. To change it we have to vote the real problems out
of office, out of control.

DO IT— JUST PLAIN DO IT !!

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L. Waldron
October 4, 2015
Reply

Bernie Sanders Stance On Israel

Bernie Sanders Stance On Israel Is More Of The Same Ole, Same Ole
The Vermont senator’s fans have been circulating a 20-year-old speech in which he blatantly objects to attacks on Israel, but his current views are harder to pin down.

Willie Bee
October 4, 2015
Reply

Bernie Sanders is often perceived as an “alternative” to presidential candidates more concerned with pleasing their Wall Street donors than voters. But when it comes to his stance on Israel and Palestine, the independent senator from Vermont, who is running for president as a Democrat, begins to look less decisively different than the rest of the pack.

Sanders made headlines in August, when a dialogue with pro-Palestine human rights activists at a Vermont town hall boiled over into frustration after Sanders chided Israel for its actions rather than condemning its many war crimes. The interaction occurred near the end of Israel’s brutal assault on the people of Gaza last summer, during which Israeli soldiers deliberately targeted hospitals and U.N. shelters and killed thousands of civilians. Last July, Sanders joined the rest of the U.S. Senate by unanimously voting to support Israel’s actions.

Ron Waldron
October 4, 2015
Reply

Tell all Presidential candidates:

Ted Cruz told the crowd at a recent Sheldon Adelson-funded
event that “in 2017 we need a president who will stand up directly and
confront the [BDS] movement.”

Tell all Presidential candidates: We support equal
rights for all peoples of Palestine and Israel. And we’re not alone.

The BDS movement is becoming a very public conversation topic in US
politics. We know this grandstanding against BDS is first and foremost
about the hunt for billionaire mega-donors – whether they be extreme
right-wing fanatics like Sheldon Adelson, or Haim Saban, whose
ultra-conservative streak is more specifically focused on opposing
Palestinian rights.

Candidates need to know that selling out Palestinian rights doesn’t
curry any favor with us. Polls repeatedly show that growing numbers of
all Americans – even and increasingly Jews—have had it with Israel’s
endless settlement expansion, inequality, and denial of rights. They
recognize that Israel is not interested in peace, and don’t want US
policy to give Israel a free pass anymore.

Show how many of us want a new path for US policies
toward Israel and Palestine.

If we raise our voices, there’s actually reason to believe we can make
a difference.

Just 4 months ago, working with many partner organizations, we helped
convince 60 Members of Congress to boycott Netanyahu’s speech to
Congress. And days ago, a new survey showed only 48% of Democrats
think Israel wants peace with its neighbors, while 47% think Israel is
a racist country.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 6, 2015
Reply

SHOULD WE TRUST ANYONE IN GOVERNMENT??

Total Contractors, aka Mercenaries, Will be 130,000 to 160,000, in Afghanistan :

They secured the Oil fields of Iraq, now
they will secure the poppy fields of
Afghanistan all for the Organized Crime
syndicate that is controlling much of
our government today.

Where are the companions of the China
cocaine deal presently??

Wouldn’t we destroy the fields other wise??
Do we trust any official this day and age??
Afghanistan now supplies over 90 percent of the world’s heroin, generating nearly $200 billion in revenue. Since the U.S. invasion on Oct. 7, 2001, opium output has increased 33-fold (to over 8,250 metric tons a year).
The U.S. has been in Afghanistan for over seven years, has spent $177 billion in that country alone, and has the most powerful and technologically advanced military on Earth. GPS tracking devices can locate any spot imaginable by simply pushing a few buttons.
Still, bumper crops keep flourishing year after year, even though heroin production is a laborious, intricate process. The poppies must be planted, grown and harvested; then after the morphine is extracted it has to be cooked, refined, packaged into bricks and transported from rural locales across national borders. To make heroin from morphine requires another 12-14 hours of laborious chemical reactions. Thousands of people are involved, yet—despite the massive resources at our disposal—heroin keeps flowing at record levels.

Common sense suggests that such prolific trade over an extended period of time is no accident, especially when the history of what has transpired in that region is considered. While the CIA ran its operations during the Vietnam War, the Golden Triangle supplied the world with most of its heroin. After that war ended in 1975, an intriguing event took place in 1979 when Zbigniew Brzezinski covertly manipulated the Soviet Union into invading Afghanistan.

Behind the scenes, the CIA, along with Pakistan’s ISI, were secretly funding Afghanistan’s mujahideen to fight their Russian foes. Prior to this war, opium production in Afghanistan was minimal. But according to historian Alfred McCoy, an expert on the subject, a shift in focus took place. “Within two years of the onslaught of the CIA operation in Afghanistan, the Pakistan-Afghanistan borderlands became the world’s top heroin producer.”

Soon, as Professor Michel Chossudovsky notes, “CIA assets again controlled the heroin trade. As the mujahideen guerrillas seized territory inside Afghanistan, they ordered peasants to plant poppies as a revolutionary tax. Across the border in Pakistan, Afghan leaders and local syndicates under the protection of Pakistan intelligence operated hundreds of heroin laboratories.”

Eventually, the Soviet Union was defeated (their version of Vietnam), and ultimately lost the Cold War. The aftermath, however, proved to be an entirely new can of worms. During his research, McCoy discovered that “the CIA supported various Afghan drug lords, for instance Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The CIA did not handle heroin, but it did provide its drug lord allies with transport, arms, and political protection.”

By 1994, a new force emerged in the region—the Taliban—that took over the drug trade. Chossudovsky again discovered that “the Americans had secretly, and through the Pakistanis [specifically the ISI], supported the Taliban’s assumption of power.”

These strange bedfellows endured a rocky relationship until July 2000 when Taliban leaders banned the planting of poppies. This alarming development, along with other disagreements over proposed oil pipelines through Eurasia, posed a serious problem for power centers in the West. Without heroin money at their disposal, billions of dollars could not be funneled into various CIA black budget projects. Already sensing trouble in this volatile region, 18 influential neo-cons signed a letter in 1998 which became a blueprint for war—the infamous Project for a New American Century (PNAC).

Fifteen days after 9-11, CIA Director George Tenet sent his top-secret Special Operations Group (SOG) into Afghanistan. One of the biggest revelations in Tenet’s book, At the Center of the Storm, was that CIA forces directed the Afghanistan invasion, not the Pentagon.

In the Jan. 26, 2003, issue of Time magazine, Douglas Waller describes Donald Rumsfeld’s reaction to this development. “When aides told Rumsfeld that his Army Green Beret A-Teams couldn’t go into Afghanistan until the CIA contingent had lain the groundwork with local warlords, he erupted, ‘I have all these guys under arms, and we’ve got to wait like little birds in a nest for the CIA to let us go in?’”

ARMITAGE A MAJOR PLAYER

But the real operator in Afghanistan was Richard Armitage, a man whose legend includes being the biggest heroin trafficker in Cambodia and Laos during the Vietnam War; director of the State Department’s Foreign Narcotics Control Office (a front for CIA drug dealing); head of the Far East Company (used to funnel drug money out of the Golden Triangle); a close liaison with Oliver North during the Iran-Contra cocaine-for-guns scandal; a primary Pentagon official in the terror and covert ops field under George Bush the Elder; one of the original signatories of the infamous PNAC document; and the man who helped CIA Director William Casey run weapons to the mujahideen during their war against the Soviet Union. Armitage was also stationed in Iran during the mid-1970s right before Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the shah. Armitage may well be the greatest covert operator in U.S. history.

On Sept. 10, 2001, Armitage met with the UK’s national security advisor, Sir David Manning. Was Armitage “passing on specific intelligence information about the impending terrorist attacks”? The scenario is plausible because one day later—on 9-11—Dick Cheney directly called for Armitage’s presence down in his bunker. Immediately after WTC 2 was struck, Armitage told BBC Radio, “I was told to go to the operations center [where] I spent the rest of the day in the ops center with the vice president.”

These two share a long history together. Not only was Armitage employed by Cheney’s former company Halliburton (via Brown & Root), he was also a deputy when Cheney was secretary of defense under Bush the Elder. More importantly, Cheney and Armitage had joint business and consulting interests in the Central Asian pipeline which had been contracted by Unocal. The only problem standing between them and the Caspian Sea’s vast energy reserves was the Taliban.

Since the 1980s, Armitage amassed a huge roster of allies in Pakistan’s ISI. He was also one of the “Vulcans”—along with Condi Rice, Paul Wolfowitz, Richard Perle, and Rabbi Dov Zakheim—who coordinated Bush’s geo-strategic foreign policy initiatives. Then, after 9-11, he negotiated with the Pakistanis prior to our invasion of Afghanistan, while also becoming Bush’s deputy secretary of state stationed in Afghanistan.

Our “enemy,” or course, was the Taliban “terrorists.” But George Tenet, Colin Powell, Porter Goss, and Armitage had developed a close relationship with Pakistan’s military head of the ISI—General Mahmoud Ahmad— who was cited in a Sept. 2001 FBI report as “supporting and financing the alleged 9-11 terrorists, as well as having links to al Qaeda and the Taliban.”

The line between friend and foe gets even murkier. Afghan President Hamid Karzai not only collaborated with the Taliban, but he was also on Unocal’s payroll in the mid-1990s. He is also described by Saudi Arabia’s Al-Watan newspaper as being “a Central Intelligence Agency covert operator since the 1980s that collaborated with the CIA in funding U.S. aid to the Taliban.”

Capturing a new, abundant source for heroin was an integral part of the U.S. “war on terror.” Hamid Karzai is a puppet ruler of the CIA; Afghanistan is a full-fledged narco-state; and the poppies that flourish there have yet to be eradicated, as was proven in 2003 when the Bush administration refused to destroy the crops, despite having the chance to do so. Major drug dealers are rarely arrested, smugglers enjoy carte blanche immunity, and Nushin Arbabzadah, writing for The Guardian, theorized that “U.S. Army planes leave Afghanistan carrying coffins empty of bodies, but filled with drugs.” Is that why the military protested so vehemently when reporters tried to photograph returning caskets?

Victor Thorn is a hard-hitting researcher, journalist and the author of many books on 9-11 and the New World Order. These include 9-11 Evil: The Israeli Role in 9-11 and Phantom Flight 93.

In short, many of the groups now supported (or tolerated) by the United States and NATO are important actors in the drug trade
Blackwater has arms warehouse in Islamabad –Blackwater has implanted sensitive instruments at Sihala to monitor activities of Khan Research Laboratories (KRL), Kahuta, as well as to keep an eye on the nuclear assets of Pakistan. 22 Oct 2009 Private US security firm Blackwater has a warehouse located in the industrial area of Islamabad that is reportedly involved in illegal arms trading. The warehouse, Kestral Logistics, is working as the subcontractor of Xe Worldwide or Blackwater, The Nation reports. According to sources, the company has arms deals with Blackwater and is importing heavy arms and ammunition for the US company for its ongoing illicit operations in Pakistan. [Wow. Blackwater ‘keeping an eye on’ the nuclear assets of Pakistan. I think we’d all prefer al-Qaeda watching them.]

“Israel Lobby” 10 Mar 2009 Chas Freeman’s full statement following his decision not to serve as National Intelligence Council chairman… ‘The tactics of the Israel Lobby plumb the depths of dishonor and indecency and include character assassination, selective misquotation, the willful distortion of the record, the fabrication of falsehoods, and an utter disregard for the truth. The aim of this Lobby is control of the policy process through the exercise of a veto over the appointment of people who dispute the wisdom of its views, the substitution of political correctness for analysis, and the exclusion of any and all options for decision by Americans and our government other than those that it favors.’

Egypt constructing steel wall on Gaza border
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has confirmed reports that Egypt is building a metal wall along its border with the Gaza Strip and noted the wall is being financed by the United States.
The wall could be a preparation for new Israeli attacks against Gaza, she said and stated the wall was part of an security agreement signed between Israel and former US President George Bush shortly before his term ended.

There are several explanations. Cynics point out that the Egyptian government receives a huge American subsidy every year – almost two billion dollars – by courtesy of Israel. It started as a reward for the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. The pro-Israel lobby in the US Congress can stop it any time.

TORAH JEWS WILL TAKE CLASS ACTION –

WHAT EVERYONE KNOWS, BUT AFRAID TO SAY SO.

“THE TRUTH”

TORAH JEWS WILL TAKE CLASS

ACTION;

Today in Bilin Palestinian, Israeli, and International activists joined together for yet another non-violent protest against the apartheid wall and Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian land. Demonstrators of all ages holding signs and Palestinian flags marched to the apartheid fence (also referred to as a wall) where they were met with sound bombs and tear gas. Dozens suffered from severe tear gas inhalation.

Today, activists managed to pull open the yellow gate next to the fence, after cutting through the surrounding barbed wire. This gate is regularly used by the army to invade and harass the people of Bilin. Beyond the gate you can see the Israeli army’s current encampment as well as fields and olive trees belonging to Palestinian families from Bilin. The apartheid wall usurps 60% of the village’s land.

International demonstrator T.D. commented, “All the values and principles of morality that we know have been completely inverted and perverted here, its Orwellian.” His placard read, “War monger Obama receives Nobel Peace Prize.” Another sign read: Rouge criminal state Israel: The only “democracy” in the Middle East.

True Torah Jews against Zionism:
Zionists Do Not Represent Jews
From the inception of the Zionist State and particularly in recent times, the impression has been created in the World that there is some connection between the State, which falsely calls itself Israel, and the Jewish people as a whole. Therefore, we who continue to uphold the never-changing tradition of the Jewish people find it proper to again clarify the following points:

A Jew is one who remains faithful to the laws of the Jewish religion, that is, the Holy Torah and its commandments.
The Jewish people became a people before they had their own land, and continued to exist as a people also after they went Into exile, because our very people hood is based exclusively on the Torah.
The Holy Land was given to the Jewish people on the condition that they observe the Torah and its commandments. When they failed to do this, their sovereignty over the land was taken from them, and they went into exile. From that time, we are prohibited by the Torah with a very grave prohibition to establish a Jewish independent sovereignty in the Holy Land or anywhere throughout the world. Rather, we are obligated to be loyal to the nations under whose protection we dwell.
This situation has existed for close to 2000 years when the Jewish people were dispersed throughout all corners of the world. During this time, the Jews always remained faithful to the country in which they lived.
The Jewish people are grateful to all those merciful nations which have allowed them to observe Torah and the commandments undisturbed.
From ancient times, the relations between the Jewish and Islamic peoples have always been those of peace and brotherhood, and friendship always reigned between them. The proof of this is the fact that for centuries, in all the Arab lands, hundreds of thousands of Jews lived in honor and amidst mutual esteem.
Jews throughout all generations yearned to grace the sacred soil of the Holy Land and to live there. However, their sole purpose was to fulfill the commandments dependent upon the land and to absorb Its holiness. Never, G-d forbid, did they have any nationalist or sovereign intent whatsoever which, as mentioned above, is forbidden to us. Indeed, also here in the Holy Land, our fathers lived in neighborly harmony with the Palestinian residents of the land, helping one another, to mutual benefit.
Until about two hundred years ago, the vast majority of Jews observed the Torah and the commandments in entirety. Jewry’s leaders were Torah scholars, who directed the people according to the Torah. They were loyal citizens in the host nations where they dwelled and to the local laws. They prayed for the welfare of their respective governments. To our sorrow, at that time a small number of Jews slowly left their observance of Torah and commandments. Together with this, they began to deride the spiritual leadership of their people. This assimilation was the basis upon which, one hundred years ago, the ideology of Zionism was born. Its founders were assimilated Jews who had abandoned the Torah.
Immediately at the founding of the Zionist movement, masses of Jews under the leadership of their Rabbis, launched a heavy battle against Zionism. Their attack was directed not only at the non-religious Zionist idea, but rather, primarily at its opposition to the Torah-ordained path that Jewry must follow while in exile. As such, the Zionists incited the nations of the world, demanding political sovereignty over the Holy Land while remaining oblivious to the resentment this would arouse In the Palestinian Arabs, the land’s veteran inhabitants. As stated, the leaders of Orthodox Jewry vehemently opposed the movement with all force.
The Zionists refused to heed the voice of the Rabbis and Torah authority. They persisted in their ways until they succeeded in influencing the British government to issue the Balfour Declaration concerning the “establishment of a national home for the Jews in the land of Israel.” To our great sorrow, from that point on began the deterioration of the good relations between the Jews and the Arab inhabitants of the land. This occurred because the Arab people understood that the Zionists wished to seize ruler ship from them. In addition, the Arab people had suspicions as if the Jewish people wished to seize control of the Temple Mount and other similar sites. Matters worsened as a result.
The Jewish leadership of that time saw it as proper to clarify before the Arab leaders that the Torah-true Jews had no desire whatsoever for sovereignty, and that our desire was to continue to live in peace with the Arabs, as we had always done. The leader of the G-d-fearing Jewish community at that time, Rabbi Yoseph Chaim Zonnenfeld. of blessed memory, organized a delegation in July of 24′ which visited King Hussein and his sons Faisal the King of Iraq and the Amir Abdullah In order to lucidly present to them the position of the G-d-fearing Jewish community. The Jewish delegation clarified unequivocally that Torah Jewry is totally opposed to the Zionist sovereignty over the Holy Land. It Is worth noting that the delegation was received with great honor. They were even assured that all Arab lands were completely open to Jews, however, on the condition that the Jews do not demand political rights. This condition also applied to the Holy Land. One of the members of the Jewish delegation, Professor Yisroel Yaakov De Haan, paid with his life for his participation.
Torah Jewry protests at every opportunity against the Zionist rule over the Holy Land, and the Zionist rebellion against the neighboring nations. Torah Jewry has condemned the Zionist oppression of the Palestinians, the land’s veteran inhabitants who have been driven from their homes and properties. The Zionists’ barbaric and violent deeds are absolutely antithetical to the essence of the Jewish people.
Torah Jewry has never ever recognized the Zionist state. Since the Zionists succeeding in establishing their state, Torah Jewry has continuously announced to the world that the Zionists do not represent the Jewish people, and that the name “Israel” that they use is a forgery. For as has been stated above, it is forbidden to us from the Torah to rebel against the nations, and all sovereignty by us is prohibited. Rather, we await the days when all the world will recognize the sovereignty of the Creator, and the words of the prophet Isaiah will yet be fulfilled: “And they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. No nation will lift its sword against any other, nor will they learn warfare anymore.”
Anti-Zionist Orthodox Jews have refrained to this day from taking any funds from the Zionist regime, whether for their educational institutions, synagogues or other benefits. Obviously, they do not participate in the Zionist elections, whether for the “Knesset” or for the municipality. We do not serve in their army, and we even avoid speaking in the Hebrew language that the Zionists Invented. (incidentally, this is not the holy and true Hebrew language in which the Bible is written.) All this is done because Torah Jewry does not recognize the Zionist regime, which Is against the Torah and against humanity.
Lately, the question has once again arisen concerning the Temple Mount and sovereignty over it. Thus, we wish to state unequivocally: a) In our time, it is a severe Torah prohibition for any Jew to set foot on any part of the Temple Mount area. b) The Jewish people have no claim whatsoever to sovereignty over this holy site, which is under Islamic authority, nor over any other holy site. Rabbi Zonenfeld was once asked, “is it true, that the Rabbi prefers an non-Jewish government over all of the Holy Land”? Rabbi Zonenfeld replied, “if King Hussein would rule over Palestine, the holiness of the Holy Land would not be diminished to even to an Iota degree”. We yearningly await G-d’s great day, when He will return His Divine Presence to Zion, restoring the holy city to its former holiness and glory as in days of old, to be a light to the peoples and the nations.
The Zionists have no right of any sovereignty over even one inch of the Holy Land. They do not represent the Jewish people in any way whatsoever. They have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people. Therefore, their words, declarations and actions are not in any way representative of the Jewish people. This is because the Zionists’ seizing of power over the Holy Land is antithetical to Jewish law, and also because the Zionists do not behave like Jews at all rather, they desecrate the sanctity of the land.
We once again clarify that it is our desire to live in peace with our Arab and Palestinian neighbors, as we did before the Zionist revolution, and as Jews all over the world till today live, accepting the yoke of rulership of their host nation, with complete loyalty. Our sole desire is to serve our G-d and to fulfill His commandments with a perfect heart and to delight in the radiance of the sanctity of the Land.
PUT THE “HOUSE’ IN ORDER.

A LAST DITCH EFFORT

Every last tissue of belief in the GOVERNMENT should by now be shred and cast aside. The Democrats are no less the corporate bailers and militarists than the Republicans. They hand trillions to the banks and brokerage firms; they dissolve union contracts and send the workers to the dogs; their unmanned drones bomb Pakistan, killing and maiming innocents and displacing tens of thousands; they sell the same lies about the wars-that they have to do with terrorism or democracy rather than oil and other resources-as their predecessors; they fund the very enemy that they claim to fight; they keep up the same contracts with Blackwater and its successors; they vote for the same war funding; they carry out the same secret renditions; they sanction and continue the same spying on US citizens; they exonerate torturers and war criminals from the previous administration; they are war criminals in complicity with other war criminals. It is now obvious

to most that both parties have

sold the American people out to

organized crime. The corruption

and control continues on the same

path with the same special

interest groups in charge.

The 14 characteristics of Fascism

remain the same now as they did

for the previous eight years.

Where is the change promised, the

coalition of Zionist states continues.

1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.
2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.
3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.
4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.
5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.
6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.
7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.
8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.
9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.
10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.
11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.
12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.
13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.
14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.
Public debate looks good, but the

closed door secrets and corruption

remains the same.

Now we know revolution is likely coming prior to a one world government.

Disappointment, to rage, to distruction.

We left the Republican Party, now the

Democrat Party has left us. Where do

we go from here.

We need to put our HOUSE in order.

FACE THE REALITY:

Dear G-D:

Our international HOLY LAND is being

distroyed. How can we protect it from

the present falsehoods? A political

movement.

The reality of the political movement,
Zionism, should be the re-establishment
of Sodom and Gomorrah as their capital
cities.

Christian Right Is ‘Trolling for Assassins’:

Messages that have been pouring out of FOX News … talking about doing away with Obama, asking God to kill him.”

Go to: highfive4u.com

The Ignorant ignors the truth. Is that you?

Read:
1. Final Report. 2. Deception. 3. What-If?
4. Watch-out. 5. The house of Treason.
6. Zionish Wall.(Coming soon)
Peace 4 All–Take down the Wall.

Available at: highfive4u.com , Barnes & Noble , and Amazon.com .

I would like your assistance in distributing. Thanks.

Wal-mart, Target, and K-mart will only accept my books though a vendor.I,m not such a vendor.. RLW

True Torah Jews against Zionism:
The Committee for the Open Discussion of Zionism (CODZ) was formed in September, 2007, in response to the efforts of certain Zionist organizations in the United States to suppress criticism of Israel and /or Zionism. These efforts, often successful, have included: pressuring academic institutions to deny tenure to faculty who have criticized Israeli policy; demanding the dismissal or suspension of pro-Palestinian teachers and administrators; instigating the denial of lecture and performance venues to critics of Israeli policy; and attempting to suppress distribution of books critical of Israel or Zionism.

Professors around the world are being attacked because of their views on Israel and Palestine.

Why we need to enforce separation

of Church and State.

It is fine to be:

Anti-Catholic, Anti-Luthern, Anti-Witness, Anti-Adventist, Anti-Muslim,

or Anti-Christian Science. BUT we

pass hate crime bills for Anti-Semitic.

Our taxes supporting a religious state

that in reality is a fraud.

Don’t celebrate our Christmas or display

on any public facility. YET we have to have the Star of David on everything.

“Come on”. Our only solution is for none

of it with in our government or policies.

“Transforming Palestine/Israel Into A Single, Secular, Democratic State With Equal Rights for All”
An Idea Whose Time has Come.

SUPPORT THE GOLDSTONE REPORT:

Support the Goldstone Report –War crimes during the attack on Gaza must be investigated. The UN Goldstone report is a well-researched, fair-minded report. Israel and Hamas must conduct credible, independent investigations on war crimes and possible crimes against humanity or face the International Criminal Court. We demand accountability for all victims, respect for the rule of law, international law and human rights.

As we tackle healthcare reform, catastrophic climate change, immigration and high finance reform, the last thing we need is for Congress to pass a resolution full of misinformation and falsehoods just to satisfy friends in AIPAC.

A Conservative Estimate of Total Direct U.S. Aid to Israel: Almost $114 Billion and climbing.

Cost of War in Iraq so far:

$696,626,160,587

Cost of War in Afghanistan so far:

$230,614,992,106

Health care reform will cost: That figure came to $3,885 per capita or $298.7 billion in total. BUT that is spending on Americans; do we have lobbies for us?

History suggests that anticipation of an end to the war might help lift the mood of consumers and investors whose fears now deepen the economic problem.

City, State, % of People below the Poverty Level, Americans in the USA.

1. Detroit , MI 32.5%

2. Buffalo , NY 29.9%

3. Cincinnati , OH 27.8%

4. Cleveland , OH 27.0%

5. Miami , FL 26.9%

6. St. Louis , MO 26.8%

7. El Paso , TX 26.4%

8. Milwaukee , WI 26.2%

9. Philadelphia , PA 25.1%

10. Newark , NJ 24.2%

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006 American Community Survey.

Heal the War-Torn Economy

Stand up for Justice and Say No! To LOCKHEED MONSTER:

During the Great Depression of the 1930’s, homeless men built “shanty towns” around the country and called them “HOOVERVILLES”, after President Herbert Hoover who presided over the worst economic collapse in U.S. history.

Today, we face an economy torn apart by more than a half century of U.S. militarism, empire, and corporate war profiteering. U.S. military spending this year is estimated at $925 billion, a figure that doesn’t include funding for the U.S. occupation of Iraq and the even more costly and escalating war in Afghanistan. The cost of the two wars, funded by supplemental spending, now stands at $14 billion a month. Our country continues to be held in the grip of a war economy resulting in poverty, which Gandhi called “the greatest form of violence”, a culture of unmet human needs here at home, and war and misery for untold millions around the world.

Lockheed Martin is the world’s largest weapons contractor and war profiteer, receiving more than $42.7 billion of our tax dollars annually. War and weapons profits continue to take priority over the justice of a caring economy and society. Many suffer, so very few may profit. The price we pay is:

“LOCKHEEDVILLE: Where the business of war matters (and human needs don’t!)”

ZIONISH WALL—- PEACE 4 ALL——TAKE DOWN THE WALL

Relevant Amendments to the U.S. Constitution

Amendment One: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or of the right of people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Amendment Four: The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Amendment Fourteen: All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws.

“Israel’s diplomatic status is undergoing a rapid collapse, whose like we have never known before. We did undergo crises during the first Lebanon War, the First Intifada and on other occasions – but never did we fall from a such great height to such a low depth, and the bottom is still far down”

Israel resembles a failed state
Ali Abunimah – Electronic Intifada – The shift in public opinion is palpable as Israel`s own actions transform it into a pariah whose driving forces are not the liberal democratic values with which it claims to identify, but ultra-nationalism, racism, religious fanaticism, settler-colonialism and a Jewish supremacist order maintained by frequent massacres.

International law is clear: Israeli settlements are illegal
Iain Scobbie (in reaction to Eric Rozenman)- Los Angeles Times – Israel refused to be seen as the successor state to the Palestinian mandate. Accordingly, it refused to pay the public debt that Palestine owed to Britain. How then can there be a right of Israeli settlement in the West Bank, territory to which Israel itself has never made legal claim?

DEMAND THE PROMISED TRANSPARENCY

Number Of Iraqis Slaughtered In US War And Occupation Of Iraq “1,366,350”

——————————————————————————–

Number of U.S. Military Personnel Sacrificed (Officially acknowledged) In U.S. War And Occupation Of Iraq 4,689

——————————————————————————–

Number Of International Occupation Force Troops Slaughtered In Afghanistan : 1,566

——————————————————————————–

Cost of U.S. War and Occupation of Iraq

$713,614,341,746

DEMAND THE PROMISED TRANSPARENCY:

Americans deserve to know the “TRUE”
facts, that is the rational behind our
“SUNSHINE LAWS”.
Decision making made by lobbist money
delutes our democracy. Foreign lobbies,
registered as American with TAX EXEMPT
STATUS have the most powerful influence
on our agencies, including our defense
department.
It has been reported that 75 retired military officers regularly appearing on television “have ties to military contractors vested in the very war policies they are asked to assess on air.”
Collectively, the group represented “more than 150 military contractors either as lobbyists, senior executives, board members or consultants,” and here’s the kicker: “Those business relationships are hardly ever disclosed to viewers.”Why is that? Media is
silenced by the same lobbies.
“major television networks continue to host retired generals as military analysts without alerting viewers to their extensive ties to defense contractors.”
Additionally, Wired magazine reports that neoconservative think-tankers who directly helped craft the Pentagon’s Afghan escalation are now appearing throughout the media as allegedly disinterested analysts of the escalation — again, without any mention of their concurrent work. Or connections to the Israeli lobbies.

It’s easy to think this opacity is the exclusive transgression of commercial media. Unfortunately, it’s not — it has bled into the country’s single most powerful economic institution, the Federal Reserve.

This is the bank currently lobbying against congressional oversight by arguing it must preserve its “independence” — the same institution whose regional board members are elected by the private banks they regulate and whose chairman, Ben Bernanke, quietly cavorts with the bank CEOs he’s supposed to be independent from. Even worse, the Fed is paying many of the ostensibly objective economists who sculpt the debate about Fed policy.

The Fed today doles out roughly $400 million a year for “research” — much of it to outside economists who then advocate for the Fed’s agenda without disclosing their Fed ties. For instance, seven of the eight economists on a recent anti-oversight letter to Congress failed to note they are or were on the Fed’s payroll.

That blatant chicanery, though, is not the worst of it. The real subterfuge is how the Fed’s shadowy pay scheme bakes an invisible pro-Fed consensus into our public discourse. Through its academic largesse, the Fed “so thoroughly dominates the field of economics that real criticism of the central bank has become a career liability for members of the profession.”

They think they have the USA under control enough, that they now can have global control of everyone’s

money. Our officials sell themselves and us out for personal gain. Will Americans revolt soon enough to regain what we once were, prior to 1994?

American News Media Works In Favor of Israel

A MOCKERY TO RELIGIOUS BELIEF (ISRAEL & USA)

Peace, Propaganda & the Promised Land
U.S. Media & the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict

How Israel manipulates and distorts American public perceptions

Through the voices of scholars, media critics, peace activists, religious figures, and Middle East experts, Peace, Propaganda & the Promised Land carefully analyzes and explains how–through the use of language, framing and context–the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza remains hidden in the news media, and Israeli colonization of the occupied terrorities appears to be a defensive move rather than an offensive one.

The faithful congregations taken for a Deceptive ride by GW Bush, republican party boys, AIPAC, and the organized crime & corruption involved

Will we ever recover from the mess left behind by such atrocities and the cost we will now bear for it all? FAITH BASED???

Explore the ways that U.S. journalists, for reasons ranging from intimidation to a lack of thorough investigation, have become complicit in carrying out Israel’s PR campaign. At its core, the documentary raises questions about the ethics and role of journalism, and the relationship between media and politics.

Explore the ways that U.S. journalists, for reasons ranging from intimidation to a lack of thorough investigation, have become complicit in carrying out Israel’s PR campaign. At its core, the documentary raises questions about the ethics and role of journalism, and the relationship between media and politics

CONSIDERING OUR CONSTITUTION

CHURCH MONIES:

Millions upon millions are embezzled every

year. Major amounts of that goes unreported, seldom is anyone prosecuted.

Missing funds are more common then thought by most members, why, because

it generally goes unreported.

Insiders steal big from unsuspecting churches:

While corporate scandals at Enron and Tyco have made headlines in recent years, churches and other nonprofit entities also have been victims of embezzlement. They can be particularly vulnerable, experts say, because of the level of trust given to employees and volunteers and their lack of sophisticated financial controls and oversight.

We should add here that the biggest

amounts are lost at the top. Not by

accident or mistake or oversight.

There are dozens and dozens of high-profile cases involving churches. There

is very little co-operation with law

enforcement.

Less then 10% of contributions come

back into the communities for the purpose given. Tax exemption is given

by “POLITICIANS” not the people,

for the implied purpose of it coming back to the community.

We see bigger buildings, except in poverty areas, bigger salaries, bigger

autos, bigger homes, expensive suits,

jewelry, and toys.

We do not see much being done for

people in desperate situations. Homeless

etc. Of course we hear that it is OK for

them to steal in that situation, but don’t

go to a church for help. Their monies

are now invested with Defense Contractors, and WAR machines.

For doing so they now can obtain low cost government grants for other business. “Faith based business” what

ever that means. Sort of like Faith based WARS I guess. BUT done with tax payer monies. Is that what we call

Separation of Church & State.

Everyone is entitled to believe or not

believe in their religion of choice, but

none should be supported by tax payer money. Especially a foreign religious

State, with the biggest lobby and influence on officials sworn to uphold

our laws, and to be accountable for such.

We hear that the “TEA PARTY” will

take a complete different approach

with lobbies. Let’s watch and see.

The ” TEA PARTY” promises a much

Different approach to FAIR TAXATION, with no exemptions.

Let’s watch and see.

The “TEA PARTY” promises to hold

War criminals accountable.

Let’s watch and see.

HAVE WE HEARD ALL THESE

PROMISES BEFORE.

HAVE THE PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATIONS AND LIES

MADE YOU ANGRY.

GO TO: highfive4u.com (read)

Ronald L. Waldron
October 9, 2015
Reply

CENSORSHIP OVER & OVER & OVER AGAIN

Account has been locked

Account Sorry for the inconvenience by with are locked in for that has been detected is different activity from the normal. We will support so that the problem is resolved. Please briefly explain why that seems to have been warned of the policy violation with respect to account. We’ll investigate in Google based on the offer our information.

E-mail address you use to log in to the Google account *
Please enter your e-mail address associated with the currently locked account.

E-mail address can be used to report from google *
Please enter your e-mail address that you can currently access. We will send you a Notice of account. If you have access now also in that e-mail address that you used to log in to your account, please re-enter in here.

Please confirm that you entered the e-mail address is the one that currently can be accessed. If you can not access e-mail address, you can not send announcements.
Please explain the reason for that seems to have been warned of the policy violation with respect to account.

SOMEONE@SOMEWHERE.COM

PLEASE: UNITED WE STAND REGISTER, AND VOTE FOR

DEMOCRATS. ENOUGH FOREIGN LOBBY CONTROL OF

CONGRESS, HOMELAND SECURITY, SUPREME COURT,

PENTAGON, FOREIGN POLICY, AND GIVE-AWAY.

ENOUGH OF THE TREASON, MALFEASANCE, AND

FASCISM of THIS CONGRESS & REPUBLICAN CORRUPTION !

Ninety-Nine
October 11, 2015
Reply

Reform in Washington, #`1 Priority.

It is pretty profound, that for the first time in history, we have a congress that is so
corrupt and out of touch with reality. That they were only successful at PISSING
OFF THE POPE.
The entire Republican Party has an approval rating of 9% nationally and internationally.
The only official that paid attention to the message the POPE delivered to them, was
Speaker John Boehner.
The biggest question we have for him, is will he help clean up the mess in Washington
D.C.? He has a responsibility to America. He also has a moral obligation to his FAITH.
Anyone with an IQ higher then 35 recognizes, that the coalition between the Zionist
organized CRIME syndicate (AIPAC), the bought out party, and individual members of the
Democrat party, is the number one priority to clean up before we can move on.
Corruption, malfeasance, and treason by congress is the down fall of America, and
has to be prosecuted.
Next is the violations of war crimes, human rights violations, and illegal occupations
by Israel. Occupations including this congress. We will need to boycott, divest, and
block any further funding of their actions.
Number (3), demonstrate, picket, and march against the coming visit by Netanyahu.
Let him & congress realize that he is not welcome in OUR Country. That we will
protest, and demand a fair and just peace agreement with Palestine.
At the present time, we do not have a candidate running for President, that does not
support AIPAC, Israel, and Mossad. Mossad is responsible for Israel’s intel. collection,
and covert operations, including against the United States, such as assassinations,
USS Liberty, 911, and false reports of WMD, Iraq, Iran, Syria, and on & on.
Ally & friends with no one. Except the partners in crime, the screwed up Republicans.

GLOBALIZATION: WORLD WIDE TAKE OVER OF ALL RESOURCES.

Will Joe Biden have a different approach, if he decides to run ?

Jack MeHoff
October 11, 2015
Reply

How to address a Politician knocking on your door.

Invite them in. Take your hat & jackit off.

This is going to take a while.

Jack MeHoff
October 11, 2015
Reply

The last message on this site does not change !! Why is that ?

Go back and check the dates, and time they were Posted.

Looks like an attempt to hide them.

BUT of course that would only be a “Conspiracy Theory” lmao

Jack MeHoff
October 17, 2015
Reply

Israel resembles a failed state:

Ali Abunimah – Electronic Intifada – The shift in public opinion is palpable as Israel`s own actions transform it into a pariah whose driving forces are not the liberal democratic values with which it claims to identify, but ultra-nationalism, racism, religious fanaticism, settler-colonialism and a Jewish supremacist order maintained by frequent massacres.

International law is clear: Israeli settlements are illegal
Iain Scobbie (in reaction to Eric Rozenman)- Los Angeles Times – Israel refused to be seen as the successor state to the Palestinian mandate. Accordingly, it refused to pay the public debt that Palestine owed to Britain. How then can there be a right of Israeli settlement in the West Bank, territory to which Israel itself has never made legal claim?

True Torah Jews against Zionism:
The Committee for the Open Discussion of Zionism (CODZ) was formed in September, 2007, in response to the efforts of certain Zionist organizations in the United States to suppress criticism of Israel and /or Zionism. These efforts, often successful, have included: pressuring academic institutions to deny tenure to faculty who have criticized Israeli policy; demanding the dismissal or suspension of pro-Palestinian teachers and administrators; instigating the denial of lecture and performance venues to critics of Israeli policy; and attempting to suppress distribution of books critical of Israel or Zionism.

Professors around the world are being attacked because of their views on Israel and Palestine.

Why we need to enforce separation

of Church and State.

It is fine to be:

Anti-Catholic, Anti-Lutheran, Anti-Witness, Anti-Adventist, Anti-Muslim,

or Anti-Christian Science. BUT we

pass hate crime bills for Anti-Semitic.

Our taxes supporting a religious state.

Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 18, 2015
Reply

WHO IS THE BIGGEST “BULLY” IN THE MIDDLE EAST ?

Who is the biggest bully, every person with any sense at all knows it is the false
State of Israel ! They have no respect for their own Jewish people. They are the most vile
of human existence. The organized crime syndicate, head-quartered in Washington, D.C.,
better know as AIPAC, an illegal FOREIGN INTEREST LOBBY, registered as American.
Over the objection of then President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
They now control 90% of the republican party, and 50% of the Democrats.
President Jimmy Carter speaks out against their activities to NO AVAIL.
President Barack Obama has consistently tried to negotiate Peace, what he gets in return
is threats on his life, zip cooperation from congress, 6 & 1/2 yrs of Malfeasance &
absolute Treason, from the loud mouth tea badgers,that have been paid from both ends.
Paid for doing nothing, nothing but objection.
The saddest thing for the American People, even with 50% give or take of the Voting
Democrats wish to DIVEST from Israel, and support the True Jewish People. NOT
ONE candidate dares to speak against the atrocities, of ISRAEL.
Many of the religious right are questioning the Media Propaganda, and the support
for Israel from the PULPIT and why. It is running against their MORAL CODE, the
out right genocide by Zionism, International BULLYING of any one that speaks out.
There has not been any major international incident or corrupt criminal activity that
Israel hasn’t been linked to in some manner. YET, there is no candidate from the republican group of thugs, that will step out and support DIVESTMENT from their
infamous Corporate Zionist AIPAC Israeli leaders.
Which now seems to be in control of not only Congress, but Home Land Non-Security.
The Worlds dominate Military power “OUR PENTAGON”, and the Supreme Court.

READ THE 14 CHARACTERISTICS OF FASCISM. IT IS HERE TO FIGHT AGAINST
RIGHT NOW! PREPARE FOR THE FIGHT OF YOU LIVES!! PREPARE TO VOTE.
PREPARE TO PROTECT WHAT IS OURS. THE AMERICAN PEOPLES COUNTRY!

WHO WILL LEAD!! WHERE ARE OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT LEADERS, WHERE
ARE OUR TRUE MILITARY GENERALS THAT DAM WELL KNOW WHO, WHAT, WHERE,
WHEN, and WHY. STEP UP AND LEAD. RUN FOR PRESIDENT, LEAD IN THE REAL
COMING WAR..

OR—PROVE THIS THEORY WRONG!! IF YOU CAN__LOL.

I PERSONALLY PRAY IN THE NAME OF “JESUS” FOR A LEADER, A LEADER !!

Ronald L. Waldron
October 25, 2015
Reply

National Defense, and the lack there of.

First line of Defense: Immigration, accepting refugees, Border patrol & Control.
The true vetting of all coming into the Country. Total disregard by this Government.

Second line of Defense: National Guard. When they were under control for activation
in the States, by governors to activate. Now they spend more tours of deployment after
deployment to WAR zones for foreign Defense. Which only weakens our strength at
home.

Third line of Defense: we have a do nothing congress, taking orders from foreign
interest lobbies. Thus we the people have a responsibility to defend our homes,
our families, now our communities. Know that when a Fascist Government wants
your guns, it is time to buy and buy stock pile ammo, weapons, and survival supplies.

Fourth Line of Defense, which should be Second: Our law enforcement agencies &
Police Departments. Every department short of quotas & personnel needed,
on the ready & trained. Time of response gets longer & longer. Naturally, setting
priority on calls, due to not enough units in service. That leaves reasonable patrol
of our neighborhoods up to neighborhood WATCH the crime.

$610 Billion spent on national defense, but spent over-seas. Closed bases here,
all community employees laid off. 300, then 600 foreign bases, nation building there, jobs
there. Then take a close look at the unnecessary NO BID CONTRACTS & CONTRACTORS.
Such as Halliburton & Black Water. and on & on. Administrative buddies that end up costing
Multi-billions, making them multi-millionaires, Bush-Cheney connections, now all AIPAC.

There is not one Congress member that is familiar with the average people in their district,
what is needed in the district, or request for resources & jobs. All is international concerns
that the UN, NATO, the HAGUE was developed for. Spending should be distributed over
all member Countries, not just the US middle class tax payer.
If more is needed, tax the exempt, tax the corporations, tax the top 2% that controls 95%
of all our resources.

A large system of foreign military bases was established by the Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War. After the Cold War, Russia reduced its network of foreign military bases. Through several rounds of Base Realignment and Closure, the U.S. has increased its military presence considerably since the end of the Cold War. In addition to the United States and Russia, France and the United Kingdom also have a number of overseas military bases.
The bases, in many cases, generate an enormous amount of popular resentment and hatred, … Bases around the borders of Russia and China are generating new hostility and arms races, and …. Foreign bases have been environmentally disastrous.
SHOCK: US has 900 bases total vs. Russia has only one:
China has built no bases on foreign soil.
“As distinct from other peoples, most Americans do not recognize—or do not want to recognize—that the United States dominates the world through its military power. Due to government secrecy, our citizens are often ignorant of the fact that our garrisons encircle the planet.”
To the extent that Americans think about these bases at all, we generally assume they’re essential to national security and global peace. Our leaders have claimed as much since most of them were established during World War II and the early days of the Cold War. As a result, we consider the situation normal and accept that US military installations exist in staggering numbers in other countries, on other peoples’ land. On the other hand, the idea that there would be foreign bases on US soil is unthinkable. Oddly enough, however, the mainstream media rarely if ever reports or comments on the issues.

It’s doing us more harm than good.
These Foreign bases support a remarkable infrastructure, including schools, hospitals, power plants, housing complexes, and an array of amenities often referred to as “Burger Kings and bowling alleys.” While here at home, no jobs, no infrastructure, 47 Million Americans living at
or below the poverty level. In my home town of Jamestown, NY over 50% of the population
are living below such standard. This has been true for the last thirty years. Not one Dam
congress person from the republican party addresses the concerns.BUT will continue
nation building in the Israeli occupied territories. Foreign aid, trade, and Military. BILLIONS
in trade off for campaign funds PLUS.

We haven’t begun to mention the Veterans, and the lack of care & support for them.
I spent a complete day at the VA hospital in Buffalo, just to listen and watch.
Some thing you don’t see from the Press, Congress, or Ministry. Talk to the over
worked employees that give their all, trying to cover what is needed.
Watch the amount of drugs prescribed and out the door, mental illness and all.
Stop by the smoking area, give out a cigarette or two, talk to the Vets, listen to their
stories, see if you think any war is worth the sacrifice of life & limb.
There hasn’t been any gain for the USA, only loss. Who has gained on the globalization
principle for WAR.

You and I like what we hear from Donald Trump, and from Dr. Ben Carson. They make
a lot of sense , there is merit, and they hit the nail on the head. BUT they are running on a
republican ticket, with a republican corporate agenda. REGARDLESS those leaders will
be in charge. The same think tanks, the same advisers, the same appointed cabinet.

THAT MEANS NO ADVOCATE FOR WE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.

Peter
October 26, 2015
Reply

Right on my Friend:

I would like to add a little more truth to your Post.

These over seas bases are for a much different Defense.
When you have a government that is controlled by the Zionist corporate world
of the USA. The military instillation’s in all the 130 countries are there for the
protection and defense of the Corporate investments that are there.
The tax payer then pays for that Security.
What was a cost to the corporations for private security,is now gone for them.
How-ever, when things get hot in any one of those places.
The private no bid contracts for Security, government contracts with Black-water SE
to provide security, and with immunity blow the resistance,and the civilian population
away, in Iraq it was 1.2 Million civilians. Reported to you by John Hopkins, years ago.
OF course you American tax payers paid the total Bill.
The 19 Trillion dollar Debt is on the tax payer for the benefit of the Globalization
and the take over of every thing.

The Republican Corporate, AIPAC, Zionist Party blocks any benefit Obama
and his administration attempts to create for the PEOPLE.

When you look at Hillary Clinton’s position as Secretary of State,who is expected
to kept their Secrets, why because they CLASSIFY it all !!
She didn’t jump right on sending in BLACKWATER security for another massacre.
So they torment her, try to discredit her and any other Democrat or MORAL
Conscious representative.

Your American people are always in denial, stick their heads in the sand and
block it out of their little BRAINS. That is what is defeating AMERICA.

Peter Dun-kin

Jack
October 26, 2015
Reply

VOTING IS LIKE A MARRIAGE:

I think you should vote for Democrats, but enter it like a marriage.

Expect the WORST if it gets any better, you have gained that much. LOL

Jack

Ronald L. Waldron
November 6, 2015
Reply

Israel is seeking a 60 percent increase in annual military aid from the US.

Israel has been committing an incremental “genocide” against Palestinians and the United States will be held accountable for “aiding and abetting” the Zionist regime in this crime, an international lawyer and political commentator says.

Barry Grossman, who is based on the Indonesian island of Bali, made the remarks in a phone interview with Press TV on Thursday while commenting on a report which says that Israel is seeking a 60 percent increase in annual military aid from the US.

Under the existing agreement that was signed in 2007 and expires in 2017, Israel recessives about $3 billion of military aid every year. Israeli officials are reportedly demanding an average of $5 billion a year over the 2018-2028 period.

“Every dollar provided by US taxpayer to fund the occupation military, is a dollar that is freed up from Israel’s own budget to be used to bribe American politicians,” Grossman said.

“While other allies and client states have their US military aid doled out in quarterly allotments, Israel receives all of its allocation in one lump sum early in the year,” he added.

“Israel also enjoys ‘fast-track’ status for weapons sales, meaning that it is able to bypass the Pentagon and make deals directly with weapons manufacturers.

“All of this is of course justified by disingenuous claims that the US is merely aiding Israel to defend itself against terrorist threats but in making this case, America’s corrupt political and security establishment invokes highly politicized notions of self-defense and national security which do violence to any reasonable definition of those terms.

“That same corrupt establishment also ignores that the occupiers are engaged in a massive continuing crime and can hardly be considered engaged in anything that can be called self-defense given that Israel has not openly engaged a foreign military threat since it lost the South Lebanon conflict which was the result of Israel’s military assault on Lebanon, after it had already been defeated in its war on Lebanon which followed Israel’s large scale invasion and occupation of Lebanon in the 80’s.

“Moreover, the second intifada waged by Palestinians ended 10 years ago and, since then, and I say this categorically there has been a more than 90 percent decline in the incidence of lethal so-called ‘Palestinian terrorism’ claimed by Israel.

“In recognition of this unequivocal demonstration of Palestinian willingness to ‘give peace a chance,’ the occupiers have continued to seize more and more Palestinian territory, kill and detain ever increasing numbers of Palestinian men, women, and children, and belligerently attacked Gaza in major operations like Operation Cast Lead and Operation Protective Edge, along with countless lesser operations – all funded by US taxpayers as a result of decisions made by corrupt politicians who have in one form or another been bribed, blackmailed, or threatened by Zionist lobbyists funded, as often as not, with money saved as a result of US military aid to Israel.”

Ronald L. Waldron
November 15, 2015
Reply

Who is financing ISIS.?
Who supplied the amount of weapons they have?
Who provides the technology for the recruiting, 5,000 to 40,000 plus.?
Who is doing the amount of training they have gotten, very advanced training?
Who is it that gains from creating another WAR in the region?
What does ISIS gain, or is it their supporter that gains?
What reasoning is there for poking a stick into the hornets nest?
Where has the action been, and who gains from the action the most?
Where else but the Middle East, would a claim of being the forever victim, that victimizes?
Why would France be the target, is it to silence their view point for Peace for Palestine?
When will the next attack occur and the reasoning behind the possible target?
When the USA 2016 elections are well underway, will interruption of such be the target?
When in six months such begins, will the fear keep voters from the polls & help keep the
losing corrupt party and partners gain the MOST by keeping them in office?

TIME WILL TELL, in the mean time keep aware of your surroundings, stay safe, and
pray in the name of JESUS that such attack does not happen. Pray for PEACE
in the MIDDLE EAST, and an end to False Flag & Black opps operations, and TERRORISM.

Ronald L. Waldron
November 16, 2015
Reply

List Of Zionist Crime Syndicate
Organizations In The USA
From John Churchilly
3-23-9

Ameinu
American Friends of Likud
American Gathering/Federation of Jewish Holocaust Survivors
America-Israel Friendship League
American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC)
American Jewish Committee
American Jewish Congress
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee
American Sephardi Federation
American Zionist Movement
Americans for Peace Now
AMIT
Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
Association of Reform Zionists of America
B’nai B’rith International
Bnai Zion
Central Conference of American Rabbis
Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America
State of Israel Bonds/Development Corporation for Israel
Emunah of America
Friends of Israel Defense Forces
Hadassah, the Women’s Zionist Organization of America
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society
Jewish Community Centers Association
Jewish Council for Public Affairs
Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs
Jewish Labor Committee
Jewish National Fund
Jewish Reconstructionist Federation
Jewish War Veterans of the United States of America (JWV)
Jewish Women International
MERCAZ USA, Zionist Organization of the Conservative Movement
NA’AMAT USA
NCSJ Advocates on behalf of Jews in Russia, Ukraine, the Baltic States & Eurasia
National Council of Jewish Women
National Council of Young Israel
World ORT – ORT America branch
Rabbinical Assembly (RA)
Rabbinical Council of America (RCA)
Religious Zionists of America (RZA or Mizrahi)
Union for Reform Judaism (URJ)
Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America (Orthodox Union or OU)
United Jewish Communities (UJC)
United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism (USCJ)
Women’s International Zionist Organization (WIZO)
Women’s League for Conservative Judaism (WLCJ)
Women of Reform Judaism (WRJ)
Workmen’s Circle (Arbeter Ring)
World Zionist Executive, US
Zionist Organization of America (ZOA)

And here is the good bit …

Every organisation above is ALSO a member of what is called :

“The Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organisations”

The Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations (CoP; often referred to as the Presidents’ Conference) is a “non-profit organisation” that describes itself as “a central address for key American, Israeli and other world leaders to consult on issues of critical concern to the Jewish community.” The Conference meets to make major statements or meet with important leaders. The Conference was founded to promote the state of Israel in the USA and that remains its primary task.

Your Guess
December 1, 2015
Reply

THIS SITE IS NOW SILENCED

Your Guess
December 15, 2015
Reply

SUPPORT DR. BEN CARSON

I WILL SUPPORT DR. BEN CARSON

“PLEASE LISTEN TO WHAT HE IS SAYING” you will find the most

soft spoken voice, has the most intelligent solutions to the problems we

are facing, of all candidates running for PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED

STATES. Speaks soft and carries a BIG STICK. A much tougher

man and leader then the average perception people have of him.

STOP, LOOK, AND LISTEN before the RUN AWAY TRAIN RUNS OVER

US ALL !

Dr. BEN is a true man of GOD.

#1 Fighter
December 27, 2015
Reply

THE UNTOUCHABLES : Their rein is OVER.

For 60 years the politics of America have developed into a group
of corrupt individuals with the attitude that they can and will control
the world. That they can operate indiscriminately with out any
restraint for the benefit of themselves, and their now ZIONIST
syndicate.
The Republicans have acted so high & mighty, and the people are
of no concern to them, only the rich & corporations are considered
as their constituents. Their THINK TANKS THE SAME.
The Democrats have campaigned as if they were for the average
working class, the middle class. How-ever the reality is that labor
unions were thrown under the bus by Democrats also.
The ridiculous trade agreements with out any enforcement of the
terms were also passed & ignored by the Democrats.
The lobbies have as much power with them as Republicans.
The corruption and personal gain is very much the same.
The WAR MACHINE costing us $610 Billion a year is supported by
both, the support for illegal occupation and terror by Israel, is
supported by both. Which is treason by both, when it is against the true interest of America. Our foreign policies of government is
destroying every thing we have believed in. The immoral values of
Israel have now become our governments values. KILL, KILL, & KILL.
Any one that disagrees gets stomped on. Silenced regardless HOW.

Donald Trump is putting it all on the line, much to the dismay of
AMERICAN politics all the way. Republican, Democrat, the system
is broken completely, and at the hands of the elected chumps.
Federal, State, and Local.

First thing to go, Homeland Security, lets have some real enforcement of the syndicate running this Country.

#1 Fighter
January 3, 2016
Reply

Over 50 % of American Citizens are angry. Americans have been
becoming more and more angry over the last 60 years.
It is a comedy show to watch the people who have created
the anger, finally realize WHO the anger is directed at, who has
caused all the anger, yet they try to stay in denial that it is THEM.
From 1948 on, Americans have watched, complained and have
had all the conversations at the dinner table, the coffee shops,
and at most gathers discussions of Politics, religion,MEDIA and business mergers, laws being passed for manipulation of markets
and monopolies formed, making the 1% owning 98% of all
things previously the American peoples.
Politicians, Preachers, Media, Journalists, Labor Leaders,
business owners & stock holders, and investors that became the ZIONIST, AIPAC, ISRAELI, and HOLLYWOOD, The organized
SYNDICATE’S “MINIONS” . (PUPPETS)
The development of a Foreign interest lobby, that never
should have been registered as an American lobby, ends up
controlling the MEDIA bobble heads, Wall Street, the USA
congress, and all things previously American, no longer is.
The United States of ISRAEL is the whole issue in a nut shell.
Right up to and including our Supreme Court.
NOT one candidate will debate or discuss the real issues.
All talk a great story, but history indicates that 90% of it ends
up being nothing but BULL–SHIT.

#1 Fighter
January 6, 2016
Reply

Personally I have heard things I like from 4 candidates for
president 2016. Donald Trump, Ben Carson, Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders.
I was a strong supporter for Barack Obama from the very beginning,
no question, and support him now. I question gun control & second
amendment. He cleared my mind with his declaration of his
decision. Again I clearly understand , and now support him in such.

I’m not clear who I will vote for, I need to hear more from each,
pertaining to WAR, foreign policy, reform of a broken system.
I want to hear more about campaign finance, lobby activities,
corruption, and cutting the defense budget and managing our
own borders. We spend 3 times that of China, 6 times more
then Russia, entering 10 times more then anyone else in WARS,
and WAR crimes.

We need to be sure we elect the most competent person that will
represent AMERICA & AMERICANS. integrity, ethics, morality
certainly are values we would like to have continue as Commander in Chief.
It will be a long process to clear out Congress, the lobbies they are in
business with, and the corruption involved. How-ever a strong President
can make appointments, and roll a lot of heads if there is a mind set to.

I would hope President Obama begins such process over his last year !!

Major General Bob Dees (U.S. Army, Ret.)

Good morning Ronald L.,

A number of years ago, my then-13 year old grandson devoured Dr. Carson’s 1996 book, Think Big, while we were away on a family vacation.

He loved it so much that he ended up leading our four-day morning study time, one chapter after another.

I was amazed at how Dr. Carson pulled out the best potential from my grandson, so I started learning more about him. The more I did, the more I believed in him.

Many politicians have fans. Dr. Carson has believers.

I’m proud to tell you that I’m one of them — and that is why I’m so honored to serve as the new Chairman of Dr. Carson’s campaign.

You’ve likely seen news reports about changes within our campaign. These changes will allow us to more pro-actively and more aggressively communicate to the American people exactly who Ben Carson is and what he believes. You saw the beginning of that yesterday with the release of his plan to reform the tax code.

Here’s who I believe…better yet here’s who I know Ben Carson is:

Ben Carson is the most qualified candidate to be your next President and Commander-in-Chief.

He has an unwavering moral compass, the right temperament and the most relevant experience.

He has a lifetime of integrity and consistency.

He has received more 2 AM crisis phone calls and has had to make more life-and-death decisions than anyone else running.

He is uniquely prepared to be the wise hand holding our nuclear codes and protecting us from terrorism at home and abroad.

Ben Carson can be the great Uniter-in-Chief to heal our nation and our inner cities, and the complex problem-solver to fix our nation’s woes.

I am truly honored to serve in this new role for a man that I believe in so deeply.

I thank you for joining us, and for your generous and ongoing support.

Respectfully,

Bob Dees
Chairman
Ben Carson for President

#1 Fighter
January 7, 2016
Reply

JUNK in your TRUNK:

With the trade agreements, and outsourcing to CHINA. Is there
any one out there that is happy with the junk in your trunk we
get when shopping is said & done.
We use to ask if it will last until it is paid for, now every one ask if it will last the trip home.
Quality is differently a thing of the past. How much more lead paint
will we allow to be imported? How many more kids will be killed or injured by blown up air bags? Or killed in an auto accident from inferior tires? Not to mention the dangerous toys. Clothing that flash fires up.
Of course when every type of inspection or enforcement agency has
been cut to less then a skeleton crew. No enforcement of terms of
an agreement, it is time for change.
I hate to think about safety of our food chain, nothing is safeguarded,
nor a concern of our congress.
We need to elect representatives that understand they are elected
by and for America and Americans only. Our Country ONLY.

NO ONE WITH DUEL CITIZENSHIP OR INTEREST SHOULD BE
ELECTED OR APPOINTED TO A GOVERNMENT POSITION…

Fighting Terrorism, rid America of Benjamin
Netanyahu, and any associate connected to
Zionism & their SYNDICATE..
The GOP on the Eve of Destruction !!

Ronald L. Waldron
January 10, 2016
Reply

Reply · 1

Ronald L. Waldron 1 second ago
+Aaron Sochaczewski Please: I.m anti-Zionism, the same as the true Jewish People.
Jewish voice for Peace. Jews against Zionism, Some 6,000+ Rabbi’s against Zionism.
Zionism: The most corrupt syndicate in the World, that controls all Republicans, and
a large percent of Democrats. Israel of today and the USA government are controlled
by the ZIONIST organizations. Zionist organizations starts with AIPAC a foreign lobby.
Trump is dropping in the polls, do to his support for Israel and their occupations.
MILLIONS of American’s believed he woulds be the change for our government being
Israel occupied. No. NO, he wants a bigger Defense budget now $610 Billion, only for
foreign interest. He ends up as just a biggot, against a major part of the USA population and the Poor.
Yes, I support Palestine, against the human rights violations of Zionist Israel.﻿
Read more
Reply ·

Ronald L. Waldron 1 second ago
+Ronald L. Waldron 46% of Democrat voters want sanctions & Boycotts against Israel, Along
with 30 % of the voting Republicans, but such is kept silent by the MEDIA that is owned by
Zionist. Not one Candidate will debate those issues. TRUMP ENDS UP DISAPPOINTING all of
us Americans wanting America to be great again. Like prior to 1948 invasion of Palestine.﻿
Reply ·

Ronald L. Waldron
January 13, 2016
Reply

TRASH MOUTH REPUBLICANS:

Can you imagine a STATE OF THE UNION address by any
one of the Obstructionist Republican Candidates.
They only communicate with the top 2% all year long, but
will Trash Talk and attack any one that considers the rest
of us at election time. Why is that?
They have nothing you can come close to calling a success
for the last 24 years. NOT ONE THING. Unless you want to
call WAR MONGERING and spending $610 Billion dollars
a year on Middle East Defense. All based on Israel’s false
intelligence of WMD or Nuclear Development.
If you are not a member of a major special interest group
you have no business voting for a Republican under any
circumstance. If you do not make at least $250,000 a year
there is no benefit for you to vote for a Republican.
If you are concerned about future generations, or about climate
change you have no business voting for a Republican.
If you want to see PEACE in the world, and a government
based on proper Ethics, Integrity, and moral conviction, If
you want a government with-out foreign leadership dictating
Domestic and Foreign policies, then you have no business
voting for a republican or Israeli Zionist syndicate supporter
at all. Does the above open the door for Democrats.
Think again, Washington needs complete reform of a broken
system. Both sides of the Isle in CONGRESS have been
guilty of TREASON against WE THE PEOPLE.
What role has the Zionist owned media played in all of this ?
How many Journalist have disappeared from the scene if they
speak one word of the real truth. They are fired, replaced or
assassinated.
President Obama’s eight year battle, was continual with both
party leaders, and their support for and by the corrupt syndicate,
AIPAC, and a long list of such foreign interest lobbies that take
up the time and proposals of both Parties.
Finally we have some movement in the right direction from what to now has been the “Right”.
Protestant churches split over anti-Israel divestment resolutions
United Church of Christ votes to divest from companies with ties to Israeli settlements.
United Methodist Church’s pension board divests from Israel-linked company.
The only candidate that may not fully support the atrocities of Israel,
and may want sanctions imposed for the abuses of power, and the
unwanted influence on our government is Bernie Sanders.
He presently is doing a balancing act for fear of retaliation from
their many organizations developed with-in OUR Country.
VERY MUCH ANTI-AMERICAN ORGANIZATIONS.
Terrorist organizations if any one crosses their AGENDA of
control of WASHINGTON, DC, and GLOBALIZATION.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 17, 2016
Reply

Democrats must unite now:

Time to commit to the strongest Democrat:

Time is up for speculation. We have made the merry-go-round of all
candidates, Republican, and Democrat.
It is a real reality that to save the middle class of America. We must
UNITE and elect a Democrat.
We must be realistic of who is the best Candidate considering
the following. Both Hillary and Bernie are qualified, they have
nearly the same agenda’s and issues.
The concern boils down to some important issues.
1. Age, health, and endurance,for the commander & Chief.
We are not looking just at a four year term, we are looking
for a President that can endure an eight year period.

2. We are not looking for a President that is an alternative to
Donald Trump. We are looking for a candidate that will win
against any Candidate from the republican party, now and
future.

3. The fact that the most corrupt, buy adds in IOWA attacking
Hillary for fear she will be the next President, gives a lot of
insight into who we should support, and vote for.

4. What has been accomplished by congress that benefits any
one in America for the last 25 to 35 years. Foreign policies,
foreign leadership, foreign lobbies, foreign money, foreign
intelligence, foreign investments, amounts to International
Syndicate.

5. Has any Senator, or Congress member presented any bills,
suggesting reforms, could any member be ignorant to the
corruption, or made attempt for campaign finance reform.

6. Has any Senator or Congress person reported any of
the abuses they know of, have witnessed.Or highly suspect.

7. Has any Senator or Congress member made any mention to
the facts of black hole money being raised by government agencies.
Has any investigation been ordered into such regarding the previous cocaine distribution, and now Afghan heroin.

Point being: Hillary Clinton is the best Candidate to be President
for leadership for the next eight years. Democrats far beyond
that. That is what will make AMERICA GREAT AGAIN..

REFORM.

Allen D. Post
January 28, 2016
Reply

Before his death in 2011, former FBI agent Ted Gunderson
spilled the beans on what the Obama administration
is planning. Was he a conspiracy nut, or did he tell the truth?
You decide…

“and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.” Revelation 20:4

The Coming FEMA Camps

Shortly before his death in 2011, Ted Gunderson had this to say to Patriot groups across America in 2009. The story was originally posted on the Southern Poverty Law Center website.

It’s one thing to hear this from conservative sites like Alex Jones or Drudge Report, but when rabidly liberal sites like Democratic Underground start reporting on this you know that the truth is starting to ooze out of Washington. Or leaked on purpose to prepare you. Hmm…

From Dem Underground:

In Pensacola, Fla., retired FBI agent Ted Gunderson tells a gathering of anti-government “Patriots” that the federal government has set up 1,000 internment camps across the country and is storing 30,000 guillotines and a half-million caskets in Atlanta.

They’re there for the day the government finally declares martial law and moves in to round up or kill American dissenters, he says. “They’re going to keep track of all of us, folks,” Gunderson warns.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 31, 2016
Reply

Democrats–Vote for a Democrat:

Democrats–Vote for a Democrat, there is only ONE
Democrat running for President. That is Hillary Clinton.

Bernie Sanders is running on a Democrat ticket, but is
a Socialist. He will not be loyal to the Party or the principles
we stand for. PEACE being at the core of this Campaign.

We can not afford another WAR. We will not support
sending our Sons & Daughters into another needless
War. Quagmire, after Quagmire. $610 Billion a year.
The lost of life & Limb by Americans. War Veterans
that are not being cared for. Veterans coming back
to OUR Country sick and homeless.
Foreign lobbies, foreign interest Stink Tanks, foreign
interest appointees to government positions.
Poverty and crime at home at the all time high.
Corporations & Banks bailed out buy us, and they
turn around and bail out on us. Out Sourcing jobs,
and off shore accounts.
We need BDS, We need to be America concerned,
NOT foreign WARS, AID, TRADE, and CONTROL
of congress any longer.

VOTE FOR A DEMOCRAT, THE ONLY DEMOCRAT
with the knowledge and ability to get the JOB done for
AMERICANS. Not for a religious MYTH of a chosen
people, that was written by the deranged themselves.
ZIONISM is the enemy of AMERICA. FACT not MYTH.

We need Hillary, Hillary needs our votes. Do your
part for a real change, get off your fat BUTTS get
out and VOTE.

NOTICE: The attacks are timed to interrupt progress
and not allow for her defense. She has answered
every question on several occasions previously.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 1, 2016
Reply

FBI agent Ted Gunderson:

Too bad agent Gunderson passed before he made the
connection of congress, and the corruption of ZIONISM
rather the old MYTH of Alumni.
How-ever for National Defense Policies, and foreign
policies, we need to demand that no duel citizenship
individual should be allowed to serve in any position
of government. Any think tank shall be Americans,
with America’s interest the priority.
No USA official should be allowed to accept money
from a foreign or foreign interest lobby for personal
or campaign funding. It is nothing but Treason.
No duel citizenship person should have knowledge
of ANY classified information of the UNITED STATES,
be it FEDERAL or STATE government.
THIS democracy, and Constitution has been,and is
the only Democracy of government of the people,
by the people, and FOR THE PEOPLE “AMERICAN”.
WHICH should include any appointments to the
SUPREME COURT, HOMELAND SECURITY, or
AGENCY of the government that presently has
their hands tied by such.

REMEMBER THIS WHEN YOU CAST YOUR VOTE:

Hillary Clinton is the only candidate that has the
experience, knowledge, and been though every
type of VETTING possible for the last Thirty years,
and comes out on TOP every time.

NO other candidate has such an exemplary record.
NO other candidate has worked as hard as Hillary
for us, the AMERICAN people.

GET OUT THE VOTES FOR HILLARY.

UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE FALL

Ronald L. Waldron
February 3, 2016
Reply

A Grim Scenario: If America Ends Up With a Republican President and a GOP-Controlled Congress
It’s entirely possible that in the upcoming presidential election the Republican candidate could win and become the next U.S. president and, at the same time, the GOP would retain control of the Congress. If that happens then this country and society would undergo a drastic change, one that is almost unimaginable.

That grim prediction and the points presented in the following discussion are not based on supposition or unsupported speculation but, rather, on explicit, documented statements and actions of the Republican Party and its members. They have clearly stated their positions on the major issues and problems facing this country and what they intend to do if they are given the opportunity, i.e., when they have assumed total control of this government.

In this new America, there is no question but that Corporate America will reign supreme, and its current power and control over this government and the direction of this country will be greatly magnified. Profits above all else will be the guiding principle shaping its agenda.

The Affordable Care Act, aka, Obamacare, would be singled out for immediate repeal; appropriate legislation would swiftly pass the House and the Senate and be signed by the president. The GOP representation in the Congress has, in the last few years, attempted to repeal the ACA legislation over 50 times, and each time President Obama has vetoed it. The vetoes were never overridden because of substantial Democratic opposition.

But this time, there would be no presidential veto, that program would be phased out, and it’s anyone’s guess what would follow. Since the Republicans have never presented any plan to replace it with a more effective health care system we can only surmise that they would just dismantle the program and turn it over to the insurance companies.

The bad news is that millions of Americans would lose their ACA membership and benefits that guarantee coverage for pre-existing conditions and would have to try to qualify for other coverage. Even if successful, they would see their premiums skyrocket as the insurance companies would, once again, be in full control.

Medicare: what would happen to this critically important program? It’s quite likely that the Medicare system would remain intact for those already enrolled but other Americans seeking new coverage would have to obtain it from the corporations of the insurance industry. As we know, turning over government programs to the private, profit-making sector is one of the key objectives of the GOP.

Inequality in America: the current huge gap between the wealthiest Americans and the rest of the people in this country would widen as all gains in national income would continue to flow to the top. America would become a full-blown oligarchy inhabited by haves and have nots.

Job creation: would continue to languish on the back burner. The Republicans have no intention of doing anything to create jobs for American workers; and neither do the U.S. corporations since they have access to an infinite number of low-wage workers in overseas countries. The fact the middle class and the American workforce are both shrinking because of this job outsourcing is of no concern to either the Republican Party or Corporate America.

Medicaid, which has, in the past, been rejected by many Republican-controlled states, would more than likely disappear as a functioning program, and the individual states that currently have this program would have to take care of their citizens’ medical needs some other way, which involves a lot more very costly emergency room visits.

Social Security: this highly successful, very important government program has, for many decades, provided retirement income for countless millions of Americans; it has been very effective even though the government has “borrowed” (some would say “absconded with”) about $2.5 trillion from the SS trust fund and has no intention of ever repaying it.

Republicans would probably adopt the former G.W. Bush proposal which called for a combination of a government-funded program for current retirees, together with personal retirement accounts invested in Wall Street for future entrants. The attempt to privatize a large portion of this program by turning much of it over to the unpredictable gyrations of Wall Street failed in 2004. But that won’t stop a Republican-controlled government from resurrecting that misguided idea once again; and then, look out America!

Planned Parenthood: it would be swiftly defunded and go out of existence.

The Military: the neocon war hawks would return en masse, with a vengeance, and not hesitate to use the most powerful military in world history to solidify the Pentagon’s agenda of perpetual war. It wouldn’t be long before Congress would kill the recently concluded nuclear agreement with Iran.

The potential for war with Iran would escalate, largely because Republicans would strongly embrace the doctrine of Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu which is based on his distrust and hatred of Iran. The chances of Israel attacking Iran with the full support of the GOP-controlled government would be greatly increased. John McCain might see his wish to “Bomb, bomb, bomb Iran” finally fulfilled. Ted Cruz would continue to pursue his proposed idea of carpet bombing ISIS; too bad if thousands of civilians would be incinerated in the process.

There would be no letup in the funding of the military empire while the plethora of America’s domestic needs would continue to remain unaddressed.

Climate Change: Republicans who think this threat to the planet and mankind is a pure hoax would not pursue any specific actions to deal with it and the dangers it represents.

Federal Air and Water Regulations: legislation would be initiated that would either significantly water down or even eliminate clean air and water regulations. The EPA, the Environmental Agency, could face elimination because, in many cases, it stands in the way of corporate America and its primary objective of increasing profits.

Confrontations with Russia and China: These two countries represent a very potent combination of military and economic power and they will not be intimidated by the U.S. Even so, the war hawks in Washington, while fully knowing this, will not back off their aggressive militaristic agenda aimed at both of these countries, a colossal misjudgment and mistake.

The Supreme Court: a Republican-controlled government would pack this court with more radicals when sitting justices were replaced. The reversal of the Citizens United decision would never be addressed, and the many interests of Corporate America would be advanced in many ways.

Roe V. Wade and a woman’s right to choose would become a thing of the past. But it would not end the practice of abortions which would then go completely underground.

American Muslims: their everyday actions would come under constant surveillance. They would become second class citizens at best and objects of hatred and derisiveness.

Immigration: especially if Trump became president, the deportation of millions of Hispanics who are not citizens would be rapidly escalated. There would be no more calls for various forms of amnesty and ways to eventually allow these illegal immigrants to become U.S. citizens.

GOP War on Women: it would continue and magnify as the voices of those who want to control the women of America and their bodies will intensify. Here are a few quotes from those ultra-conservative individuals who possess that control syndrome:

Mike Huckabee: “Women don’t need to depend on government for birth control. All they have to do is learn to control their burning desires.” He further said, “Wives Also should‘graciously submit’ to their husbands.”

GOP Indiana Senate candidate Richard Mourdock said that a pregnancy resulting from rape is God’s intention. Rush Limbaugh insulted women when he stated: “Feminism was established so as to allow unattractive women easier access to the mainstream of society.”

Now we know the true meaning of the word “control freak.”

We have seen that Republicans are perfectly willing to water down or eliminate successful government programs that people really need but they neither have the inclination nor the capacity to replace them with something more effective. They don’t seem to understand that one of the primary responsibilities of this government is to provide for the “safety and security” of the American people; and that includes appropriate government programs.

In the past, the Democratic Party has had difficulty getting out the vote and they have lost the control of Congress as a result. What it must do now is to organize a great effort to motivate and energize a massive number of their supporters to vote in November.

If they do just that then the Democratic candidate will win handily.

But if far too many supporters of the Democratic agenda stay home and don’t vote and the majority of actual voters decide to cast their ballots for a candidate whose positions on critical issues match those outlined above, then the grim, nightmarish scenario presented above will become reality.

Talk about the American people arriving at a critical crossroads. So when we decide whether to vote or not, and for whom we will cast that ballot, we better think very deeply about the America in which we want to live going into the future.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 4, 2016
Reply

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN POLITICS:

The recent REPUBLICAN tricks, pulled in IOWA against
black candidate Ben Carson, is the normal corrupt actions
of republicans.
The total obstruction of President Obama, the continued
discrimination and attacks for the last eight years, again
shows evidence of such.
The tricks used against Colin Powell, setting him up for
false testimony before the United Nations, on weapons
of mass destruction by Iraq.
They as much as endorsed Donald Trump in his attack
and outrageous speech against all Muslims.
The Zionist syndicate and top 2% controlling congress and
the corporations, like wise discriminate in the same manner.
NEXT but not least, how about the nearly all white conservative Evangelical Churches that support the
republican agendas, WARS, War crimes, and human rights
violations of Israel.

We need to stand United with the Democrat Candidates.

United we stand–Divided we fall VOTE accordingly.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 5, 2016
Reply

EXECUTIVE ORDER:

We the people realize that Homeland Security, a Republican
created corrupt system of controlling all investigative federal
agencies, will not order an investigation into the fraud
campaign practices of Ted Cruz.
It will only be investigated if President Obama demands
such. WILL HE DO SO??
The only way he can fight for us the American people
since taking office, due to the obstructionist congress,
that the corrupt AIPAC syndicate has bought and paid
for, CARSON being the only Republican candidate,
not influenced by such dirty money.

Carson America, Inc.

Ronald L.,

Exclusive audio was just released by Breitbart News which indicates that as the Iowa Caucuses were beginning on Monday night, the Cruz campaign called precinct captains across the state to inform them that I was suspending my campaign, and to instruct voters that “they should not waste a vote on Ben Carson and vote for Ted Cruz.” You can listen below:

Marshal Law
February 13, 2016
Reply

Israel occupies Congress & Homeland Security, Their partner Russia, has their troops on American soil.

The Hitler supporters of the holocaust, Russian Zionist
troops, are now all over America.

Steve, my mother just called in tears describing her horror story and validation of foreign troops in Danville, VA. My family farms in NC not far from Danville, VA and their neighbor (Bob) works in Danville to be near his family and first born grandchild. Often Bob will watch his
granddaughter who attends school in Danville and brings her and friends over to my parents farm. Yesterday Bob brought his 2nd grade granddaughter and her new girlfriend and mother to meet my parents. My mother welcomed
them all as usual but noticed both had accents which made her that more inquisitive. After a short tour of the farm, looking at some wild deer and came into the house. Being cordial mom passed out cookies and said I detect an accent, do you mind if I ask where you were from and the little
girl said they just moved here from Russia. My mother replied, oh that’s along way to come to Virginia, what does your Daddy do that he moved you all here and the girl replied, hes here to shoot and kill Americans. The
little girls mother instantly broke down crying, saying its true, grabbed the daughter and left. My parents were shocked and while they’ve heard rumors, they never expected to hear this from a child.”

IT CONSTITUTES TREASON AGAINST THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.

The agreement calls for at least 15,000 Russian troops to engage in policing activities at American public events on American soil. In actuality, there are at least 150,000 Russian troops on American soil. This bilateral agreement is designed to conceal the fact of what the Russians are up to and they have been on American soil for some time.

No Staging Necessary, the Russians Are Ready To Go: Red Dawn Is Here

The blame will be put on this administration, but it has
been developed during the last administration along
with the members of AIPAC and group of organizations
associated with such. They are planning Marshall Law
prior to the Elections, knowing full well that voters will
otherwise pull the rug out from under their paid for
partners in congress, and their appointees.

Russian soldiers dressed up and riding in Homeland Security vehicles. Sherrie also detailed how the Smoky Mountains are now under the control of the UN and people are being denied access. She has identified the fact that Russians are emanating from an area in which there massive chemical weapons are stockpiled. In the following video, a detention facility is revealed with railroad tracks stopping at buildings.
Sites such as West Valley, NY nuclear waste site, has hundreds
of rail cars parked on near by rails. sitting there for months
now. ??

FEMA Camps: The agreement called for Russian troops to engage in policing activities at American public events on American soil. And we are seeing the same thing at the Army base at Fort Carson, Colorado where Russian soldiers are training at the local base and are engaged in local policing activities.

Of course our troops are outsourced to middle East, even our
national guard units serve over-seas now, what protection do we have. THEY WANT TO TAKE OUR WEAPONS.

Homeland Security–Controlled lock, stock, and BARREL by
Mossad, and Zionist Israel. Now military intervention,
which by the way has had major control of the Pentagon, and
a $610 Billion dollar budget for some time now.

Daniel
March 1, 2016
Reply

Shame on America, and the people.
Not one word of God. Not the hope in Jesus Christ nor the redemptive work on the cross for every one of us who have no hope except for God.
We cannot fight anything, change the direction of this wicked nation and heal the outcast unless we repent of our wicked ways as a nation.
The majority of people have little or any concern for the nation as a whole. It is in Jesus Christ one of obeying His commandments. “Love one another as I have loved you”. This from the Saviour Himself. No fear of God, no reverence to His holiness. A people full of lawlessness, and calling evil good.
Hearts and minds according to Jesus must change, before we can see the manifestation of this nation.

Marshal Law
March 13, 2016
Reply

Attack, Attack, the front runner:

The party leaders and insiders such as the MEDIA conglomerates, all are attacking the peoples chosen
candidate and front runner for commander in chief.

The same as our chosen commander in chief from
the last two elections, President Obama.
They have obstructed all things for America, and supported
all things for special interest.

Our leaders have been puppets of the “ZIONIST
SYNDICATE”, we have seen nothing but corruption.

47 Million AMERICAN’S living at or below the poverty level.
Our veterans of a very unnecessary war completely
ignored by this congress. A congress that has a 15%
approval rating. No infrastructure here but nation building
in the Middle East. 610 Billion defense budget all spent
else where. Heroine on every street corner, borders wide
open. Leaving the “ZIONIST SYNDICATE” in charge of
all things corrupt, which includes all things of WASHINGTON,
DC.

All of the present candidates for commander-in-chief,
other than a TRUMP/CARSON ticket have been a part
of the insider corrupt system.

The insiders think they can change the hearts & minds of
us the AMERICAN PEOPLE to continue on with business
as usual.

We Americans first, are determined to change it, and now.
We are not looking for a leader of present political
correctness. We are looking for a candidate with the
knowledge of and how to deal with the mess that all
oither candidates have taken part in.

If not by accepting the buy out of special interest &
corruption. The sitting on their thumbs and saying
nothing and doing nothing is in fact taking part in it.

IT IS TIME. UNITED WE STAND—DIVIDED WE FALL.
That means we the people have to UNITE, and FIGHT.

AMERICA and AMERICANS FIRST. WE THE PEOPLE
will pick our commander in chief to lead for us. Our government by and for the AMERICAN people. NOT
including the corruption of duel citizenship.

The Governing on the Eve of Destruction
Republicans and Democrats seem to have made up their minds: they will divide, degrade and ultimately run the country into the ground. Rather then to work for us the people.

UNITED WE STAND–FIGHT FOR WHATS RIGHT.

MAKE THIS GOVERNMENT GREAT AGAIN.

TRUMP/CARSON TICKET FOR AMERICA

Marshal Law
March 13, 2016
Reply

THE WINNING COMBINATION:

Donald Trump and Ben Carson are the winning duel
to beat Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton.

Seriously check it out. Both are trusted more then
any other candidates in the running.
THE WINNING COMBINATION:

Voters looking for complete change from the polarized
partisan politics of both parties.

No incumbent candidate will stay in office.

All issues on the table, special interest lobbies and
organizations are top targets , BDS has become a
priority issue with a very large amount of voters on
domestic issues. America & Americans are sick
of foreign dominance of congressional members.

BOYCOTT, DIVEST, and SANCTIONS…

NOTICE: Marco Rubio, the No. One candidate of the
Republican Party, media, and special interest groups
in the beginning, has shot himself in the foot.
He has ranted and raved in support of the Israeli government
and the atrocities they commit, and ends up in last place
with the people.
The same will happen to the rest of the out of touch politicians
that under estimate the American people and what we desire
& expect from our government….

Ronald L. Waldron
March 16, 2016
Reply

Petition Attorney General’s office to bring TREASON CHARGES

We the people and citizens of the United State have witnessed, and suffered through the corrupt, criminal, and treasonous actions, and lack of performance for any reasonable action by elected officials.

The control of the Senate and congress by Special
interest groups both Foreign and Domestic has been
detrimental to the entire Country,and destroys the
idea & principles of democracy internationally .

When Duel citizens from a rogue State make up the
top 2% of the United States, control 92% of the nations
money, and own the corporations, media, officials,
Home-land Security, pentagon , and going after more control
of our Supreme Court. When they also make up the
leadership of the largest organized crime Syndicate in
History, it seems like we lack the Intelligence, ability, or desire
to prosecute the true criminals.

Have they been given Diplomatic Immunity, issued a get
out of JAIL free card, or Harvard Alumni ID PASS. sets
them free.

I would doubt that our present Commander in Chief will
pardon any of these criminals before he leaves office.

That being a practice of the past, is another issue to be
changed.

DEMAND AND PETITION PROSECUTION !!

Ronald L. Waldron
March 20, 2016
Reply

WHAT AMERICAN’S FEAR THE MOST

Petition Attorney General’s office to bring TREASON CHARGES

We the people and citizens of the United State have witnessed, and suffered through the corrupt, criminal, and treasonous actions, and lack of performance for any reasonable action by elected officials.

The control of the Senate and congress by Special
interest groups both Foreign and Domestic has been
detrimental to the entire Country,and destroys the
idea & principles of democracy internationally .

When Duel citizens from a rogue State make up the
top 2% of the United States, control 92% of the nations
money, and own the corporations, media, officials,
Home-land Security, pentagon , and going after more control
of our Supreme Court. When they also make up the
leadership of the largest organized crime Syndicate in
History, it seems like we lack the Intelligence, ability, or desire
to prosecute the true criminals.

Have they been given Diplomatic Immunity, issued a get
out of JAIL free card, or Harvard Alumni ID PASS. sets
them free.

I would doubt that our present Commander in Chief will
pardon any of these criminals before he leaves office.

That being a practice of the past, is another issue to be
changed.

DEMAND AND PETITION PROSECUTION !!

Israel’s Worldwide Role in Repression

From South America to South Africa, and all over the world, Israel, often acting together with the United States, has undermined popular movements by supplying weapons, technology and training to repressive governments.

This website seeks to gather testimony and expose Israel’s historic and ongoing role in transforming its colonization of Palestine into profit through exporting repression around the world.

This website is a collective effort of organizations and activists impacted by and fighting the role that Israel, as a junior partner to the United States and settler colonial State in the Middle East (Southwest Asia/North Africa), and Zionist organizations play in repression and arms trade. Please contact us if you are interested in

participating in activities,
have reports and articles that document the role of Israel and Zionist organizations in repression and arms trade,
want to post testimony about the impact of Israel or Zionist organizations on you, your community or your movement,
Want to post campaigns or activities that expose and challenge this role
Want more information or have questions
Google: fighting terrorism at home & abroad peace blog

Success in reaching our GOAL: United We Stand

Goal: Divide and conquer the Corrupt Zionist Party, and
the corrupt politicians that have had complete disconnect
with the American people. Members of both parties are
owned lock stock and barrel by the Foreign AIPAC
lobby with 50 chapters though out the USA, and several
developed organizations that have no respect for the
American people or our Democracy.

The more the Zionist party and media attack Donald
Trump, the anger of the PEOPLE grows. The push
for riots and disruption has come from planting of
such by the opponents of Mr. Donald Trump.

The American people are preparing for the biggest fight
in the Country’s history. Preparing for the forced reform
of government, and removal of the Zionist influence and
control of congress, home-land Security, Defense contractors, no bid contracts, Pentagon, and duel citizenship people involved with our government.

Change has always taken mass demonstration,
petitions, marches, riots, civil unrest, and demand
for majority rule. Certainly not by the corrupt, immoral,
illegal occupiers of Israel, genocides, human rights
violators, or false religious cults, and murders of
Christ, nor the followers of Lucifer.

The false prophets of political & religious leadership,
along with media bobble heads are coming to an end.

We will not be deceived . We will also occupy Cleveland,
Ohio in November to make sure that our votes count
and are respected by the delegates.
We realize that the leadership should be removed for
corrupt criminal behavior. It is time for them to
experience living in fear with no support. Live in
poverty with no support, live unemployed and homeless.

The members of congress,and their special interest
groups, can no longer justify their existence.

We are EAGER to tell each of you good-bye, and
may you spend an eternity in HELL.

We fear this ridiculous congress, and the Israeli
occupation of it, far more then any other radical
organization. It is time for BDS of both.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 28, 2016
Reply

SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS:

Every one refers to the corruption and connections as
special interest groups. You all know them by name, it is
time that you use such. Name each and every one, and
who accepts, and who spends what and where.

That would not take long, most all realize it, just can’t muster
up enough Ethics & Integrity to do so. I Know you ask in
your own mind. Was Tim Russert’s death really by a ”
every day heart attack”, really? Lots more questions,
then answers I’m sure.

sho1924is
March 30, 2016
Reply

I do agree that we need to meet our needs ultimately as a global community.

But I disagree that the US can lead on this unless there are fundamental changes to its way of thinking and solvong matters as well as its system.

The US unfortunately has been guided by other interests abroad although they have always tried to put a humanitarian mask on every occasion.

The Middle East is a lucrative place not only for its resources but its strategic position.

It has been easy for countries like US, UK and European nations to gain support to accomplish their goals here. Especially with the media engines behind them spurning out the right propaganda to instil fear in their own people. This resulting in common people paralyzed in their thinking and common sense and finally allowing wholeheartedly their governments to slaughter for their own gain.

Check out my blog: http://Www.arabviews.xyz for my recent post on medias reaction to recent Belgium bombings.

Allen D. Post
April 6, 2016
Reply

Donald Trump would have been better off with an endorsement from Monica Lewinsky, rather then the one from Sarah Palin.
Both being professional Zionist prostitutes, neither knows when
to keep their mouth shut.
Donald knows AIPAC has plenty more gals on their pay roll,
Just ask Eliot Spitzer and John Edwards about that set up.
Plenty of Politicians have lost their careers because of the
scandals. Created to do just that. Sex, Drugs, and money..
WOMEN in office seem to have a much better moral code,
ethics, and integrity.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 9, 2016
Reply

AMERICA ISRAEL
“A decade ago, it would have been unthinkable that the front-runner of the Republican Party would publicly promise to be an impartial arbiter between Israel and Palestine. It would boggle the mind that a serious contender for the Democratic nomination would debate the New York Daily News editorial board on the merits of the 2014 war on Gaza. And it would be completely out of the question that a movement like the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement would not only be newsworthy, but a topic of discussion on the campaign trail. But here we are.”
SILENCED AGAIN, AND AGAIN.

Ronald L. Waldron
April 9, 2016
Reply

CENSORSHIP OF THIS SITE HAPPENS FREQUENTLY:

THIS IS WHY THE SILENCE !! THIS IS TIME FOR REVOLT—-TIME TO VOTE FOR TRUMP !!

GO TO THE FOLLOWING:

MINDFIELD
http://www.gordonthomas.ie/mindfield.htm

Also to THE UGLY TRUTH

Ronald L. Waldron
April 9, 2016
Reply

ZIONISM–FASCISM–ONE WORLD POWER–ONE GOVERNMENT–

ONE RELIGION–ONE BANK–ONE SUPER RACE.

MOST DANGEROUS TIMES FOR US ALL.

Ronald L.Wajdron
April 11, 2016
Reply

FORWARD THIS EMAIL THANK YOU BERNIE

Ronald L. Waldron

9:04 PM (4 minutes ago)

to info

Thank You Bernie, Thank You for listening to US the American People.
I listened to your speech i9n Buffalo, N.Y.

I have communicated to you by email on several occasions, The issues I have ask
about for fourteen years to all media & officials have for the first time been
addressed by you tonight.

Ronald L. Waldron

fightcorruption02@gmail.com

716 489-3269

fighting terrorism at home & abroad peace blog

Also Google: Ronald L. Waldron

We will help your fight all we can. Thank You for truth we know we are hearing it.

Decided tonight instead of Hillary.

THANK YOU BERNIE

Ronald L.Wajdron
April 19, 2016
Reply

GLOBALIZATION VS: TAKING CARE OF AMERICA & AMERICANS.

Globalization=One World Bank Being developed NOW !
Out Sourcing Jobs–Creating 5..5% Unemployment RATE
When another 22% have given up looking.
National Security=Military out sourced to protect Israel and
the corporations in 130 different Countries now, along with
other Countries that pay nothing for defense.by the Good ol’ USA.
Military Leaders now saying they can not Defend America if attacked .
Just imagine the USA tax payers being ripped off with a $610 Billion
Dollar budget that no other Countries pay or help pay for.
The foreign trade bills, that further take away from us Americans.

Google what the foreign aid to Israel is. It is shocking and they ask congress for more,or we should say demand and get it, each time
$300 to $350, million or more.
The Zionist organized Crime syndicate, and AIPAC lobby with 100
foreign interest organizations, and their duel citizenship members
controls our religious institutions also.
It is our sons & daughters being killed, injuried for life in their DAM
wars, and false flag operations. Duel citizens running the pentagon
& homeland security. While our professionals have to bow to the . BASTARDS & the myths of the OLD TESTAMENT

NOW GET THIS “HOLY SHIT”CRAP

HOW FAR WILL WE AMERICANS GO TO CLEAN UP & END
GLOBAL POVERTY.BEFORE THEIR TAKE OVER.

their media will be showing the hunger, the poverty living
conditions, give us all the sad, sad, stories. BUT not those
in AMERICA. They don’t show the devastation here at home.

CARE–National Conference MAY 2-4. WASHINGTON, DC
of Israel. Be there to listen, see & hear, but silence on here
in America.
YOU all are invited to join Madelene Albright, Michelle Nunn,
Chelsea Clinton Vice Chair of the Clinton Founddation, naturally
USA Senators, members of Congress, and thelargest gathering of

CARE activist,advocates, leaders and supporters from around the World, all expecting America to appropriate what the top 2% would not think of.doing give and not take. Oh no demand it from the USA tax payer..
What you will not see, hear from them & their media, or CONGRESS.
or Candidates, is Americans in America suffering these conditions.

47 Million Americans living at or below the poverty level. Veterans
sick & homeless unable to get help.
They talk about the prison population here. What they don’t say
is how many mental institutions have been closed and turned into
prisons. How many of them now live homeless, or in prisons & jails
where they are kept so medicated and in conditions worse then
animals. Animals have more activist then the ill and homeless.
No documentaries on the empty condemned buildings, homes,
streets not seeing any repair for years, bridges the same.
Look at the conditions on Native American reservations.

It is my opinion that we first need to clean out the corruption,
and the corrupt out of Washington. We need to boycott, against
the human rights violations, BDS. I agree with BDS.
We need to put lobbies out of business, we need to recognize
who are are enemies. Allies , we have none left. Only the takers,
thieves,,
Listen to Rabbi’s against Zionism, Jews against Zionism, and
their reasons for it
With the CLINTON’S involved with this on top of trade agreements,
wars, and now no mention of WHAT Americans need.
How many of the ZIONIST and top 2% contribute in taxes,
aid, help of any kind if they don’t benefit more.
All the disasters here in America would any other Country aid US.
You know better, and why.
LOOK around you, see what they refuse to tell. Refuse to go to.
refuse to air. Refuse to spend on. BUT look where the money goes to
Demand.reform. Ethics & integrity count.

At present I believe Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders really want to change it,
and are the only ones that are & will help change it. They NEED OUR FULL
SUPPORT. — PLEASE DO SO !! HELP AMERICA SURVIVE

Think America Only for a change.

Tomorrow I again will be called a Conspiracy theorist and/or an isolationist..

I have been doing this for 16 years plus. NATION-WIDE including MEDIA,
politicians, and many organizations. SILENCE, NO DEBATES until this
Election cycle, we now are strong enough, making enough noise, they
half to address it.

WATCH CLEVELAND IN JULY. VOTE IN NOVEMBER.

VOTE IN THE PRIMARIES IF YOU CAN. Many eliminated from doing SO.

LOOK: More than 1/3 of AMERICA already LOOKS LIKE A THIRD WORLD
COUNTRY.

GLOBALIZATION == WORLD CONTROL BY ZIONISM

FASCIST REGIME

Ronald L.Wajdron
April 19, 2016
Reply

GO VOTE FOR TRUMP

Lefty Wright
April 21, 2016
Reply

MAKE IT A FIRST TIME COMMITTED VOTE BY THE PEOPLE

Cruz does not belong on a ballot any longer.
Kasich does not belong on a ballot any longer.
The voters certainly have not and will not accept either one.

Republican voters can stop the GOP, and these two chumps
by voting for Donald Trump (only) the rest of the way in PRIMARY
voting to prove to them that the people do matter.

Why get stuck with a ZIONIST puppet by allowing the GOP to decide
in July at Cleveland . If you are not a Trump supporter, don’r waste
a vote or delegate. STAY HOME.

MAKE IT A FIRST TIME COMMITTED VOTE BY THE PEOPLE

Noson Mikoto
April 28, 2016
Reply

You hit the nail on the head. I also can be helpful here 🙂 BTW, if anyone needs to fill out a a form, I found a blank fillable form here
http://goo.gl/P224rP

Lefty Wright
April 30, 2016
Reply

TIME TO STAND UP AMERICA. TAKE IT ALL BACK.

SHOCKING News About the Presidential Election…
The Social Security Bombshell Every Candidate Wants to Keep a Secret
Backroom Congressional deal legally mandates Social Security
“cuts” – weeks BEFORE inauguration.

No matter what the candidates promise, some seniors could lose
as much as three months’ worth of benefit checks.

Find out how to get every single dollar the U.S. gov’t owes you!

Dear Reader,

You’ve heard a lot of promises about Social Security on the campaign trail.

From Hillary Clinton:

“I will defend Social Security!”

– Hillary Clinton
Ted Cruz:

“We can save Social Security
for our seniors.”

– Ted Cruz
And Bernie Sanders:

“We’re not going to cut Social Security. We’re going to expand Social Security.”

– Bernie Sanders
Even Donald Trump says he won’t touch Social Security unless it’s to improve it…

“We’re going to save Social Security.
We’re not going to cut Social Security.”

– Donald Trump
But there’s one big problem with these promises.

They’re never going to come true.

You see, every single candidate knows a dirty secret about Social Security. And they’re not telling you.

No matter what they say, Social Security is scheduled for more “cuts” in 2017…

And they’re mandated by law.

That’s right, just last November Congress and President Obama reached a backroom deal to systematically trim Social Security benefits for certain seniors in 2017.

And they made it ILLEGAL for anyone in the government to override those cuts.

Some seniors will lose as much as $4,200 a year – that’s like losing as much as three months’ worth of Social Security checks.

The presidential candidates are all fully aware of the “cuts” coming in 2017.

So, no matter what Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump or anyone else tells you…

They have NO power to stop the latest round of Social Security “cuts”…

By the time the next President stands in front of the Capitol Building, places their hand on the Bible and swears the oath of inauguration – some American seniors will have already lost access to as much as three months’ worth of Social Security.

Beyond that, there’s nothing they can do to “save” Social Security. Even Donald Trump’s riches can’t plug the gaping hole in the Social Security fund.

That’s on top of Social Security cuts that went in effect on April 30. Over 32 million American seniors lost access to as much as $60,000 in extra benefits over their lifetimes.

So, if you’re an American senior, what can you do to protect yourself?

In a moment, I’ll explain more about the new round of Social Security “cuts” coming in 2017 – and how they affect you.

I’ll also show you a few simple steps you can take to maximize your Social Security benefits and get every single dollar you’re owed by the U.S. government.

After all, you’ve paid money into this program your whole life. You earned this money.

But the sad truth, according to Fox News, is that most Americans will likely only get back about 75% of the money they pay in Social Security taxes.

That’s because most people don’t know how to get all the money they’re entitled to…

And the fact remains that the U.S. government would rather spend your Social Security money on programs like Obamacare than give it to you.

That’s why I sent you this valuable presentation today.

Get Every Single Dollar You’re Owed!

Hello, my name is Blair Morse. I’m a senior analyst for an independent financial research company.

My company is part of a network of affiliates in 20 different countries spread across four continents. Over 2.4 million people read our collected work every day.

And during the last 36 years we’ve gained a reputation for exposing government boondoggles…

We’ve made it our business to warn Americans ahead of time, so they can take precautions to protect their wealth and liberty.

For example, in 1994, one of our corporate affiliates reported that Bill Clinton and Congress were about to start taxing Americans who gave up their citizenship…

Just months later, Clinton signed that exact bill into law.

In 2008, another affiliate predicted “Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two largest and most leveraged owners of U.S. mortgages are sure to go bankrupt in the next 12 months.”

The Federal Government took over their operations three months later.

And for the last six months, right up until the deadline, our team was warning seniors about two major Social Security loopholes that were closed down on April 30.

We showed over 75,000 seniors how to take advantage of these two loopholes to get as much as $60,000 in extra lifetime benefits before it was too late.

That’s like getting an extra two checks a year!

People like Raymond R., who wrote to thank us for sharing this information.

“I was able to take advantage of the file and suspend strategy for my wife and I, and I figure that will net us an extra $57,600.”

Unfortunately, these loopholes are now closed.

But, there are at least four more ways you can boost your monthly Social Security intake that haven’t been shut down by the government yet.

We think it’s your God-given right and obligation as a free citizen of the United States to make sure you get the absolute maximum in Social Security benefits you’re owed from the U.S. government.

And today, I’m going to show you how to get every single dollar.

Keep in mind… I’m not associated with the Social Security Administration in any way. And all of this information is available at no cost on the Social Security website or in the handbook.

You could call Social Security, but they only dispense information.

To make it easier for you, we compiled the information about these four Social Security loopholes in one simple-to-understand resource. And we’ll offer it to you for free…

But you must act quickly. Because the April cuts were just the beginning.

The Dirty Election Secret No One’s Sharing…

As I mentioned, Congress recently struck another backroom deal with President Obama.

It likely involves further Social Security “cuts” that will affect millions more people.

These “cuts” could trim $4,200 a year off some folks’ checks.

For most people, that’s as much as another three months’ worth of Social Security benefits – gone.

It all relates to something called a COLA, or cost of living adjustment.

This is where, typically, the government increases your Social Security payment to keep it in line with inflation.

But right now, the government says inflation is too low for a cost of living adjustment.

How is this possible – when you and I both know the cost of everything from health care to housing is shooting up?

It turns out the Social Security Act has a complicated formula for determining inflation, based on the costs of typical urban wage earners and clerical workers.

Gas and food prices weigh heavily in this formula. With those commodities down right now, the calculations show no inflation.

But other costs, like medical care, are barely factored in.

And as most seniors know, that’s by far their largest bill.

“People can afford to drive to the drugstore because gas prices are lower, but once they get there, they may not be able to afford their prescriptions,” said AARP spokesman, Joshua E. Rosenblum.

The government should know better. Health care costs are skyrocketing for Medicare as well. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid services says the program expects to see a $42 billion increase in payouts in 2016.

And that’s where the Social Security “cut” comes in…

A small clause in the Social Security Act says that if there is no cost of living adjustment for Social Security then by law, Medicare premiums can’t be raised for the majority of middle to lower class Americans.

Instead, 3.1 million select Americans will absorb the full increase. If you’re one of them, you’ll see Medicare premiums rise 52%. In some cases, you could lose as much as $4,200 in 2017 alone…

That’s like having as much as three months’ worth of Social Security benefits ripped away from you.

Bottom line: What we have here is a Social Security cut disguised as a Medicare cost increase.

If you’re affected, your Social Security money is going to be taken away from you to subsidize health-care coverage for lower-income Americans.

Even though you’ve paid taxes into Social Security since your first job as a teenager…

I believe these cuts are coming immediately after the 2016 election…

The politicians struck a temporary agreement in 2016’s budget bill. Rather than allow Social Security cuts to dominate the conversation during an election year, they patched over the problem.

They authorized an emergency measure to keep the Medicare increase to just 15%, a far less noticeable number for most people.

That fixes the issue until after the presidential election is settled in November 2016. As soon as it’s over, you should expect to see even higher Medicare increases in 2017.

Why?

Because while the government managed to “fix” the problem this year, they also made it ILLEGAL to delay the increases in 2017.

The major presidential candidates are all fully aware of the deal. Yet they keep telling Americans there will be no more Social Security cuts.

Rest assured, by the inauguration of the next President, your Social Security benefits will likely be squeezed even further, robbing you of a potential $4,200 in one year alone…

Have you considered the impact it would have on you if Social Security benefits shriveled up?

Over 40% of American seniors live month-to-month, relying on Social Security to pay their essentials – their home, their food and medicine.

Would you be able to afford food and medicine – and still make the mortgage payment?

What about travel – and grandchildren – and all the other things you want to do with your money in retirement?

The collapse of Social Security as we know it wouldn’t just be an inconvenience…

It would create a massive humanitarian crisis here in America. And it would stand as the worst thing the American government has ever done to its citizens.

You need to protect yourself right away. And the first step is doing everything you possibly can to get every dollar you’re owed by the United States government…

I’ll show you how for FREE.

Even though two major Social Security loopholes closed on April 30, there are still a few, little-known tricks you can use to maximize your benefits.

For instance:

Most people have no idea they can get all of the Social Security they’re owed in one lump sum. This option isn’t for everyone, but in special situations, like buying a home or dealing with expensive medical bills, it could come in handy.
Professionals have always encouraged seniors to file for Social Security as late as possible. But there’s one case when you should actually file early, not late.

There’s a one-time bonus increase to your payments you can claim at age 70, just by redoing your paperwork. We’ll show you where to find the public form and how to fill it out.
Our experienced research team is constantly studying the Social Security rules, looking for any edge.

When the law was changed recently, we were one of the first publishers to update our readers in plenty of time before the April 30 window closed.

In just six months, we showed over 75,000 seniors how to get what’s theirs. And we can show you how as well, in our FREE informational guide, Four Ways to Immediately Boost Your Social Security.

Inside we reveal all of the details behind these four existing Social Security loopholes.

They have the power to bring in thousands of extra dollars a year in Social Security for seniors of all ages.

Of course, we can’t guarantee Congress and Obama won’t close these loopholes soon as well, so you need to act quickly.

That’s why we’ve included all of this information in a FREE, easy to understand guide, Four Ways to Immediately Boost Your Social Security.

Of course, all of this information is publicly available on the Social Security Administration website and in the Social Security handbook.

But the handbook is over 2,726 pages long and contains a whole lot of fine print.

Who has the time for that?

That’s why we did it for you. We’ve read over the handbook. And we’ve studied the changes to the Social Security law closely.

In a nutshell, the situation is changing daily. And we’re on top of it.

After we send you this guide, we’ll also send you a follow-up email any time something changes with the law, including when the government may try to shut down one or all of the remaining loopholes. We’ll keep you aware of any important Social Security deadlines.

And we’ll give you all of that information totally free.

In a moment, I’ll ask for your email address so we can immediately rush you a copy of Four Ways to Immediately Boost Your Social Security.

But, keep in mind, this is just a short-term fix. This will help you squeeze a few more dollars out of the Social Security program.

If the cuts get worse in the years to come, you’ll be lucky just to break even – no matter how many loopholes you take advantage of.

The second, long-term step is to make sure you never have to rely on Social Security to fund your retirement.

Most people see Social Security as a contract between you and the government. You pay money into the system and they pay it back at a later date.

Guaranteed by law.

But nothing could be further from the truth…

Supreme Court: U.S. Government Under No “Obligation” To Pay Social Security

Everyone knows, by law, you must pay your Social Security taxes. You have no choice. It comes out of your paycheck automatically.

But did you know the government isn’t under the same rigid contract?

In fact, by ruling of the United States Supreme Court, the federal government is under NO obligation to pay you a Social Security check.

They can decide to spend the money on something else at any time.

This is the clear precedent set in the case of Flemming v. Nestor.

Ephram Nestor was an immigrant from Bulgaria. He moved here in 1918 and paid Social Security taxes from the very beginning of the program, 1936.

In 1955, when he retired, Nestor began receiving Social Security checks for $55.60 per month.

But just one year later, Nestor was deported. Turns out, he’d been an active member of the Communist Party in the 1930s, giving the U.S. government grounds to kick him out.

When he was deported, his Social Security checks stopped. Nestor sued the U.S. government saying since he had paid money into the program, he had a right to those benefits.

The Supreme Court ruled against Nestor, saying the government had the right to terminate Social Security at any time.

Interestingly enough, the Social Security Administration has a full page on their website devoted to the Nestor case. The authorities themselves sum up the case this way:

“[Nestor] appealed the termination arguing, among other claims, that promised Social Security benefits were a contract. In its ruling, the Court rejected this argument and established the principle that entitlement to Social Security benefits is not a contractual right.”

Read that again…

You have no contractual right to Social Security.

It could end tomorrow, and there’s nothing you can do about it.

And that comes straight from the Social Security Administration themselves.

That opinion reaffirmed the 1937 Helvering v. Davis opinion of the Court that stated:

“The proceeds of both the employee and employer taxes are to be paid into the Treasury like any other internal revenue generally, and not earmarked in any way.”

That means the government can spend your tax money on anything they want. And they are NOT contractually obligated to pay you.

If you’re retired and have paid taxes into Social Security all your life, it’s enough to make your head explode.

My friend, this is a warning… there is a war on retirees afoot.

Now they’re taking away benefits you’ve paid into for years…

And they have the full backing of the Supreme Court to do it.

First, they closed two loopholes that helped married couples get another $1,800-$2,500 a year.

Since April 30, 2016, those options are no longer available.

Millions of seniors have been cheated – losing out on benefits they’ve paid into their whole life.

On top of that, Congress is planning to cut nearly 3 months’ worth of Social Security from some seniors, as soon as the presidential election is over.

This is a bipartisan deal. Both Democrats and Republicans alike want to keep your money for themselves.

And none of the Presidential candidates will admit they’re powerless to stop it.

Rest assured, before the new President takes office, there will be massive Social Security cuts announced for 2017. They’ll come in the form of steep Medicare increases.

Besides that, Social Security pays a lousy return anyway.

In the near future, most seniors will likely receive only 75% of the money they put in.

That’s a 25% loss.

I know it might be frustrating – but you have to write off that money you paid in taxes as a loss. If you recoup anything in Social Security benefits from this point, consider yourself lucky.

And you have to act quickly to replace that income…

How do you do that?

Build Your Own “Private Social Security Replacement Fund – And Collect 5x More
Income Every Month

At The Palm Beach Research Group, we’ve spent the last two years and over $3 million searching for this solution – the best possible way to protect yourself from the coming Social Security cuts and potentially make a few extra thousand dollars a month.

We had two dozen retirement analysts, investigators, and journalists at work on this project, searching high and low for a safe, guaranteed way for American seniors to collect significant income every month… without relying on the government.

In the end, we found over 30 unique income tools seniors can use to pad their bank account and live a more comfortable retirement.

All of these tools could help you replace the Social Security income you’ll lose and then some.

We provide the details on all of these opportunities in our new book, The Big Black Book of Income Secrets. Stay tuned to find out how to receive your copy in the mail – completely free.

For instance, we found a unique investment account buried in the fine print of the IRS tax code.

Very few Americans have ever heard of this tool that is completely unconnected to the government – but powerful, wealthy American seniors like Hilary Clinton, Joe Biden and John McCain use it to pad their bank accounts.

Walt Disney used it to fund his empire. So did McDonald’s founder Ray Kroc.

We call this unique tool, Income for Life.

What makes it such a magnet for the wealthy, but still such a powerful investment tool for regular Americans like you and I?

First off, because it can pay a substantial tax-free income.

The average Income for Life account can grow up to 5% a year over the long term. Compounded over 30 years, that’s a 165% gain.

Meanwhile, Social Security might eventually give you 25% LESS than what you contributed in taxes.

That’s a huge difference – and it could mean tens of thousands more in income every year.

But that’s just one reason Income for Life is one great alternative to Social Security.

Safer Than Social Security?

At this point, trusting Social Security to pay for your retirement is like trusting a thief to guard your house.

You’ll be lucky if you get anything back…

With an Income for Life account, you’re in far safer hands. The major companies that issue these accounts have never missed an income payment for the last 100 years!

That includes the Great Depression and the 2008 financial crisis.

What makes them so safe?

Unlike Social Security, Income for Life is a private contract that comes with contractual guarantees.

And the returns aren’t beholden to the stock market.

They aren’t run by a traditional bank, who then takes your money and sticks it in riskier assets. As you remember, that’s what brought down the financial system in 2008.

But the safety and steady income are just a small part of the benefits of an Income for Life account.

Your Money is Invisible to the IRS

While anyone who makes more than $25,000 a year has to pay taxes on their Social Security payments, an Income for Life Account will give you two huge tax benefits.

All of the income you make is tax-free – as long as it stays in your account.
The money you put in your account is INVISIBLE to the IRS.
On top of that, there’s very few limits to how much money you can put in Income for Life accounts. And you can withdraw your money any time you’d like, which you can’t do with an IRA or a 401(k) without paying steep penalties.

You can use the money in your Income for Life account to buy a car, a home or pay medical bills in an emergency. It’s there whenever you want it.

And it’s not just a tax-shield – the money in your account is also protected from lawsuits in most states, even divorce.

In fact, we recently shared this shortcut with a few close friends and associates. They’re gushing over this previously unknown option.

People like Keith B. who wrote in to say, “I plan on using my [Income for Life account] for my children’s education and to buy rental property.”

Or Greg R., who told us, “I’ve already bought a small beach house thanks to this account. It’s amazing. I don’t need Wall Street anymore.”

Jason J., says Income for Life has drastically improved his family’s lifestyle:

“Our account has helped us pay for a vacation club membership. We have plans to fund cars, vacations and real estate. This account is simpler than other retirement accounts like 401ks and IRAs in that it doesn’t need monitoring.

It’s safer because a certain return is guaranteed. And it’s more flexible in that we have access to the money in it.”

In a moment, if you’re interested, I’ll show you how to sign up for an Income for Life account and walk you through every part of the process, step by step.

All of this information is in The Big Black Book of Income Secrets.

This account alone could replace all of the income you stand to lose in the upcoming Social Security cuts and even pay you significantly more than what you were expecting.

However, the Income for Life account is just one of 30 different opportunities you’ll find in this 410 page, hardcover book.

For instance, do you own a home?

In Chapter 6 we’ll share a unique program created by the FHA, that lets you collect extra income every month, just for staying in your home.

You won’t have to rent it out or add a second mortgage or anything like that.

How to Claim Your “Senior Homeowner’s Reward”

The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Office of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) have teamed up to create an outstanding “reward” program for seniors.

If you meet the requirements, you could get paid anywhere from $575-$2,200 a month – for the rest of your life. Or at least as long as you live in your home.

Here are the major qualifications for this “Senior Homeowner’s Reward.”

You must be 62 years of age or older
You must own your own home in full – or have lived in it for at least 25 years
You must continue to occupy the property
If you meet these criteria, there’s only two more steps you need to take – and you can start getting monthly checks, all because you’re a senior who owns a home.

I’m shocked how many seniors qualify for this reward who don’t take advantage of an easy income source.

That’s why we included all the details in the Big Black Book of Income Secrets.

And I don’t just mean the positives… We break down the potential pitfalls of every single opportunity we recommend.

Look, we don’t expect you to completely trust us and do everything we say just because we say it. That would be ridiculous.

You’re intelligent enough to draw your own conclusions from our research. You don’t need us to be cheerleaders. You need us to be a neutral evaluator who presents the pros and cons.

Each chapter of the book comes with a full breakdown of the opportunity.

Why was it created?
How does it work in practice?
Who’s eligible?
How much can you make?
How can seniors use it to get the cash they need right away?
We’ll answer every single one of these questions in detail – with simple, easy-to-understand examples that walk you through the process.

Thumbing through the book right now, there’s another really exciting way to get more income in Chapter 9…

“The Banker’s Code” – How to Make Money on Stocks 98% of the Time

You can use what we call “The Banker’s Code” to make money 98% of the time… but you don’t buy regular shares.

Instead, “The Banker’s Code” involves something called the “secondary stock market”, which can be much more valuable.

For example, we recently showed readers how to make an annualized 20.7% return on Walgreen’s on the secondary stock market (their regular shares dropped 2.3% in the last month.)
You could have grabbed a 21.4% annualized return on Apple’s shares, which went down 6.8% in the past six months.
Intel’s “secondary stock market” shares saw a 28.7% annualized return – even while its regular shares went nowhere – down just 3.6% in the last 12 months.
In the Big Black Book of Income Secrets, we’ll share the “Banker’s Code” and show you how to use it to profit 98% of the time on the secondary stock market.

Now I’m sure you’re wondering… a book with this many unheard of income secrets must cost a lot of money…

And it’s true. We charge anywhere from $30-$50 retail for this book.

But, not for you…

We’re going to give you a copy for a very special price:

FREE

That’s right. We’re offering anyone reading this letter a copy of The Big Black Book of Income Secrets for free.

We’ll even cover the shipping and handling to get this book to you as soon as possible.

I’ll explain why we’d do that in a moment. But, take a look at just a couple more of the incredible income opportunities you’ll learn about in the Big Black Book of Income Secrets.

A type of “private retirement fund” that pays guaranteed income and has nothing to do with the government – but that’s also eligible for your tax-deferred 403(b), 457(b), 401k and traditional IRA accounts. (page 88).
An investment so good Warren Buffett uses it on the side all the time. You get steady monthly income with the upside of the stock market and the downside safety of a bond. (page 297).
A way to get guaranteed payments for the rest of your life. These payments go up when the market goes up. But when the market goes down, they stay locked in at the highest payment. (page 107)
You’ll learn all of these secrets and more as soon as you get your FREE copy of The Big Black Book of Income Secrets.

I’ll send it to you today – along with instructions on how to take advantage of the remaining Social Security loopholes.

You won’t pay a cent for either item. And combined, they’ll show you how to start bagging five times more income every month.

I only ask one favor from you…

Give our monthly income resource, The Palm Beach Letter, a completely risk-free try today.

In The Palm Beach Letter, our top-notch research team – some of the best and brightest in the industry – will keep you updated on all of the opportunities we reveal in the book.

And every time we come across a new income opportunity –we’ll send you an immediate update that outlines everything you need to know: how it works, how much you could make, and how you could start collecting this extra income as soon as possible.

You can use these opportunities to combat the loss of your Social Security benefits, both in 2016 and beyond.

But you’ll get so much more than that as a Palm Beach Letter subscriber. You’ll have access to a universe of opportunities through our contacts in the financial world.

We employ an army of experts on things like the stock market, annuities, insurance, mortgages, real estate, gold, silver, oil, currency, option trading…

Our mission is to help American seniors live the retirement they deserve. An independent retirement where you’re not worried about where the next dollar’s coming from.

You can focus on yourself, your family – and the life pursuits that make you happy. Not some 9-to-5 job that’s just there to pay the bills.

And you won’t have to keep biting your nails, hoping the next check from the government shows up.

You’ll receive your issue of The Palm Beach Letter on the first Thursday of every month.

Occasionally, an opportunity is so urgent it can’t wait until the next month’s issue. In that case, we’ll send you a full briefing ASAP, sometimes days before the new issue comes out.

We created this service to give retirees like you a leg up. So, we want you to have every piece of information as soon as we have it.

We think it’s the most comprehensive guide to retirement income out there.

But don’t just take our word for it…

We’re lucky enough to get letters and phone calls from happy Palm Beach Letter subscribers every day.

Tully R., a brand-new subscriber, wrote to update us:

“I have learned more in the last six months than in the prior 44 years, and I have had other newsletter subscriptions. I already feel like a major movement in my life has taken hold.”

Carole Q. adds:

“I cannot say for sure that yours is the best financial newsletter in the world but I can honestly say it is absolutely the best I have subscribed to; and I have tried many over the years. You guys almost feel like family. It’s obvious you have the very best interests of your subscribers at heart. Keep up the fantastic work!”

Stephanie A. told she’d tried a number of other investment newsletters, “but I must say your newsletter is my favorite. It really has been priceless. I cannot wait to read everything you share. I just want you to know how much your hard work is appreciated.”

We’re truly humbled by these notes. It’s very satisfying to know the work we’re doing is helping thousands of Americans who want to retire and stay retired.

And we want to help you too.

That’s why we’ve made this offer as generous as possible.

When you subscribe to The Palm Beach Letter, you’ll get 60 days to decide if it’s right for you.

That’s what I mean by “risk-free.”

That way, you’ll get a chance to test drive the service.

Read the two monthly issues…

Take a look at our archives…

And of course, read through your two free gifts –Four Ways to Immediately Boost Your Social Security and The Big Black Book of Income Secrets.

If you’re not satisfied with the moneymaking opportunities we show you, simply call or email us any time and we’ll send you a full refund – no questions asked.

And even after those 60 days are up, we’ll still give you a prorated refund at any time.

And you can keep the Social Security report and the book, our compliments, as a thank you for giving us a try.

So how much does a trial subscription to The Palm Beach Letter cost?

Way less than you might think.

Especially when you consider you’ll also get one more incredible resource free.

The Retirement Crib Sheet – Your Handy Reference to Saving Thousands in Expenses Every Year

At The Palm Beach Letter, we don’t just care about helping you make money.

We also want to help you save money and improve your lifestyle. And we’ve compiled nearly 100 ways you can cut costs on daily expenses, health care, vacations and much more. We put it all in one simple, online resource.

It’s called The Retirement Crib Sheet – Everyday Tips You Can Use to Save Thousands a Year.

It’s full of shortcuts you can use to make your retirement a heck of a lot simpler.

For example…

If you know the “secret password” you can fly first class for FREE – on any airline, anytime you want. (page 22)
Never pay ATM fees again. And you won’t have to switch your current bank or drive miles out of your way. (page 50)
This tiny device gives the same channels and picture quality as your cable company – for over $100 less a month (page 15)
Get a free gym membership with your Medicare plan (page 67)
Always guarantee you pay the lowest gas price when you fill up the tank. You could save $400 a year. (page 45)
Traveling abroad? Pay just $20 for unlimited international phone calls (page 11)
Learn any language you want – for FREE – on your phone. This is proven to work 50% faster than Rosetta Stone’s $500 program. (page 59)
Avoid these three aisles of the grocery store. You’ll save hundreds of dollars a year and you’ll eat healthier. (page 43)
We have a researcher solely dedicated to maintaining this immense resource. She’s always searching for ways you can save more money. And she puts them all in The Retirement Crib Sheet.

Just so you know, I won’t be sending The Retirement Crib Sheet in the mail…

You see, many of these money-saving shortcuts can be found on the Internet.

Instead of searching high and low to find these links yourself, we’ve put them all in one place.

That’s why we call it your “crib sheet.” This is a reference you can use to save money on cable TV, Internet, gas, airfare, hotels, fancy dinners, groceries, taxes – on and on…

With our online reference, you can click one link and start using these shortcuts right away. And we include simple, step-by-step instructions for how to use each.

This crib sheet is yours free as well, simply by taking a trial subscription to The Palm Beach Letter.

You’ll also have 60 days to test The Palm Beach Letter out. If it’s not what you expected, simply call or email us within the allotted time and you’ll get your money back.

Here’s everything else you’ll get FREE with your Palm Beach Letter subscription.

Four Ways to Immediately Boost Your Social Security – Congress and President Obama just took away two Social Security loopholes worth as much as $60,000 in lifetime benefits. After April 30, this income is no longer available. But there are four other loopholes that will continue and could help you claim thousands of dollars more in Social Security income. We’ll show you how to take advantage and we’ll update on any new changes to the Social Security law.
The Retirement Crib Sheet – Everyday Tips You Can Use to Save Thousands Every Year – This electronic report contains over 100 tips you can use to get free first class airfare, heavy discounts at expensive restaurants, cheap gas, cheap groceries and much more. You can use our easy reference to take advantage of these opportunities, just moments from now.
The Big Black Book of Income Secrets – Learn over 30 different ways seniors can pick up safe, reliable income every month. These unique solutions could easily help you make up the money you stand to lose in Social Security.
Remember, millions of American seniors stand to lose out on over three months’ worth of Social Security payments in 2017.

No matter what any of the Presidential candidates say, these “cuts” are coming BEFORE the inauguration.

If you’re relying on Social Security to pay your bills or fund your retirement, you need to get The Big Black Book of Income Secrets and our extra reports, right away.

Click on the link below to go to our secure order form. Then follow the instructions so we can send these free resources to you immediately.

Continue…

To Your Wealth,

Blair Morse

Senior Analyst

The Palm Beach Research Group

PS. Remember, the situation is changing every day. While we feel confident you can take advantage of the four remaining Social Security loopholes, the government could come in and shut them down any time. So please don’t delay, take a look at your free Social Security report right now.
.

Home | About | Privacy
© Palm Beach Research Group. All Rights Reserved. Protected by copyright laws of the United States and international treaties. This website may be used pursuant to the subscription agreement and any reproduction, copy, or redistribution (electronic or otherwise, including on the world wide web). in whole or in part, is strictly prohibited without the express written permission of Palm Beach Research Group, 55 NE 5th Avenue, Delray Beach, FL. 33483.

Lefty Wright
May 2, 2016
Reply

Israel’s Worldwide Role in Repression:

From South America to South Africa, and all over the world, Israel, often acting together with the United States, has undermined popular movements by supplying weapons, technology and training to repressive governments.

This website seeks to gather testimony and expose Israel’s historic and ongoing role in transforming its colonization of Palestine into profit through exporting repression around the world.

This website is a collective effort of organizations and activists impacted by and fighting the role that Israel, as a junior partner to the United States and settler colonial State in the Middle East (Southwest Asia/North Africa), and Zionist organizations play in repression and arms trade. Please contact us if you are interested in

participating in activities,
have reports and articles that document the role of Israel and Zionist organizations in repression and arms trade,
want to post testimony about the impact of Israel or Zionist organizations on you, your community or your movement,
Want to post campaigns or activities that expose and challenge this role
Want more information or have questions Download below in your preferred language:
Israel: su role en la repression mundial Israel’s role in global repression

ZIONISM: The worlds largest organized crime syndicate, and TERRORIST supporters. Backed up by the Bush and Clinton administrations, along with the Republican Party, and many of the polarized members of the Democrat Party including Hillary Clinton. No one of either party will discuss the atrocities of Israel, the 67 + sanctions passed by the United Nations VETOED by the USA.

Congress with a 15% approval rating, none representing government of the American People, but bow down to ZIONISM & the wishes of AIPAC, and Israel.

The Cost of Israel to U.S. Taxpayers:$ 3 Trillion in aid.

Another $16.4 billion in U.S. military loans were converted to grants then forgiven by Congress.

In the mean time 1/3 of America now looks like and is a third world country.( repression to a depression all by Zionist greed for Global control, and treason by USA officials).

Hillary, playing the WOMEN card, to become the first woman president. Come on Ladies, think a bit. Is Hillary Clinton really a representative of the moral values, Ethics, Integrity, and professional demeanor you want to see become the first woman president. Does she really deserve the honor of being the first women president. Do you really think she stands equal to Elizabeth Warren. Susan Collins, Shirley Chisholm, and others.

Sorry to say so, but if Hillary is Elected it will be Netanyahu getting the “Blow-jobs” in the oval office.+ their budget from USA tax payers.

No talk from any candidate about the needed reforms in Washington, DC.

Most Popular Articles in this Issue
Pro-Israel PAC Contributions to Congressional Candidates
U.S. Aid to Israel
US Aid: The Lifeblood of Occupation
It will not change under Hillary Clinton….

Lefty Wright
May 5, 2016
Reply

BERNIE SANDERS:: DON’T GIVE IT UP—COMING UP SHORT NOW. RUN AS AN INDEPENDENT !!

BERNIE:

It is far from over.

We do not want to see the Clinton s moving back into the WHITE HOUSE
with all the Dirty Laundry they left with, they are no different then the BUSH
& Cheney puppets to AIPAC lobby & organized syndicate groups of ZIONIST.

Voters are waking up to what is needed in Washington, DC, they will be
well awake by November, 2016.

Republican voters and Democrat voters realize that neither TRUMP, who
already is attempting to unite with the Zionist party members, while the
Clinton s have always been on the same page with the AIPAC regime.

You are the only hope of breaking away from the corruption, what is
actually international plot for globalization by ZIONISM, a political
movement for World dominance. One world BANK, ONE government
of Fascism ..

WE THE PEOPLE WANT COMPLETE REFORM OF THE SYSTEM.

Term limits as one. Crack down on campaign Financing another. Conflict
of interest. Represent America & Americans. No more dual citizens in office.
BDS, No more Vetoes of UN Sanctions against Israel.

Lefty Wright
May 5, 2016
Reply

21 most consequential Clinton scandals, ranked from most important:

1. Monica Lewinsky: Led to only the second president in American history to be impeached.

2. Benghazi: Four Americans killed, an entire system of weak diplomatic security uncloaked, and the credibility of a president and his secretary of state damaged.

3. Asia fundraising scandal: More than four dozen convicted in a scandal that made the Lincoln bedroom, White House donor coffees and Buddhist monks infamous.

4. Hillary’s private emails: Hundreds of national secrets already leaked through private email and the specter of a criminal probe looming large.

5. Whitewater: A large S&L failed and several people went to prison.

6. Travelgate: The firing of the career travel office was the very first crony capitalism scandal of the Clinton era.

7. Humagate: An aide’s sweetheart job arrangement.

8. Pardongate: The first time donations were ever connected as possible motives for presidential pardons.

9. Foundation favors: Revealing evidence that the Clinton Foundation was a pay-to-play back door to the State Department, and an open checkbook for foreigners to curry favor.

10. Mysterious files: The disappearance and re-discovery of Hillary’s Rose Law Firm records.

11. Filegate: The Clinton use of FBI files to dig for dirt on their enemies.

12. Hubble trouble: The resignation and imprisonment of Hillary law partner Web Hubbell.

13. The Waco tragedy: One of the most lethal exercises of police power in American history.

14. The Clinton’s Swedish slush fund: $26 million collected overseas with little accountability and lots of questions about whether contributors got a pass on Iran sanctions.

15. Troopergate: From the good old days, did Arkansas state troopers facilitate Bill Clinton’s philandering?

16. Gennifer Flowers: The tale that catapulted a supermarket tabloid into the big time.

17. Bill’s Golden Tongue: His and her speech fees shocked the American public.

18. Boeing Bucks: Boeing contributed big-time to Bill; Hillary helped the company obtain a profitable Russian contract.

19. Larry Lawrence: How did a fat cat donor get buried in Arlington National Cemetery without war experience?

20. The cattle futures: Hillary as commodity trader extraordinaire.

21. China gate: Nuclear secrets go to China on her husband’s watch.

Lefty Wright
May 5, 2016
Reply

PARDONGATE

In the last day of his presidency, Bill Clinton granted 140 pardons and commuted 36 sentences (a scandal that came to be known as Pardongate), many of them to convicted felons who had paid large fees to Clinton associates. Like many of Clinton’s actions, these pardons raised ethical concerns and added to the controversies surrounding the Clinton Presidency and Hillary Clinton’s senate campaign.While this case began as an investigation into corruption, it has also become a fight against government secrecy. Judicial Watch litigated for four years in an effort to force the Bush Department of Justice to release the thousands of pardon documents. To date, the Department of Justice, despite a court order, has released only a mere fraction of the documents and those released have been completely redacted.This fight for information began on January 29, 2001 when Judicial Watch filed a Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”) request for the Clinton pardon documents. When the DOJ failed to deliver the documents, Judicial Watch filed suit.The Bush Administration, not interested in pursuing an investigation of the Clinton pardons, asserted executive privilege.

The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia granted a motion for summary judgment to the Department of Justice and Judicial Watch appealed. On January 21, 2004, just short of three years since the original FOIA filing, Judicial Watch argued before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. In May 2004, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled the Bush Administration’s claim of presidential communications privileges regarding the Justice Department documents “…would be both contrary to executive privilege precedent and considerably undermine the purposes or FOIA to foster openness and accountability in government.” Furthermore, the Court added that such an extension “…would have far-reaching implications for the entire executive branch that would seriously impede the operation and scope of FOIA.” (View the Court’s decision).

In May 2005, in a move contemptuous of the Court’s order, the U.S. Department of Justice defied the ruling and produced 915 blacked-out pages citing the “deliberative process” and other exemptions.

CASE STATUS In 2006, Judicial Watch filed a Motion for Award for Attorneys Fees and Expenses. In September, a stipulation agreeing to $25,000 was filed and Judicial Watch withdrew the Motion. Judicial Watch recieved payment on November 21, 2006.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 6, 2016
Reply

ONE WORD:
One word defines AMERICAN
politics, either party,that word
is: MALFEASANCE

America does not need the present parties to unite for
more of the same. We do not
need Israel, AIPAC, and other
ZIONIST organizations in control of our Officials, and
Foreign Policy.
WE do not need the multi-millionaires running our
Country.
For the first time in our history
over 50% of our congress are
millionaires.
No wonder the 2% ers run our
government, banks, Wall St., corporations, and religious
institutions where MONEY is now their GOD, their golden
calf we were warned about.
Where the sick, homeless,
disabled, people in need are
now turned away from GODS
house.
We have 47 million Americans
living at poverty level and below. This government spending $610 Billion a year on defense, but not our own.
$1 Trillion in foreign aid to an Occupying regime, our true
Enemy called our ALLY?
We have one GREAT candidate
outside of the con-job on
Americans left. HE is not a
Republican, and Hillary says
he is not a Democrat.
He is AMERICAN with America’s interest at heart.
He is not a Millionaire like
the rest. He is BERNIE
SANDERS, with a life time
of true service to us–USA.

AMERICANS all need to unite
for the good of all Americans,
not just the rich & foreign
Lobbies.

UNITE BEHIND A TRUE
AMERICAN PATRIOT.

SAVE WHAT WE HAVE LEFT.

RLW

Ronald L. Waldron
May 6, 2016
Reply

Ronald L. Waldron
January 5, 2010 at 12:21 pm
SHOULD WE TRUST ANYONE IN GOVERNMENT??

Total Contractors, aka Mercenaries, Will be 130,000 to 160,000, in Afghanistan :

They secured the Oil fields of Iraq, now
they will secure the poppy fields of
Afghanistan all for the Organized Crime
syndicate that is controlling much of
our government today.

Where are the companions of the China
cocaine deal presently??

Wouldn’t we destroy the fields other wise??
Do we trust any official this day and age??
Afghanistan now supplies over 90 percent of the world’s heroin, generating nearly $200 billion in revenue. Since the U.S. invasion on Oct. 7, 2001, opium output has increased 33-fold (to over 8,250 metric tons a year).
The U.S. has been in Afghanistan for over seven years, has spent $177 billion in that country alone, and has the most powerful and technologically advanced military on Earth. GPS tracking devices can locate any spot imaginable by simply pushing a few buttons.
Still, bumper crops keep flourishing year after year, even though heroin production is a laborious, intricate process. The poppies must be planted, grown and harvested; then after the morphine is extracted it has to be cooked, refined, packaged into bricks and transported from rural locales across national borders. To make heroin from morphine requires another 12-14 hours of laborious chemical reactions. Thousands of people are involved, yet—despite the massive resources at our disposal—heroin keeps flowing at record levels.

Common sense suggests that such prolific trade over an extended period of time is no accident, especially when the history of what has transpired in that region is considered. While the CIA ran its operations during the Vietnam War, the Golden Triangle supplied the world with most of its heroin. After that war ended in 1975, an intriguing event took place in 1979 when Zbigniew Brzezinski covertly manipulated the Soviet Union into invading Afghanistan.

Behind the scenes, the CIA, along with Pakistan’s ISI, were secretly funding Afghanistan’s mujahideen to fight their Russian foes. Prior to this war, opium production in Afghanistan was minimal. But according to historian Alfred McCoy, an expert on the subject, a shift in focus took place. “Within two years of the onslaught of the CIA operation in Afghanistan, the Pakistan-Afghanistan borderlands became the world’s top heroin producer.”

Soon, as Professor Michel Chossudovsky notes, “CIA assets again controlled the heroin trade. As the mujahideen guerrillas seized territory inside Afghanistan, they ordered peasants to plant poppies as a revolutionary tax. Across the border in Pakistan, Afghan leaders and local syndicates under the protection of Pakistan intelligence operated hundreds of heroin laboratories.”

Eventually, the Soviet Union was defeated (their version of Vietnam), and ultimately lost the Cold War. The aftermath, however, proved to be an entirely new can of worms. During his research, McCoy discovered that “the CIA supported various Afghan drug lords, for instance Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The CIA did not handle heroin, but it did provide its drug lord allies with transport, arms, and political protection.”

By 1994, a new force emerged in the region—the Taliban—that took over the drug trade. Chossudovsky again discovered that “the Americans had secretly, and through the Pakistanis [specifically the ISI], supported the Taliban’s assumption of power.”

These strange bedfellows endured a rocky relationship until July 2000 when Taliban leaders banned the planting of poppies. This alarming development, along with other disagreements over proposed oil pipelines through Eurasia, posed a serious problem for power centers in the West. Without heroin money at their disposal, billions of dollars could not be funneled into various CIA black budget projects. Already sensing trouble in this volatile region, 18 influential neo-cons signed a letter in 1998 which became a blueprint for war—the infamous Project for a New American Century (PNAC).

Fifteen days after 9-11, CIA Director George Tenet sent his top-secret Special Operations Group (SOG) into Afghanistan. One of the biggest revelations in Tenet’s book, At the Center of the Storm, was that CIA forces directed the Afghanistan invasion, not the Pentagon.

In the Jan. 26, 2003, issue of Time magazine, Douglas Waller describes Donald Rumsfeld’s reaction to this development. “When aides told Rumsfeld that his Army Green Beret A-Teams couldn’t go into Afghanistan until the CIA contingent had lain the groundwork with local warlords, he erupted, ‘I have all these guys under arms, and we’ve got to wait like little birds in a nest for the CIA to let us go in?’”

ARMITAGE A MAJOR PLAYER

But the real operator in Afghanistan was Richard Armitage, a man whose legend includes being the biggest heroin trafficker in Cambodia and Laos during the Vietnam War; director of the State Department’s Foreign Narcotics Control Office (a front for CIA drug dealing); head of the Far East Company (used to funnel drug money out of the Golden Triangle); a close liaison with Oliver North during the Iran-Contra cocaine-for-guns scandal; a primary Pentagon official in the terror and covert ops field under George Bush the Elder; one of the original signatories of the infamous PNAC document; and the man who helped CIA Director William Casey run weapons to the mujahideen during their war against the Soviet Union. Armitage was also stationed in Iran during the mid-1970s right before Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the shah. Armitage may well be the greatest covert operator in U.S. history.

On Sept. 10, 2001, Armitage met with the UK’s national security advisor, Sir David Manning. Was Armitage “passing on specific intelligence information about the impending terrorist attacks”? The scenario is plausible because one day later—on 9-11—Dick Cheney directly called for Armitage’s presence down in his bunker. Immediately after WTC 2 was struck, Armitage told BBC Radio, “I was told to go to the operations center [where] I spent the rest of the day in the ops center with the vice president.”

These two share a long history together. Not only was Armitage employed by Cheney’s former company Halliburton (via Brown & Root), he was also a deputy when Cheney was secretary of defense under Bush the Elder. More importantly, Cheney and Armitage had joint business and consulting interests in the Central Asian pipeline which had been contracted by Unocal. The only problem standing between them and the Caspian Sea’s vast energy reserves was the Taliban.

Since the 1980s, Armitage amassed a huge roster of allies in Pakistan’s ISI. He was also one of the “Vulcans”—along with Condi Rice, Paul Wolfowitz, Richard Perle, and Rabbi Dov Zakheim—who coordinated Bush’s geo-strategic foreign policy initiatives. Then, after 9-11, he negotiated with the Pakistanis prior to our invasion of Afghanistan, while also becoming Bush’s deputy secretary of state stationed in Afghanistan.

Our “enemy,” or course, was the Taliban “terrorists.” But George Tenet, Colin Powell, Porter Goss, and Armitage had developed a close relationship with Pakistan’s military head of the ISI—General Mahmoud Ahmad— who was cited in a Sept. 2001 FBI report as “supporting and financing the alleged 9-11 terrorists, as well as having links to al Qaeda and the Taliban.”

The line between friend and foe gets even murkier. Afghan President Hamid Karzai not only collaborated with the Taliban, but he was also on Unocal’s payroll in the mid-1990s. He is also described by Saudi Arabia’s Al-Watan newspaper as being “a Central Intelligence Agency covert operator since the 1980s that collaborated with the CIA in funding U.S. aid to the Taliban.”

Capturing a new, abundant source for heroin was an integral part of the U.S. “war on terror.” Hamid Karzai is a puppet ruler of the CIA; Afghanistan is a full-fledged narco-state; and the poppies that flourish there have yet to be eradicated, as was proven in 2003 when the Bush administration refused to destroy the crops, despite having the chance to do so. Major drug dealers are rarely arrested, smugglers enjoy carte blanche immunity, and Nushin Arbabzadah, writing for The Guardian, theorized that “U.S. Army planes leave Afghanistan carrying coffins empty of bodies, but filled with drugs.” Is that why the military protested so vehemently when reporters tried to photograph returning caskets?

Victor Thorn is a hard-hitting researcher, journalist and the author of many books on 9-11 and the New World Order. These include 9-11 Evil: The Israeli Role in 9-11 and Phantom Flight 93.

In short, many of the groups now supported (or tolerated) by the United States and NATO are important actors in the drug trade
Blackwater has arms warehouse in Islamabad –Blackwater has implanted sensitive instruments at Sihala to monitor activities of Khan Research Laboratories (KRL), Kahuta, as well as to keep an eye on the nuclear assets of Pakistan. 22 Oct 2009 Private US security firm Blackwater has a warehouse located in the industrial area of Islamabad that is reportedly involved in illegal arms trading. The warehouse, Kestral Logistics, is working as the subcontractor of Xe Worldwide or Blackwater, The Nation reports. According to sources, the company has arms deals with Blackwater and is importing heavy arms and ammunition for the US company for its ongoing illicit operations in Pakistan. [Wow. Blackwater ‘keeping an eye on’ the nuclear assets of Pakistan. I think we’d all prefer al-Qaeda watching them.]

“Israel Lobby” 10 Mar 2009 Chas Freeman’s full statement following his decision not to serve as National Intelligence Council chairman… ‘The tactics of the Israel Lobby plumb the depths of dishonor and indecency and include character assassination, selective misquotation, the willful distortion of the record, the fabrication of falsehoods, and an utter disregard for the truth. The aim of this Lobby is control of the policy process through the exercise of a veto over the appointment of people who dispute the wisdom of its views, the substitution of political correctness for analysis, and the exclusion of any and all options for decision by Americans and our government other than those that it favors.’

Egypt constructing steel wall on Gaza border
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has confirmed reports that Egypt is building a metal wall along its border with the Gaza Strip and noted the wall is being financed by the United States.
The wall could be a preparation for new Israeli attacks against Gaza, she said and stated the wall was part of an security agreement signed between Israel and former US President George Bush shortly before his term ended.

There are several explanations. Cynics point out that the Egyptian government receives a huge American subsidy every year – almost two billion dollars – by courtesy of Israel. It started as a reward for the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. The pro-Israel lobby in the US Congress can stop it any time.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 6, 2016
Reply

Bernie Sanders for President
Ronald –

In the United States today, the wealthiest country in the history of the world, 47 million Americans are living in poverty.

Almost 22 percent of American children are poor and we have the highest child poverty rate of almost any major country on earth.

Let’s be clear. Living in poverty doesn’t just mean you don’t have enough money. It goes much deeper than that.

Living in poverty means you are less likely to have a good grocery store in your community selling healthy food. Far too often it means you don’t know where your next meal is going to come from. Living in poverty means you are less likely to have access to a doctor, dentist or mental health care provider. It means you have less access to public transportation, which makes it harder to find a job. It means you are less likely to have access to child care.

In the United States of America, poverty is often a death sentence.

Yesterday, I spoke about poverty in McDowell County, West Virginia — one of the poorest counties in one of the poorest states in America. In 2014, over 35 percent of the residents in McDowell lived in poverty, including nearly half of the children. The roads are crumbling and only 6 percent of adults have a college education. Less than two-thirds have graduated high school. It has the lowest life expectancy for men in the entire nation. I hope you’ll watch part of my speech on poverty and share it with friends and family on social media.

Bernie Sanders Speaks on Poverty in McDowell County, West Virginia

SHARE THIS

Ronald L. Waldron
May 11, 2016
Reply

FLAWED BY FRAUD: The 2016 Elections.

SUPER DELEGATES: Who are they. Check it out below.

They are all insiders, Most have been and are people which are very much
connected to the special interest groups that influence our political system,
and have bought out America’s officials. Those that receive large donations,
advice, and demands from…

The AIPAC lobby, chapters in every State, several associated organizations
national & international groups, a foreign interest lobby that now controls
our political parties, and officials.

American voters are and will stand up against the corruption involved.

THERE is only one candidate that will fight against their control, their
no tax policies, aid & support given . THAT is Bernie Sanders.

Trump is a friend to all of them, and has been leaning in their direction
the last couple of weeks to again, unite the PARTY. WHAT A JOKE.

WHAT YOU ALL SHOULD KNOW AND CONSIDER.

GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog

GO TO THE LAST POST. READ IT.

List of Democratic Party superdelegates, 2016
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Seal of the President of the United States.svg
2016 U.S. presidential election
TimelineGeneral election debates
National pollingStatewide polling
Newspaper endorsementsParties
Democratic Party
PrimariesCandidatesDebates and forums
National pollingStatewide pollingStraw polls
EndorsementsResultsConventionSuperdelegates
Republican Party
PrimariesCandidatesDebates and forums
National pollingStatewide pollingStraw polls
EndorsementsResultsConvention
Minor parties
Green Party PrimariesConventionLibertarian Party PrimariesNational pollingConventionAll candidates
Other racesHouseSenateGubernatorial
vte
This list tracks current support for given candidates among the 719 unpledged delegates (commonly known as superdelegates) who will cast a vote at the 2016 Democratic National Convention, to be held July 25–28 in Philadelphia.[1] The 8 unpledged delegates from Democrats Abroad carry half-votes at the convention, yielding a total of 715 votes.[2] Unpledged delegates represent about 15% of the overall convention votes (4,770 delegates, 4,766 votes) and come from several categories of prominent Democratic Party members:
438 elected members (with 434 votes) from the Democratic National Committee (including the chairs and vice-chairs of each state’s Democratic Party)
20 distinguished party leaders (DPL), consisting of current and former presidents, current and former vice-presidents, former congressional leaders, and former DNC chairs
193 Democratic members of the United States House of Representatives (including non-voting delegates from DC and territories)
47 Democratic members of the United States Senate (including Washington, DC shadow senators)
21 Democratic governors (including territorial governors and the Mayor of the District of Columbia).
Superdelegates are “unpledged” in the sense that they themselves decide which candidate to support. (In other words, they are not allocated according to voter preferences as the majority of delegates are.) Pledged delegates can change their vote if no candidate is elected on the first ballot and can even vote for a different candidate on the first ballot if they are “released” by the candidate they are pledged to. Superdelegates, on the other hand, can change their vote purely of their own volition. With the exception of the eight DNC members from the Democrats Abroad, who each receive a half-vote, all superdelegates are entitled to one vote (including when a sitting official or distinguished party leader is also a DNC member). Throughout this page, those who qualify under multiple categories are considered as sitting officials first, then as DNC members, and then as DPLs (for example, a sitting senator who is also a DNC member is listed as a senator).
The list below is based on the most recent public indication of support. The listed individuals are free to change their support at any time until they cast their vote at the Democratic National Convention in July.
Contents [hide]
1 Totals by group
2 List
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links
Totals by group[edit]
Distinguished party leaders Governors Senators Representatives DNC members Totals
Hillary Clinton 11 17 39 170 266 503
Bernie Sanders 1 0 2 9 29 41
Martin O’Malley 0 0 0 0 1 1
No endorsement 8 4 6 14 138 170
Totals 20 21 47 193 434 715
Note: Democrats Abroad Superdelegates are assigned half-votes; each of them accounts for ½ rather than 1 in the table above.
List[edit]
Delegate State Group Endorsement
Alma Adams NC Rep. Clinton[3]
Pete Aguilar CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Steven K. Alari CA DNC[4] None
Maggie Allen ME DNC[4] Clinton[5]
Jill Alper MI DNC[4] Clinton[6]
Rafael Anchia TX DNC[4] Clinton[7]
Joe Andrew MD DPL None
Stuart Appelbaum NY DNC[8] Clinton[8]
Dennis Archer MI DNC[4] Clinton[6]
Patrice M. Arent UT DNC[4] Clinton[9]
Brad Ashford NE Rep. Clinton[3]
Jon M. Ausman FL DNC[4] Clinton[10]
Carrie Austin IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Shawn K. Bagley CA DNC[4] Clinton[12]
Tammy Baldwin WI Sen. Clinton[a][13][14]
Nick Balletto CT DNC[4] Clinton[15]
Virginia Barnes MA DNC[4] None
Phil Bartlett ME DNC[4] None
Karen Bass CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Jan Bauer IA DNC[4] Clinton[16]
Joyce Beatty OH Rep. Clinton[3]
Xavier Becerra CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Van Beechler ID DNC[17] Clinton[18]
Cecil Benjamin VI DNC[19] None
Michael Bennet CO Sen. Clinton[3]
Ami Bera CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Bret Berlin FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Jeff Berman DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Don Beyer VA Rep. Clinton[3]
Belinda Biafore WV DNC[4] Clinton[22]
Gus Bickford MA DNC[4] Clinton[23]
Joe Biden DE DPL None[24]
Erin Bilbray NV DNC[4] Sanders[25]
Rachel Binah CA DNC[4] None
Sanford Bishop GA Rep. None[26]
Stephen Bittel FL DNC[4] Clinton[27]
Artie Blanco NV DNC[4] None
Richard Bloomingdale PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Earl Blumenauer OR Rep. Clinton[3]
Richard Blumenthal CT Sen. Clinton[3]
Dean Boerste IN DNC[4] Clinton[29]
James C. Boland DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Suzanne Bonamici OR Rep. Clinton[3]
Anita Bonds DC DNC[4] Clinton[30]
Cory Booker NJ Sen. Clinton[3]
Madeleine Bordallo GU Rep. Clinton[31]
David Bowen WI DNC[4] Sanders[32]
Muriel Bowser DC Gov. Clinton[33]
Barbara Boxer CA Sen. Clinton[3]
Carolyn Boyce ID DNC[4] Clinton[34]
Rick Boylan FL DNC[4] None
Brendan F. Boyle PA Rep. Clinton[35]
Bob Brady PA Rep. Clinton[36]
Bob Bragar DA[note 1] DNC[4] Clinton[37]
Sandra Brandt VA DNC[4] Clinton[38]
Joyce Brayboy NC DNC[4] None
Donna Brazile DC DNC[4] None
Christine Bremer Muggli WI DNC[4] Clinton[a][13][40]
Scott Brennan IA DNC[4] Clinton[41]
Doug Brooks MO DNC[4] Clinton[42]
Boyd Brown SC DNC[4] Clinton[43]
Corrine Brown FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Jerry Brown CA Gov. None
Kate Brown OR Gov. Clinton[44]
Michael D. Brown DC Sen.[45][46] None
Sherrod Brown OH Sen. Clinton[3]
Julia Brownley CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Jocelyn Bucaro OH DNC[4] Clinton[47]
Raymond Buckley NH DNC[4] None
Steve Bullock MT Gov.[note 2] None
Tonio Burgos NJ DNC[4] Clinton[48]
Carol Burke VI DNC[49] None
Cordelia Lewis Burks IN DNC[4] Clinton[50]
John L. Burton CA DNC[4] None
Joe Buscaino CA DNC[4] Clinton[51]
Cheri Bustos IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Laphonza Butler NY DNC[4] Clinton[52]
G.K. Butterfield NC Rep. Clinton[3]
Luisette Cabañas PR DNC[4] None[53]
Michael Cacace CT DNC[4] Clinton[54]
Mitchell Caesar FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Mary Beth Cahill DC DNC[4] Clinton[55][56]
Laura Calvo OR DNC[4] None
Rosiky F. Camacho MP DNC[4] Clinton[57]
MaryEva Candon DC DNC[4] Clinton[58]
Maria Cantwell WA Sen. Clinton[3]
Lois Capps CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Michael Capuano MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Tony Cardenas CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Ben Cardin MD Sen. Clinton[3]
Maria Cardona DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
John Carney DE Rep. Clinton[3]
Tom Carper DE Sen. Clinton[3]
André Carson IN Rep. Clinton[3][50]
Jimmy Carter GA DPL None[26]
Karen Carter Peterson LA DNC[4] Clinton[59]
Matt Cartwright PA Rep. Clinton[3]
Barbra Casbar Siperstein NJ DNC[4] Clinton[48]
Bob Casey, Jr. PA Sen. Clinton[3]
Richard Cassidy VT DNC[4] Sanders[60]
Kathy Castor FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Joaquín Castro TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Emelia S. Chargualaf MP DNC[4] Clinton[57]
Will Cheek TN DNC[4] None
Michael Childers WI DNC[61] Clinton[13]
Judy Chu CA Rep. Clinton[3]
David Cicilline RI Rep. Clinton[3]
Katherine Clark MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Martha Fuller Clark NH DNC[4] None
Yvette Clarke NY Rep. Clinton[3]
William Lacy Clay, Jr. MO Rep. Clinton[3]
James Clayborne, Jr. IL DNC[4] Clinton[62]
Emanuel Cleaver MO Rep. Clinton[3]
Alan Clendenin FL DNC[4] Clinton[63]
Bill Clinton NY DPL Clinton[a][64]
Jim Clyburn SC Rep. Clinton[65]
Kathleen Clyde OH DNC[4] Clinton[66]
Gilda Cobb-Hunter SC DNC[4] None[67]
Tony Coelho PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Larry Cohen DC DNC[4] Sanders[68]
Steve Cohen TN Rep. Clinton[3]
Maria C. Cole NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Rickey Cole MS DNC[4] Clinton[70]
Garnet Coleman TX DNC[4] Clinton[71]
Sheila Comar NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Jim Condos VT DNC[4] Sanders[72]
Gerry Connolly VA Rep. Clinton[3]
John Conyers MI Rep. Clinton[3]
Steven Cook MI DNC[4] None
Vivian Cook NY DNC[4] None
Chris Coons DE Sen. Clinton[3]
Jim Cooper TN Rep. Clinton[3]
Maria Cordone MD DNC[4] Clinton[20][73]
Peter Corroon UT DNC[4] Sanders[74]
Jim Costa CA Rep. Clinton[75]
Jerry Costello IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Ed Cote WA DNC[4] None
Pat Cotham NC DNC[4] None
Jeannette Council NC DNC[4] Clinton[76]
Joe Courtney CT Rep. Clinton[3]
Janet Cowell NC DNC[4] Clinton[77]
Jeffrey David Cox NC DNC[4] Clinton[78]
Doris Crouse Mays VA DNC[4] None
Joseph Crowley NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Henry Cuellar TX Rep. Clinton[3]
John Cullerton IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Elijah Cummings MD Rep. Clinton[79]
Jennifer Cunningham NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Andrew Cuomo NY Gov. Clinton[3]
Ana Cuprill WY DNC[4] Clinton[80]
Melba Curls MO DNC[4] Clinton[42]
John Currie NJ DNC[4] Clinton[81]
Kenneth M. Curtis FL DPL None
Joyce Cusack FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Jean Lemire Dahlman MT DNC[4] None
John D. Daniello DE DNC[4] None
Tom Daschle SD DPL Clinton[82]
Leah Daughtry NY DNC[4] None
Danny K. Davis IL Rep.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Susan Davis CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Wendy Davis GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Yvonne Davis TX DNC[4] None
Ralph Dawson NY DNC[4] Clinton[8]
Mark Dayton MN Gov. Clinton[3]
Howard Dean VT DPL Clinton[84]
Dottie Deans VT DNC[4] Sanders[72]
Peter DeFazio OR Rep. None
Diana DeGette CO Rep. Clinton[3]
John Delaney MD Rep. Clinton[3]
Rosa DeLauro CT Rep. Clinton[3]
Suzan DelBene WA Rep. Clinton[3]
Debra DeLee MA DPL None
Lizette Delgado Polanco NJ DNC[4] Clinton[85]
Mark DeSaulnier CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Ted Deutch FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Grace Diaz RI DNC[4] Clinton[86]
Brandon Dillon MI DNC[4] None
Nancy DiNardo CT DNC[4] Clinton[87]
Debbie Dingell MI Rep.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Arrington Dixon DC DNC[4] Clinton[58]
Frank Dixon OR DNC[4] None
Chris Dodd CT DPL Clinton[88]
Lloyd Doggett TX Rep. Clinton[89]
Kate Donaghue MA DNC[4] Clinton[23]
Ronald Donatucci PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Joe Donnelly IN Sen. Clinton[3][50]
Becca Doten CA DNC[4][90] None[a][91]
Joanne Dowdell NH DNC[4] Clinton[92]
Michael F. Doyle PA Rep. Clinton[93]
Tammy Duckworth IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Maria Elena Durazo CA DNC[4] None
Dick Durbin IL Sen. Clinton[3]
Jess Durfee CA DNC[4] Clinton[94]
Mary Ellen Early CA DNC[4] None
John Eastwood DA[note 1] DNC[4] None[37]
Maria Echaveste CA DNC[4] Clinton[95][96]
Olma Echeverri NC DNC[4] Clinton[97]
Donna Edwards MD Rep. Clinton[3][73]
John Bel Edwards LA Gov. Clinton[98]
Joyce Elliott AR DNC[4] Clinton[99]
Keith Ellison MN Rep. Sanders[3][100]
Louis Elrod GA DNC[4] None[26]
Eliot Engel NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Akilah Ensley NC DNC[4] Clinton[101]
Reni Erdos NJ DNC[4] Sanders[102]
Anna Eshoo CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Lily Eskelsen García DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Elizabeth Esty CT Rep. Clinton[3]
Joe Falk FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Sam Farr CA Rep. None
Herman Farrell NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Chaka Fattah PA Rep. Clinton[3]
Dianne Feinstein CA Sen. Clinton[3]
Katherine Fernandez Rundle FL DNC[4] None
Rajiv Fernando IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Hector Figueroa NY DNC[4] Clinton[8]
Bill Foster IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Donald Fowler SC DNC[4][note 3] Clinton[103]
Earl Fowlkes DC DNC[4] Clinton[104]
Lois Frankel FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Isabel Framer OH DNC[4] Clinton[66]
Pat Frost Brooks OH DNC[4] Clinton[66]
Al Franken MN Sen. Clinton[3][100]
Jim Frasier OK DNC[4] None
David Frye IN DNC[4] Clinton[105]
Marcia Fudge OH Rep. Clinton[3]
Tulsi Gabbard HI Rep. Sanders[106]
Alexandra Gallardo-Rooker CA DNC[4] None
Kate Gallego AZ DNC[4] Clinton[107]
Ruben Gallego AZ Rep. Clinton[3]
John Garamendi CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Eric Garcetti CA DNC[108] Clinton[109]
Teresa Garcia Krusor KS DNC[4] Clinton[110]
Alejandro García Padilla PR Gov. None
Montserrat Garibay TX DNC[4] Clinton[111]
Al Garrett MI DNC[112] None
Tefere Gebre CA DNC[4] None
Dick Gephardt MO DPL Clinton[42]
Penny Gerber PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Alice Germond VA DNC[4] Clinton[38]
Pete Gertonson ID DNC[4] Sanders[113]
Mike Gierau WY DNC[4] Clinton[80]
Kirsten Gillibrand NY Sen. Clinton[3]
Bob Gilligan DE DNC[4] Clinton[114]
Emily Giske NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Angel Gomez FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Alma Gonzalez FL DNC[4] Clinton[115]
Barry Goodman MI DNC[4] Clinton[116][117]
Lisa Goodman DE DNC[4] Clinton[118]
Al Gore TN DPL None
Billi Gosh VT DNC[4] Clinton[42]
Gwen Graham FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Anthony Graves CO DNC[4] Clinton[119]
Alan Grayson FL Rep. Sanders[120]
Al Green TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Darlene Green MO DNC[4] Clinton[42]
Gene Green TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Amanda Green-Hawkins PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Vallena Greer MS DNC[4] Clinton[70]
Janice Griffin MD DNC[4] None
Raúl Grijalva AZ Rep. Sanders[3]
Marcel Groen PA DNC[4] Clinton[121]
Michael Gronstal IA DNC[4] Clinton[122]
Stanley Grossman DA[note 1] DNC[4] Clinton[37][123]
Steve Grossman MA DPL Clinton[23]
Carol Guthrie TX DNC[4] None
Joni Gutierrez NM DNC[4] Clinton[124]
Luis Gutiérrez IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Debra Haaland NM DNC[4] None[125]
Dan Halpern GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Janice Hahn CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Mary Hales WY DNC[4] Clinton[80]
Mark Hammons OK DNC[4] None
Emmett Hansen II VI DNC[4] Sanders[126]
Elaine Harris WV DNC[4] None
Fred R. Harris NM DPL None[125]
Jaime Harrison SC DNC[4] Clinton[127]
Maggie Hassan NH Gov.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Alcee Hastings FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Zack Hawkins NC DNC[4] None
Denny Heck WA Rep. Clinton[3]
Martin Heinrich NM Sen. Clinton[125]
Heidi Heitkamp ND Sen. Clinton[3]
Jacquie Helt MT DNC[4] None
Luis Heredia AZ DNC[4] Clinton[107]
John Hickenlooper CO Gov. Clinton[3]
Brian Higgins NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Tony Hill FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Gilberto Hinojosa TX DNC[4] Clinton[128]
Rubén Hinojosa TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Jim Himes CT Rep. Clinton[3]
Mazie Hirono HI Sen. Clinton[3]
Pat Hobbs CA DNC[4] None
Marge Hoffa MN DNC[4] Clinton[129]
Wayne Holland UT DNC[4] Sanders[130]
Eleanor Holmes Norton DC Rep. Clinton[21]
Danny Homan IA DNC[4][131] Clinton[132]
Mike Honda CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Steny Hoyer MD Rep. Clinton[3]
Fred Hudson VA DNC[4] Clinton[133]
Alice Huffman CA DNC[4] Clinton[52]
Jared Huffman CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Aleita Huguenin CA DNC[4] Clinton[134]
Therese Hunkin AS DNC[4] Sanders[135]
Daniel Hynes IL DNC[4] O’Malley[136]
Harold Ickes DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
David Ige HI Gov. None
Vince Insalaco AR DNC[4] Clinton[99]
Jay Inslee WA Gov. Clinton[3]
Steve Israel NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Troy Jackson ME DNC[4] Sanders[137]
Sheila Jackson Lee TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Victoria Jackson-Stanley MD DNC[4] None
Jay Jacobs NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Nancy Jacobson FL DNC[4] Sanders[138]
Sly James MO DNC[4] Clinton[139]
Ben Jeffers LA DNC[4] None
Hakeem Jeffries NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Tim Jerman VT DNC[4] Sanders[72]
Norwood Jewell MI DNC[4] None
Connie Johnson OK DNC[4] Sanders[140]
Eddie Bernice Johnson TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Hank Johnson GA Rep. Clinton[3]
Lacy Johnson IN DNC[4] Clinton[141][142]
Matt Johnson CA DNC[4] None
Gale Jones Carson TN DNC[4] Clinton[143]
Ray Jordan MA DNC[4] Clinton[23]
Tim Kaine VA Sen.[note 3] Clinton[3]
Elaine Kamarck MA DNC[4] Clinton[23]
Ron Kaminski NE DNC[4] Clinton[144]
Marcy Kaptur OH Rep. Sanders[145]
William Keating MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Patsy Keever NC DNC[4] None
John Keller IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Randy Kelley AL DNC[4] Clinton[146]
Unzell Kelley AL DNC[4] Clinton[146]
Robin Kelly IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Joseph P. Kennedy III MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Ruben Kihuen NV DNC[4] Clinton[147]
Dan Kildee MI Rep. Clinton[3]
Derek Kilmer WA Rep. Clinton[3]
Lee Kinch KS DNC[4] None
Ron Kind WI Rep. Clinton[13][61]
Paul G. Kirk MA DPL Sanders[148]
Ann Kirkpatrick AZ Rep. Clinton[3]
Amy Klobuchar MN Sen. Clinton[3][100]
Kaye Koonce SC DNC[4] Clinton[149]
Sarah Kovner NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Debra Kozikowski MA DNC[4] None
Caitlin Kraft-Buchman DA[note 1] DNC[4] Clinton[37][150][151]
Ann Kuster NH Rep. Clinton[3]
Andrew Lachman CA DNC[4] Clinton[152][153][154]
Roberta Lange NV DNC[4] None
Jim Langevin RI Rep. Clinton[3]
Deborah Langhoff LA DNC[4] Clinton[155]
Fagafaga Daniel Langkilde AS DNC[4] Clinton[156]
Linda Langston IA DNC[4] Clinton[16]
Martha Laning WI DNC[4] None[13]
Rick Larsen WA Rep. Clinton[3]
Jim Larson MT DNC[4] None
John B. Larson CT Rep. Clinton[3]
Warren Larson ND DNC[4] None
Brenda Lawrence MI Rep. Clinton[3]
Gerald Lawrence PA DNC[28] Clinton[28]
Patrick Leahy VT Sen. None[a][39]
Barbara Lee CA Rep.[note 2] None
Sunita Leeds DC DNC[4] Clinton[157]
Frank Leone VA DNC[4] Clinton[38]
Bel Leong-Hong MD DNC[4] Clinton[73]
Cindy Lerner FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Sander Levin MI Rep. Clinton[3]
John Lewis GA Rep. Clinton[3]
Yvette Lewis MD DNC[4] Clinton[73][158]
Ted Lieu CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Dan Lipinski IL Rep. Sanders[159]
John Litz TN DNC[4] Clinton[143]
Dave Loebsack IA Rep. Clinton[3]
Zoe Lofgren CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Valerie Longhurst DE DNC[4] Clinton[160]
Andrés W. López PR DNC[4] None
Sandra Loridans DA[note 1] DNC[4] Clinton[37]
Martha Love WI DNC[4] Clinton[13]
Evan Low CA DNC[4] Clinton[161]
Joe Lowe SD DNC[4] None
Alan Lowenthal CA Rep. None
Nita Lowey NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Juanita Luiz WA DNC[4] None
Ben R. Luján NM Rep. Clinton[125]
Michelle Lujan Grisham NM Rep. Clinton[125]
Charlotte Lundergan KY DNC[4] Clinton[162]
Stephen F. Lynch MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Kerman Maddox CA DNC[4] Clinton[163]
Michael Madigan IL DNC[4] None
Mark Mallory OH DNC[4] Clinton[47]
Dan Malloy CT Gov.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Ronald Malone OH DNC[4] Clinton[66]
Carolyn Maloney NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Sean Patrick Maloney NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Joe Manchin WV Sen. Clinton[3]
Mary Mancini TN DNC[4] None
Jack Markell DE Gov. Clinton[3]
Ed Markey MA Sen. Clinton[3]
Bert Marley ID DNC[4] Sanders[164]
Marcia Marley NJ DNC[4] None
Pat Maroney WV DNC[4] Clinton[165]
Ken Martin MN DNC[4] Clinton[166]
Iris Martinez IL DNC[4] Clinton[167]
Marcus Mason DC DNC[4] Clinton[168]
Sharon Mast WA DNC[4] None
Doris Matsui CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Edna Mattson RI DNC[4] Clinton[86]
Lupita Maurer OR DNC[4] None
Glen Maxey TX DNC[4] None
Janet May AL DNC[4] Clinton[146]
Jayne Mazzotti IL DNC[4] Clinton[169]
Terry McAuliffe VA Gov.[note 3] Clinton[3]
Valerie McCall OH DNC[4] Clinton[170]
Claire McCaskill MO Sen. Clinton[3]
Jennifer McClellan VA DNC[4] Clinton[171]
Kenneth McClintock PR DNC[4] Clinton[172]
Betty McCollum MN Rep. Clinton[100]
Melody McCray-Miller KS DNC[173] None
Dustin McDaniel AR DNC[4] Clinton[99]
Jim McDermott WA Rep. Clinton[3]
David McDonald WA DNC[4] None
Betty McElderry OK DNC[4] Clinton[140]
Mattie McFadden-Lawson CA DNC[4] None
Thomas M. McGee MA DNC[4] None
Jim McGovern MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Andy McGuire IA DNC[4] None
Rhine McLin OH DNC[4] None
Marv McMoore, Jr. MA DNC[4] None
Joseph McNamara RI DNC[4] Clinton[174]
Jerry McNerney CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Gregory Meeks NY Rep.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Shari Mellin IN DNC[4] Clinton[50]
Bob Menendez NJ Sen. None
Grace Meng NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Jeff Merkley OR Sen. Sanders[175]
Kim Metcalfe AK DNC[4] Clinton[176]
Glenard S. Middleton, Sr. MD DNC[4] None
Barbara Mikulski MD Sen. Clinton[3][73]
Breanne Miller UT DNC[4] Clinton[9]
Lorraine Miller TX DNC[4] None
Nancy Mills PA DNC[4] Clinton[121]
Stephanie Miner NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
George J. Mitchell NY DPL Clinton[177]
Heather Mizeur MD DNC[4] Sanders[178]
Lolo Matalasi Moliga AS Gov. Clinton[156]
Maureen Monahan NE DNC[4] None
Walter Mondale MN DPL Clinton[179]
Frank Montanaro RI DNC[4] Clinton[86]
Charles E. Moore KY DNC[4] None[162]
Gwen Moore WI Rep. Clinton[3][13]
Minyon Moore DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Javier Morillo-Alicea MN DNC[4] Clinton[180]
Arthur Morrell LA DNC[4] Clinton[155]
Bruce Morrison MD DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Seth Moulton MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Dorothy Mrowka CT DNC[4] Clinton[54]
Bob Mulholland CA DNC[4] Clinton[181]
Henry Muñoz III TX DNC[4] None
Larry Murakami AK DNC[182] Sanders[183]
Chris Murphy CT Sen. Clinton[184]
Patrick Murphy FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Ian Murray PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Patty Murray WA Sen. Clinton[3]
Jerrold Nadler NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Grace Napolitano CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Katie Naranjo TX DNC[4] Clinton[185]
Richard Neal MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Bill Nelson FL Sen. Clinton[3]
Nick Nemec SD DNC[4] None
Jadine Nielsen HI DNC[4] Clinton[157]
Jay Nixon MO Gov. Clinton[3]
Chad Nodland ND DNC[4] Sanders[186]
Rick Nolan MN Rep. Sanders[187]
Donald Norcross NJ Rep. None
George Norcross NJ DNC[4] None
Michael Nutter PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
David O’Brien MA DNC[4] Clinton[23]
Blanca O’Leary CO DNC[4] Clinton[188]
Beto O’Rourke TX Rep. None[189]
Barack Obama IL DPL None[190]
Carlos Odio FL DNC[4] None
Stephanie Ohigashi HI DNC[4] None
Russell Okata HI DNC[4] Clinton[191]
John Olsen CT DNC[4] Clinton[54]
Ian Olson AK DNC[4] None
Danica Oparnica AZ DNC[4] Sanders[192]
Sandy Opstvedt IA DNC[4] Clinton[193]
Liza M. Ortiz PR DNC[4] None
Sannie Overly KY DNC[162] None[162]
Kylie Oversen ND DNC[4] None
William Owen TN DNC[4] Clinton[143]
Karen Packer OR DNC[4] None
Lisa Padilla CO DNC[4] None
Rick Palacio CO DNC[4] None
Frank Pallone NJ Rep. Clinton[3]
Bruce Palmer WY DNC[4] Clinton[80]
Bill Pascrell NJ Rep. Clinton[3]
John Patrick TX DNC[4] None[189]
Johnnie Patton MS DNC[4] Sanders[126]
Donald Payne, Jr. NJ Rep. Clinton[3]
Gregory Pecoraro MD DNC[4] Clinton[194]
Christine Pelosi CA DNC[4] Clinton[a][195]
Nancy Pelosi CA Rep.[note 2] None
Carol Pensky MD DNC[4] Clinton[73]
David A. Pepper OH DNC[4] None
John Perdue WV DNC[4] Clinton[165]
Joaquin Perez GU DNC[196] Clinton[197]
John Pérez CA DNC[4] Clinton[198]
Ed Perlmutter CO Rep. Clinton[3]
Thersita B. Pertduo MP DNC[4] Clinton[57]
Gary Peters MI Sen. Clinton[3]
Scott Peters CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Collin Peterson MN Rep. Sanders[199]
Greg Pettis CA DNC[45][200] None[200]
Renee Pfenning ND DNC[4] None
Fredericka Phillips TX DNC[4] None
Pedro Pierluisi PR Rep. Clinton[201]
Chellie Pingree ME Rep. Clinton[3]
Stacey Plaskett VI Rep. Clinton[52]
Mark Pocan WI Rep. None[13]
Jared Polis CO Rep. Clinton[3]
Bruce Poole MD DNC[4] None
Karen Pope-Onwukwe MD DNC[4] Clinton[20][73]
DuBose Porter GA DNC[4] Clinton[202]
Ed Potillo DC DNC[4] Clinton[203]
Steven Powell IL DNC[4] Clinton[11]
Vincent Powers NE DNC[4] None
Roberto Prats PR DNC[4] Clinton[204]
David Price NC Rep. Clinton[3]
Carrie Pugh DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Doug Pyle HI DNC[4] Sanders[126]
Nancy Quarles MI DNC[4] None
Sandy Querry MO DNC[4] Clinton[42]
Mike Quigley IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Jake Quinn NC DNC[4] Sanders[205]
Jorge Quintana MT DNC[4] None
Karl Racine DC DNC[4] Clinton[206]
Jason Rae WI DNC[4] None[13]
Evie Rafalko McNulty PA DNC[4] Clinton[207]
Gina Raimondo RI Gov. Clinton[3]
Andres Ramirez NV DNC[4] Clinton[147]
Rion Ramirez WA DNC[4] Clinton[208]
Charles Rangel NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Jaxon Ravens WA DNC[4] None
Stephanie Rawlings-Blake MD DNC[4] None
Richard Ray GA DNC[4] None[26]
Jack Reed RI Sen. Clinton[3]
Kasim Reed GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Chris Regan WV DNC[4] Sanders[209]
Steve Regenstreif DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Clara Reid AS DNC[4] Clinton[156]
Harry Reid NV Sen.[note 2] Clinton[210]
Ed Rendell PA DPL Clinton[211]
Rory Respicio GU DNC[4] Clinton[212]
Riise Richards VI DNC[19] None
Laura Ricketts IL DNC[4][11] Clinton[11]
Shane Riddle LA DNC[4] Clinton[155]
Betty Ritchie TX DNC[4] Clinton[213]
Dennis Rivera NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Matt Robinson MO DNC[4] Clinton[214]
Bill Roe AZ DNC[4] None
José R. Rodríguez TX DNC[4] Clinton[111]
Mannie Rodriguez CO DNC[4] Clinton[188]
Roy Romer CO DPL Clinton[188]
Carol Ronen IL DNC[4] Clinton[215]
Valerie Brady Rongey WA DNC[4] None
James Roosevelt MA DNC[4] None
Ellen Rosenblum OR DNC[4] Clinton[216]
Sally Rosser GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Bill Roy, Jr. KS DNC[4] None
Lucille Roybal-Allard CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Kathleen Rice NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Cedric Richmond LA Rep. Clinton[3]
Virgie Rollins MI DNC[4] None
Joe Rugola OH DNC[4] Clinton[66]
Raul Ruiz CA Rep. Clinton[201]
Dutch Ruppersberger MD Rep. Clinton[3]
Bobby Rush IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Tim Ryan OH Rep. Clinton[3]
R. T. Rybak MN DNC[4] None[217]
Shauna Ryder Diggs MI DNC[112] None
Beverly Ryken CO DNC[4] None
Gregorio Sablan MP Rep. Clinton[218]
Juan Sanchez NM DNC[4] None[125]
Linda Sánchez CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Loretta Sanchez CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Raymond Sanchez NM DNC[4] Clinton[125]
Bernie Sanders VT Sen.[219][220] Sanders[126]
Keelan Sanders MS DNC[4] Sanders[70]
John Sarbanes MD Rep. Clinton[3]
Lee Saunders DC DNC[4] Clinton[21]
Peggy Schaffer ME DNC[4] Clinton[5]
Jan Schakowsky IL Rep. Clinton[3]
Brian Schatz HI Sen. Clinton[3]
Adam Schiff CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Kurt Schrader OR Rep. Clinton[3]
Nancy Schumacher MN DNC[4] Clinton[221]
Chuck Schumer NY Sen. Clinton[3]
Bobby Scott VA Rep. Clinton[3]
David Scott GA Rep. Clinton[3]
Lori Sellner MN DNC[4] Clinton[129]
José E. Serrano NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Terri Sewell AL Rep. Clinton[3]
Lottie Shackelford AR DNC[4] Clinton[99]
Billy Shaheen NH DNC[4] Clinton[92]
Jeanne Shaheen NH Sen. Clinton[3]
Garry Shay CA DNC[4] None
Brad Sherman CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Ken Sherman DA[note 1] DNC[4][222] Sanders[37]
Peter Shumlin VT Gov. Clinton[3]
Kyrsten Sinema AZ Rep. None
Darryl Sinkfield AL DNC[4] None
Albio Sires NJ Rep. None
Louise Slaughter NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Adam Smith WA Rep. Clinton[3]
Hilda Solis CA DNC[4] Clinton[223]
Katie Solon DA[note 1] DNC[4] None[37]
Lenora Sorola-Pohlman TX DNC[4] Clinton[111]
Jackie Speier CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Dennis Speight TX DNC[4] Clinton[111]
Debbie Stabenow MI Sen.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Rick Stafford MN DNC[4] Clinton[224]
Christopher Stampolis CA DNC[4] None
Casey Steinau AK DNC[182] None
Pam Stephenson GA DNC[4] Clinton[225]
Paul Strauss DC Sen. None
Sharon Stroschein SD DNC[4] None
Joanne Sullivan CT DNC[4] None[226]
Kathy Sullivan NH DNC[4] Clinton[92]
Gary Suwannarat DA[note 1] DNC[4] Sanders[37]
Eric Swalwell CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Susan Swecker VA DNC[4] Clinton[227]
Gerry Sweeney NY DNC[4] Clinton[69]
Annette Taddeo FL DNC[4] Clinton[228]
Taling M. Taitano GU DNC[4] Clinton[229]
Mark Takai HI Rep. Clinton[3]
Mark Takano CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Alexis Tameron AZ DNC[4] None
Allison Tant FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Marian Tasco PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
Larry Taylor OR DNC[4] None
Roy Temple MO DNC[4] Clinton[214]
Natalie Tennant WV DNC[4] Clinton[22]
Jon Tester MT Sen. None
Sarah Thomas-Nededog GU DNC[196] Clinton[197]
Bennie Thompson MS Rep. Clinton[3]
Mike Thompson CA Rep. Clinton[3]
Senfronia Thompson TX DNC[4] None
Susan Thomson MA DNC[4] None
Krystal Thrailkill AR DNC[4] Clinton[99]
Dina Titus NV Rep. Clinton[3]
Andrew Tobias FL DNC[4] None
Earl Ray Tomblin WV Gov. Clinton[230]
Paul Tonko NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Ann Tornberg SD DNC[4] None
Norma Torres CA Rep. None
Niki Tsongas MA Rep. Clinton[3]
Shan Tsutsui HI DNC[231] Clinton[157]
Galea’i Tu’ufuli AS DNC[4] Clinton[156]
John Tunela MP DNC[4] Clinton[57]
Tom Udall NM Sen. Clinton[125]
Keith Umemoto CA DNC[4] None
Karen Valentine DE DNC[4] None
Chris Van Hollen MD Rep. Clinton[3]
Juan Vargas CA Rep. Clinton[232]
Marc Veasey TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Filemon Vela, Jr. TX Rep. Clinton[3]
Nydia Velázquez NY Rep. Clinton[3]
Pete Visclosky IN Rep. None[50]
Rick Wade DC DNC[4] Clinton[233]
Brian Wahby MO DNC[4] Clinton[42]
George Wallace VA DNC[4] Clinton[38]
Tim Walz MN Rep. Clinton[3][100]
Everett Ward NC DNC[4] None
Carolyn Warner AZ DNC[4] Clinton[107]
Mark Warner VA Sen. Clinton[3]
Elizabeth Warren MA Sen. None
Debbie Wasserman Schultz FL Rep.[note 2] None
Maxine Waters CA Rep.[note 2] Clinton[3]
Bonnie Watson Coleman NJ Rep. Clinton[3]
Randi Weingarten NY DNC[4] Clinton[8]
Peter Welch VT Rep. Sanders[234]
Royce West TX DNC[4] Clinton[185]
Nan Whaley OH DNC[235] Clinton[235]
Sheldon Whitehouse RI Sen. Clinton[3]
Chris Wicker NV DNC[4] None
Lona Wilbur WA DNC[4] None
David Wilhelm OH DPL Clinton[47]
Alan Williams FL DNC[4] Clinton[20]
Arlanda Williams LA DNC[4] Clinton[155]
Marian Williams FL DNC[4] None
Nikema Williams GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Frederica Wilson FL Rep. Clinton[3]
Sylvia Wilson PA DNC[4] Clinton[28]
John Wisniewski NJ DNC[4] Sanders[236]
Tom Wolf PA Gov. Clinton[3]
David Worley GA DNC[4] Clinton[83]
Nancy Worley AL DNC[4] None
Ron Wyden OR Sen. Clinton[3]
Nancy Wyman CT DNC[237] Clinton[237]
Rosalind Wyman CA DNC[4] Clinton[238]
Karen Yarbrough IL DNC[4] Clinton[169]
John Yarmuth KY Rep. Clinton[162]
Laurence Zakson CA DNC[4] Clinton[239]
Patricia Zieg NE DNC[4] Clinton[144]
Rob Zimmerman NY DNC[4] Clinton[240]
John Zody IN DNC[4] None[50]
James Zogby DC DNC[4] Sanders[126]
AL Vice Chair (vacant) AL DNC[241] None
KY Vice Chair (vacant) KY DNC[162] None
NY Chair (vacant) NY DNC[242] None
NY National Committeeman (vacant) NY DNC[243] None
CDA Vice President (vacant) — DNC[4] None
DNC Vice Chair (vacant) — DNC[106]
lsf the Democratic Party

Lefty Wright
May 13, 2016
Reply

The above post is right on regarding ZIONISM and control

Bernie Sanders for President

The only hope we as Americans have to stop the theft of our Country
by ZIONIST. They control & own Israel, and the officials of many
regimes including the entire political parties of Republicans, and
many, many of the polarized members of the Democrat party
which includes the Clinton’s.

See what the Jewish people are saying go to and see for your selves.
Neturei Karta – Orthodox Jews United Against Zionism
GOOGLE: Jews against ZIONISM.

See: Rabbis against Zionism.

Anti-Zionist Jews

Anti-Zionist Jews.

Jewish voice for PEACE.

The Ugly Truth

The Top Ten Anti-Israel Groups in America

International Jewish Anti-Zionist Network

Anti-Zionist Party

The real nature of Jews against Zionism.

The anti-Zionist Neturei Karta hareidi sect was named on Monday one of the top 10 most influential and active anti-Israel groups in the United States. All say that
Hillary and Donald are both in lock step and classed as ZIONIST.

They also say that if Bernie is not the candidate they will stay home on election day.

They say that they support Bernie Sanders, All others are Zionist supporters.

PEACE ACTION’S GROUNDSWELL
PEACE ACTION, THE LARGEST GRASSROOTS PEACE ORGANIZATION IN THE U.S. GROUNDSWELL EXISTS TO INFORM, ENGAGE AND MOBILIZE. FORMERLY, THE PEACE BLOG.SEARCH FOR : FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD PEACE BLOG

Ronald L. Waldron
May 17, 2016
Reply

STOP THE FRAUD–Contact your State Attorney’s office regarding it..

ALL STATES SHOULD DO THE SAME AS ALASKA.

The Alaska Democratic Convention Just Rejected Superdelegates

WHAT every State should be doing. Fraud is fraud and is
criminal, no matter what rules the same people make up.

Laws are not made to be broken. Rules are made to be broken
especially in a clear case of wrong doing is involved.

FLAWED BY FRAUD: The 2016 Elections.

SUPER DELEGATES: Who are they. Check it out below.

They are all insiders, Most have been and are people which are very much
connected to the special interest groups that influence our political system,
and have bought out America’s officials. Those that receive large donations,
advice, and demands from…

The AIPAC lobby, chapters in every State, several associated organizations
national & international groups, a foreign interest lobby that now controls
our political parties, and officials.

American voters are and will stand up against the corruption involved.

THERE is only one candidate that will fight against their control, their
no tax policies, aid & support given . THAT is Bernie Sanders.

Trump is a friend to all of them, and has been leaning in their direction
the last couple of weeks to again, unite the PARTY. WHAT A JOKE.

WHAT YOU ALL SHOULD KNOW AND CONSIDER.

GOOGLE: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Blog

GO TO THE LAST POST. READ IT.

Christians and Zionism MIX like – Oil & Water.

We have no checks & balances left. No enforcement agencies with all
control by Zionist Homeland Security. biggest farce of all.

NOTE from HILLARY to DONALD TRUMP

Clinton Foundation is a “charity fraud” that allows foreign interests to legally bribe Hillary Clinton (Clinton.news)

Will Trump Expose The GOP’s Corrupt History?

Ronald L. Waldron
May 17, 2016
Reply

Next Financial Crisis Has Already Begun
by Mike Burnick, Director of Research

The early stages of what will be the most severe and painful financial crisis in U.S. history is now underway.

That’s according to a top analyst with a remarkably accurate track record for calling major economic shifts.

He called the gold rally in 1999 (before the metal soared 533%) and the top of the gold market in September of 2011.

He also called the stock market crash in 1987 as well as the real estate crash in 2007.

His secret to spotting major reversals ahead of the crowd is a proven system that was developed by a little-known presidential advisor after the Great Depression. It has since predicted every major market move for the last 50 years with incredible accuracy.

And today it’s foreshadowing one of the worst financial crises we’ve ever seen. The Dow’s recent 2,000 point plunge was just a taste of what lies ahead.

See the proof for yourself.

No fewer than three of the most powerful economic waves in existence are now converging in a way that hasn’t been seen since 1929.

And they are warning of a great unraveling that is about to explode into the headlines.

Cycle #1 shows that businesses will hoard cash … create fewer jobs … and stop reinvesting in business growth. And by doing so, will help drag the economy to a near-standstill.

Cycle #2 indicates that consumers, shaken by weak job growth and plunging household income will pull back too, leading to slower business formation and slower inventory turnover.

Cycle #3—which predicted both the Great Depression and the 2008 Great Recession—shows a coming period of massive economic pain including an ever-weaker economy, chronic unemployment, soaring interest rates, massive defaults on public and private debt and more.

Sound familiar? It should, because the evidence is clear that we have already entered the early stages of these unstoppable cycles.

RECOMMENDED: Find out the date this “Supercycle” will hit the U.S.

Our government, our economy and our way of life are living on borrowed time. For most, the changes will be catastrophic.

Only those who prepare now will have a prayer of protecting their loved ones, let alone preserving their wealth or their quality of life.

The very first step is to see these cycles—the most powerful forces in the economic universe—for yourself. So we’ve just posted a special briefing gives you the full story.

You will get a detailed explanation of how they work, and see for yourself the data that shows the coming collapse. Plus you will discover the simple, practical steps you can take now to get your family and your finances through the crisis ahead.

You can get immediate access to this important research free of charge here.

Read the full report here
The new economic crisis will catch many Americans completely unprepared. Please don’t be one of them! Take action right now to protect yourself and your family and to preserve your wealth. The 4 steps detailed in the report will help you get started. Just enter your email address below to access the full report now.

Click here, it’s free!
The link to your free report will be sent to the email address you enter above, as well as continuing updates through a complimentary new subscription to Money and Markets newsletter, plus investment news, analysis, recommendations, flash alerts and special offers. You can unsubscribe at any time. We respect your privacy.

Latest Articles

All Hell Is About to Break Loose: The “Day America Dies” Is Almost Here Read more

Expert Warns: The Federal Reserve is Powerless to Stop the Next Financial Crisis Click Here

Greece is Just the Beginning! See Which Country Will Buckle Under Massive Debt Next Click Here

Economic Bombshell: The Most Powerful Forecasting Tool Know to Man Signals Market Trouble AheadRead More

These 3 Charts Tell You Everything You Need to Know About What’s Ahead for the Economy Click Here

Ronald L. Waldron
June 11, 2016
Reply

MY FEED BACK REQUESTED by You. I need your feedback for Donald Trump

If you are his VICE PRESIDENT, and if I’M listened to some what.
If you know what one man can and has done. Surprise when Edwards
won Iowa. When you recognize who helped Obama ahead of each scheduled
event, knocking Hillary out 200o8. Who can do it again. That as one man I
have changed a lot more then ALL realized until now.

AMERICAN’s are all angry, and none of the true issues are debated or allowed
to be covered. The DOG & PONY show is about over.The revolution is coming,
the rein of power by ZIONISM is and wll be under attack.

International interference will become necessary. THERE is a big misconception
that business as usual, and that the people don’t have the power to force change.

WATCH the misconception play out.

OF COURSE I’m a DEMOCRAT, THUS open first for Hillary. There hasn’t been
any replies to my offers in the past, thus don’t expect so now.

AMERICAN IDEALS exist, OUT SIDE of the D.C. Belt-way, AIPAC, and
Israel. Issues of concern will be voiced and debated by professionals,
with experts on ZIONISM, WAR mongering, Peace, Human Rights, BDS,
separation of ALL religions from government..

Next agenda will be the END of illegal occupation of another’s PROPERTY,
and IDENTITY .

I suspect along with many others, is that the full scale revolution is coming.

You need to listen to or research who, what, where, when, and why.!!
HOW–“THAT, I get paid for. my work ?? ”

Google: Fighting terrorism at Home & Abroad PEACE BLOG

Read the last postings, scan the rest. My 6 books written prior to 2007.

Confidential information regarding the movie rights etc.current offers
the value of such.. THINK

Ronald L.,
My Faith Votes is busy preparing for our upcoming forum to facilitate a conversation between Donald Trump and some of our nation’s most prominent Christian leaders.

I truly believe it has the potential to be a pivotal moment this election cycle, and through today’s email, I hope you will help me as I strive to carry your voice.

My role will be to guide this conversation, and I would like to know your question or comment for Donald Trump. You can tell me by going here.

Our purpose is not an endorsement or collective decision from the faith community, and we certainly don’t expect to solve all of our nation’s problems in a meeting.

But this will allow a very significant group of faith leaders, along with Mr. Trump, to better understand each other as people, to discuss his vision for the future of America, and to enable him to better understand and appreciate those issues that are most important to people of faith.

As people of faith we must make our voices heard and I hope you will take this opportunity to share your question or comment with me now.

You’ve been a dedicated supporter and I’d really appreciate your input.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely,

Ben Carson

Ronald L. Waldron
June 11, 2016
Reply

NEXT ISSUE: WE the AMERICAN tax-payers will also be demanding an AUDIT of the FED. NOT done since the 1950’s
under President Eisenhower. One of the best advisers, CONGRESS should have listened, BUT as is the case the 1960’s on.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 13, 2016
Reply

DO YOU WANT TO UNITE FOR CHANGE:

READ:

GOOGLE: FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME & ABROAD PEACE BLOG

SCAN to end, read the last few postings. See if you agree.

I’m taking a leadership role, The Democrat Platform will be what we are asking
for.,OUR candidates need support from all of us.

I ASK FOR YOUR VOTES: STRAIGHT DEMOCRAT TICKET !!

Thank you fot your Courtesy, and your consideration.

Respectfully:

Ronald L. Waldron

Please join our network of Americans 4 America.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 14, 2016
Reply

We need to vote for DEMOCRATS, Demand Change regarding foreign policies, foreign Aid, and wasteful spending.

Breaking from Newsmax.com

Newsmax’s ranking of the 25 hardest-working members of Congress is released today. Several prominent Democrats made the list, including Rep. Stephen Lynch (MA), Rep. Juan Vargas (CA), Rep. Joaquin Castro (TX), Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (HI), and Rep. Patrick Murphy (FL), among many other Democrats.of foreign
The most corrupt are Republicans, The least done for America for the last sixteen years. It has been the split Republicans ending up as the obstructionist, committing treason, and developed the Fascist ideals of a foreign entity.

No more WAR. No more Nation building, Separation of all faiths from government, separation of foreign interest lobbies from government,
fair taxation for all. TAX exemptions for the place of worship ONLY. Not investments, businesses, and foreign involvement.

Transparency, and infrastructure repairs & development here in the USA. Defense budget for USA DEFENSE ONLY. OTHERS MUST PAY
ALL RELATED COST. NONE FOR A RELIGIOUS STATE. Government of the USA should never have been nor should be involved with
ZIONISM an organized crime syndicate, nor for any religions State. If such AID is given, an equal amount should be given to each of the
other religions. All wars in the Middle East are WARS of religious belief, We should be completely NEUTRAL.

The USA should not be defending any aspect of MYTH, or false propaganda. Our Bill of rights, and our Constitution are the
documents of government. The Bible,full of undocumented stories and events and 100’s of interpretations , use it for your
personal reference if you wish, but to use it for government is ridicules. The propaganda that GOD has chosen people that
will inherit the earth and can steal everyone’s wealth at will as they do, should not be reinforced by GOVERNMENT.

The HUMAN RIGHTS violations, the abuse of women, the trafficking of drugs, weapons, humans, blood diamonds, and false flag
operations, the assassinations, the blowing up of ships, buildings, and false intelligence, shows us who are worst enemy is.
The corruption and treason by officials is all related to AIPAC, Mossad, and false State of Israel..

We the American people are awakened, but officials continue to enjoy the lap of luxury from such a corrupt source.

IT WILL BE CHANGED. THE CHANGE WE ARE FIGHTING FOR., and will FIGHT WHOLE HEARTILY FOR EVER REVOLT FOR.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 14, 2016
Reply

THE NEXT time GOD tells you anything, PLEASE RECORD IT, OTHERWISE is just another false allegation. or MYTH.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 15, 2016
Reply

Russian Spies Hacked Democratic Computer Network: WashPost
ussian government hackers penetrated the computer network of the Democratic National Committee and gained access to the entire database of opposition research on Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump,The Washington Post reported on Tuesday.

“The intruders so thoroughly compromised the DNC’s system they also were able to read all email and chat traffic,” the paper said, citing committee officials and security experts.

Those officials also said some of the hackers had access to the DNC’s network for about a year.

Shawn Henry, president and chief security officer of CrowdStrike Services and former FBI agent, told MSNBC his team was able to identify and track the hackers to the Russian government.

“We know with certainty, my time in the bureau and now at CrowdStrike, that foreign intelligence services are constantly interested in political processes. They’re interested in strategies. They’re interested in foreign policy, etcetera,” Henry told MSNBC. “And the DNC and other NGOs that have been targeted over the years by this very, very sophisticated group with a high degree of capability and some very, very sophisticated technology.”

The DNC told the Post that no financial, donor or personal information appears to have been accessed, which suggests the breach was traditional espionage, not the work of criminals, the Post reported.

“It’s the job of every foreign intelligence service to collect intelligence against their adversaries,” Henry told the Post.

CrowdStrike told the Post that it identified two separate groups that infiltrated the DNC’s network. One had gained access last summer and was monitoring the DNC’s communications.

The other infiltrated the network in late April and targeted the opposition research files. It was this breach that set off the alarm, the Post reported.

“Their tradecraft is superb, operational security second to none,” CrowdStrike co-founder and chief technology officer Dmitri Alperovitch, told The Hill.

The hack has raised questions over why the Russian government would want campaign opposition research on the Republican nominee, the Hill notes. Theories range from getting information on what the foreign policy of a Trump presidency might look like all the way to finding possible embarrassing information to use against Trump as leverage.

“They’re looking for any kind of insight into how our positioning towards Russia is changing or will change as a result of the election,” John Hultquist, head of cyber espionage at the security firm FireEye, told the Hill. “The biggest driver for intelligence collection is change — and nothing changes America’s posture like an election.”

Yet another theory is that the Russians want Trump to win and plan on giving him the information so his campaign can know what the Democrats are planning to do, especially since Trump once called it a “great honor” for Putin to refer to him as a “strong leader.”

Alperovitch and other security experts, though, don’t buy into that suggestion, according to the Hill, since there appeared to be nothing out of the ordinary in the breach. Alperovitch called the idea “conspiracy theories.”

Though CrowdStrike is not certain how the hackers got into the DNC system, they suspect they used a spear-phishing effort, where emails are sent to DNC employees in an effort to get them to download software that allows the hackers in.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 15, 2016
Reply

Where you find one, there will be 149999 MORE!!

Ronald L. Waldron
June 16, 2016
Reply

Lobby, lobby, lobby,100% corrupt, 100% control of Republicans.

92% of Americans want legislators to work for US!
They were elected as OUR lobbyist, to work with others for the TRUE
benefit of those AMERICANS that elected them, their constituents.

The ONLY constituents they represent are the TOP 2%, and the
corporations owned by such. DOMESTIC and/or FOREIGN..

Regardless of the known national & International laws they are
involved with violating. THE REPUBLICANS have allowed such ,
things as HOME-LAND SECURITY to control ALL enforcement
agencies, FEDERAL, STATE and LOCAL.

IF you earn less then $250,000, you have no reason to vote for a
REPUBLICAN, NEVER EVER waste your vote and taxes paid
AGAIN. THE REPUBLICAN PARTY lost their way over the last
25–35 years. THEY FOLLOW A FALSE PROPHECY, and
FOREIGN POLICY.

DEMAND DEBATES on the ISSUES. ALL they can do is total
obstruction and attack.

If you find that you can not vote for a DEMOCRAT. Write in BALLET
for your favorite Disney Character..They would do a much better job
then majority leader or speaker of the House PRESENTLY !!

WE call for an end of the ATROCITIES of ZIONIST ISRAEL.
An end to the fact of their being any kind of victim, but the creator
of everything immoral, sinful, and out right anti-Christ, anti-Christian.
The perpetrators of corruption, crime, and Social sickness.

PEACE ON EARTH will never come until ZIONISM is completely
DESTROYED,

IF the earth is destroyed, it comes by way of Israel and their illegal
OCCUPATION in the middle East and the officials in WASHINGTON
DC

Lucifer: The grand POO PA of Zionism..

Ronald L. Waldron
June 20, 2016
Reply

Dear Ronald,

Please find below a special message from our friends at Independent Living News. They have some important information to share with you.

Bob Livingston
Editor, Personal Liberty Digest
Editor, The Bob Livingston Letter

The FBI now admits that ISIS thugs are in all 50 states.

If you want to know the future, all you have to do is look at the past.

These goons almost always attack a city’s power infrastructure. They did it in Turkey, Iraq, Syria… And there is still the unexplained power outages in San Francisco that happened back in April.

If the U.S. power grid takes a hit, we would find ourselves in the dark ages over night and at the mercy of those who want to hurt us.

That’s why I created this.

Our nation’s power grid is criminally under protected.

It only takes someone with a 5th grade education and enough hatred in their hearts to do some real damage.

One of the easiest ways to shut us down is through an Electro Magnetic Pulse (EMP). An EMP device can be built for cheap and can cripple a city the size of New York or Atlanta.

Lefty Wright
June 20, 2016
Reply

A MUST READ MESSAGE, ACT NOW !

Lefty Wright< lefty.wright@yahoo.com

11:26 AM (7 minutes ago)

to allendpoat

Allen :

I just got word from a strong insider source to pass along that we need to
drop all other Campaigning projects . That America as America we need
to support Donald Trump, he is the only one that will take BDS under
serious consideration. He will study the facts as they truly are. He will
listen to a debate on foreign interest lobbying, the results & effect on
funding both ways.

Zionism VS Jewish Faith Rather or not officials have been committing
Treason and other high crimes that should be prosecuted.

Stay Safe;

Yea, ISIS is located in all 50 States

Lefty Wright

Lefty Wright
June 20, 2016
Reply

Thank You Allen and Lefty:

I’m getting the same message, and from party members. She will continue to call all the work & true research that professionals
have done just CONSPIRACY THEORIES, rather then to debate the TRUTH of the matter, and take action for the benefit of the
USA against the Foreign Organized Syndicate of ZIONISM.

We will do what we can do to help.

RLW

Ron Waldron
June 21, 2016
Reply

Hillary Clinton’s pandering speech must have registered close to 100% on AIPAC’s checklist.

It is well known to Washington political observers that politicians invited to speak at the annual, giant AIPAC convention ask for suggested talking points from this powerful pro-Israeli government lobby. Hillary Clinton’s pandering speech must have registered close to 100% on AIPAC’s checklist.

Clinton’s speech was newsworthy for its moral obtuseness and the way in which it promised unilateral White House belligerence should she become president. A reader would never know that her condemnation of Palestinian terrorism omitted any reference to the fact that Israel is the occupier of what is left of Palestinian lands, colonizing them, seizing their water and land, brutalizing the natives and continuing the selective blockade of Gaza, the world’s largest Gulag ever since Israel closed its last colony there in 2005.

Clinton emphasized her condemnation of Palestinian children being taught “incitement” against their Israeli oppressors and the recent deplorable knife attacks against Israeli soldiers and civilians. She neglected to point to massive, daily Israeli incitement backed up by U.S.-supplied deadly weapons that over the last decade have caused 400 times more Palestinian fatalities and serious injuries to innocents than the defenseless Palestinians have caused their Israeli counterparts. One of Prime Minister Netanyahu’s coalition partners, for example, from the Jewish Home Party, called for the slaughter of all Palestinians, the elderly and women in general. “Otherwise,” the partner said (in an English-language translation from the Hebrew), “more little snakes will be raised there.”

Clinton did not mention any of these brutalities, though they are components of what is an illegal occupation under international law and the United Nations charter. The Yale Law graduate simply chooses not to know better. Instead, she told her wildly-applauding audience of her support for increasing the amount of U.S. taxpayer spending for the latest military equipment and technology to over $4 billion a year. For the record, Israel is an economic, technological and military powerhouse that provides Israelis with universal health insurance and other social safety nets that are denied the American people.

In an obvious slap at President Obama, whose name she never mentioned (even Netanyahu thanked Obama in his address to AIPAC), Clinton almost shouted out: “one of the first things I’ll do in office is invite the Israeli Prime Minister to visit the White House.” This was a thinly-veiled reference to Netanyahu’s trip to a joint session of Congress, where he tried to undermine President Obama’s negotiations with Iran in what was an unprecedented interference by a foreign leader. Not surprisingly, Obama did not ask Netanyahu over to visit the White House for a drink before he headed back to Israel.

High on AIPAC’s checklist is to insist that all speakers condemn what Clinton called the “alarming boycott, divestment and sanctions movement known as BDS.” She then twice slanderously associated this modest effort (in which many Jews are active participants) to get Israel to lift some oppression from the occupied Palestinian territories, with antisemitism. However, by totally erasing any nod, any mention, any compassion toward the slaughter of Palestinian children, women and men in their homes, schools and hospitals, Hillary Clinton makes a mockery of her touted Methodist upbringing and her declared concern for children everywhere.

For repeated applause at AIPAC’s convention and its associated campaign contributors, she has lost all credibility with the peoples of the Arab world. Moreover, such hostility in her words registers “the other antisemitism,” to cite the title of an address by James Zogby before an Israeli university in 1994.

With all her self-regarded experience in foreign affairs, Mrs. Clinton could pause to ponder why she is backing state terrorism against millions of Arab Palestinians trapped in two enclaves, surrounded by walls, military outposts, and suffering from deep poverty, including widespread diseases and severe anemia among Palestinian infants and children.

Unlimited is her militant animosity toward Iran, bragging about crippling sanctions that she spearheaded (which caused untold harm to the health and care of civilians), and threatening military force “for even the smallest violations of this [nuclear] agreement.” Yet for decades Israel has violated numerous U.N. resolutions to withdraw its occupation and repression of Palestinians without a murmur from Secretary of State Clinton, who as a candidate opposes a role for the U.N. Security Council (over which the U.S. has an often-used veto) in the peace process.

NO ETHICS, NO INTRGRITY, NO CHANGE. NO MORAL VALUES. SHE is Israel’S,AIPAC’S and NETANYAHU’s BITCH !!

Ronald L. Waldron
June 26, 2016
Reply

REVOLUTION IS NECESSARY FOR OUR SURVIVAL AS AMERICA. DRASTIC MEASURES .FOR TRUE DEMOCRACY, FIGHT AGAINST ZIONIST FASCISM.

$133.132 billion given by our congress to Israel. Each Israeli RECEIVES more then any AMERICAN.

The United States of Israel?
by ROBERT FISK

Stephen Walt towers over me as we walk in the Harvard sunshine past Eliot Street, a big man who needs to be big right now (he’s one of two authors of an academic paper on the influence of America’s Jewish lobby) but whose fame, or notoriety, depending on your point of view, is of no interest to him. “John and I have deliberately avoided the television shows because we don’t think we can discuss these important issues in 10 minutes. It would become ‘J’ and ‘S’, the personalities who wrote about the lobby – and we want to open the way to serious discussion about this, to encourage a broader discussion of the forces shaping US foreign policy in the Middle East.”

“John” is John Mearsheimer, a political scientist at the University of Chicago. Walt is a 50-year-old tenured professor at the John F Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. The two men have caused one of the most extraordinary political storms over the Middle East in recent American history by stating what to many non-Americans is obvious: that the US has been willing to set aside its own security and that of many of its allies in order to advance the interests of Israel, that Israel is a liability in the “war on terror”, that the biggest Israeli lobby group, Aipac (the American Israel Public Affairs Committee), is in fact the agent of a foreign government and has a stranglehold on Congress – so much so that US policy towards Israel is not debated there – and that the lobby monitors and condemns academics who are critical of Israel.

“Anyone who criticises Israel’s actions or argues that pro-Israel groups have significant influence over US Middle East policy,” the authors have written, “…stands a good chance of being labelled an anti-Semite. Indeed, anyone who merely claims that there is an Israeli lobby runs the risk of being charged with anti-Semitism … Anti-Semitism is something no-one wants to be accused of.” This is strong stuff in a country where – to quote the late Edward Said – the “last taboo” (now that anyone can talk about blacks, gays and lesbians) is any serious discussion of America’s relationship with Israel.

Walt is already the author of an elegantly written account of the resistance to US world political dominance, a work that includes more than 50 pages of references. Indeed, those who have read his Taming Political Power: The Global Response to US Primacy will note that the Israeli lobby gets a thumping in this earlier volume because Aipac “has repeatedly targeted members of Congress whom it deemed insufficiently friendly to Israel and helped drive them from office, often by channelling money to their opponents.”

But how many people in America are putting their own heads above the parapet, now that Mearsheimer and Walt have launched a missile that would fall to the ground unexploded in any other country but which is detonating here at high speed? Not a lot. For a while, the mainstream US press and television – as pro-Israeli, biased and gutless as the two academics infer them to be – did not know whether to report on their conclusions (originally written for The Atlantic Monthly, whose editors apparently took fright, and subsequently reprinted in the London Review of Books in slightly truncated form) or to remain submissively silent. The New York Times, for example, only got round to covering the affair in depth well over two weeks after the report’s publication, and then buried its article in the education section on page 19. The academic essay, according to the paper’s headline, had created a “debate” about the lobby’s influence.

They can say that again. Dore Gold, a former ambassador to the UN, who now heads an Israeli lobby group, kicked off by unwittingly proving that the Mearsheimer-Walt theory of “anti-Semitism” abuse is correct. “I believe,” he said, “that anti-Semitism may be partly defined as asserting a Jewish conspiracy for doing the same thing non-Jews engage in.” Congressman Eliot Engel of New York said that the study itself was “anti-Semitic” and deserved the American public’s contempt.

Walt has no time for this argument. “We are not saying there is a conspiracy, or a cabal. The Israeli lobby has every right to carry on its work – all Americans like to lobby. What we are saying is that this lobby has a negative influence on US national interests and that this should be discussed. There are vexing problems out in the Middle East and we need to be able to discuss them openly. The Hamas government, for example – how do we deal with this? There may not be complete solutions, but we have to try and have all the information available.”

Walt doesn’t exactly admit to being shocked by some of the responses to his work – it’s all part of his desire to keep “discourse” in the academic arena, I suspect, though it probably won’t work. But no-one could be anything but angered by his Harvard colleague, Alan Dershowitz, who announced that the two scholars recycled accusations that “would be seized on by bigots to promote their anti-Semitic agendas”. The two are preparing a reply to Dershowitz’s 45-page attack, but could probably have done without praise from the white supremacist and ex-Ku Klux Klan head David Duke – adulation which allowed newspapers to lump the name of Duke with the names of Mearsheimer and Walt. “Of Israel, Harvard and David Duke,” ran the Washington Post’s reprehensible headline.

The Wall Street Journal, ever Israel’s friend in the American press, took an even weirder line on the case. “As Ex-Lobbyists of Pro-Israel Group Face Court, Article Queries Sway on Mideast Policy” its headline proclaimed to astonished readers. Neither Mearsheimer nor Walt had mentioned the trial of two Aipac lobbyists – due to begin next month – who are charged under the Espionage Act with receiving and disseminating classified information provided by a former Pentagon Middle East analyst. The defence team for Steven Rosen and Keith Weissman has indicated that it may call Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley to the stand.

Almost a third of the Journal’s report is taken up with the Rosen-Weissman trial, adding that the indictment details how the two men “allegedly sought to promote a hawkish US policy toward Iran by trading favours with a number of senior US officials. Lawrence Franklin, the former Pentagon official, has pleaded guilty to misusing classified information. Mr Franklin was charged with orally passing on information about a draft National Security Council paper on Iran to the two lobbyists… as well as other classified information. Mr Franklin was sentenced in December to nearly 13 years in prison…”

The Wall Street Journal report goes on to say that lawyers and “many Jewish leaders” – who are not identified – “say the actions of the former Aipac employees were no different from how thousands of Washington lobbyists work. They say the indictment marks the first time in US history that American citizens… have been charged with receiving and disseminating state secrets in conversations.” The paper goes on to say that “several members of Congress have expressed concern about the case since it broke in 2004, fearing that the Justice Department may be targeting pro-Israel lobbying groups, such as Aipac. These officials (sic) say they’re eager to see the legal process run its course, but are concerned about the lack of transparency in the case.”

As far as Dershowitz is concerned, it isn’t hard for me to sympathise with the terrible pair. He it was who shouted abuse at me during an Irish radio interview when I said that we had to ask the question “Why?” after the 11 September 2001 international crimes against humanity. I was a “dangerous man”, Dershowitz shouted over the air, adding that to be “anti-American” – my thought-crime for asking the “Why?” question – was the same as being anti-Semitic. I must, however, also acknowledge another interest. Twelve years ago, one of the Israeli lobby groups that Mearsheimer and Walt fingers prevented any second showing of a film series on Muslims in which I participated for Channel 4 and the Discovery Channel – by stating that my “claim” that Israel was building large Jewish settlements on Arab land was “an egregious falsehood”. I was, according to another Israeli support group, “a Henry Higgins with fangs”, who was “drooling venom into the living rooms of America.”

Such nonsense continues to this day. In Australia to launch my new book on the Middle East, for instance, I repeatedly stated that Israel – contrary to the anti-Semitic conspiracy theorists – was not responsible for the crimes of 11 September 2001. Yet the Australian Jewish News claimed that I “stopped just millimetres short of suggesting that Israel was the cause of the 9/11 attacks. The audience reportedly (and predictably) showered him in accolades.”

This was untrue. There was no applause and no accolades and I never stopped “millimetres” short of accusing Israel of these crimes against humanity. The story in the Australian Jewish News is a lie.

So I have to say that – from my own humble experience – Mearsheimer and Walt have a point. And for a man who says he has not been to Israel for 20 years – or Egypt, though he says he had a “great time” in both countries – Walt rightly doesn’t claim any on-the-ground expertise. “I’ve never flown into Afghanistan on a rickety plane, or stood at a checkpoint and seen a bus coming and not known if there is a suicide bomber aboard,” he says.

Noam Chomsky, America’s foremost moral philosopher and linguistics academic – so critical of Israel that he does not even have a regular newspaper column – does travel widely in the region and acknowledges the ruthlessness of the Israeli lobby. But he suggests that American corporate business has more to do with US policy in the Middle East than Israel’s supporters – proving, I suppose, that the Left in the United States has an infinite capacity for fratricide. Walt doesn’t say he’s on the left, but he and Mearsheimer objected to the invasion of Iraq, a once lonely stand that now appears to be as politically acceptable as they hope – rather forlornly – that discussion of the Israeli lobby will become.

Walt sits in a Malaysian restaurant with me, patiently (though I can hear the irritation in his voice) explaining that the conspiracy theories about him are nonsense. His stepping down as dean of the Kennedy School was a decision taken before the publication of his report, he says. No one is throwing him out. The much-publicised Harvard disclaimer of ownership to the essay – far from being a gesture of fear and criticism by the university as his would-be supporters have claimed – was mainly drafted by Walt himself, since Mearsheimer, a friend as well as colleague, was a Chicago scholar, not a Harvard don.

But something surely has to give.

Across the United States, there is growing evidence that the Israeli and neo-conservative lobbies are acquiring ever greater power. The cancellation by a New York theatre company of My Name is Rachel Corrie – a play based on the writings of the young American girl crushed to death by an Israeli bulldozer in Gaza in 2003 – has deeply shocked liberal Jewish Americans, not least because it was Jewish American complaints that got the performance pulled.

“How can the West condemn the Islamic world for not accepting Mohamed cartoons,” Philip Weiss asked in The Nation, “when a Western writer who speaks out on behalf of Palestinians is silenced? And why is it that Europe and Israel itself have a healthier debate over Palestinian human rights than we can have here?” Corrie died trying to prevent the destruction of a Palestinian home. Enemies of the play falsely claim that she was trying to stop the Israelis from collapsing a tunnel used to smuggle weapons. Hateful e-mails were written about Corrie. Weiss quotes one that reads: “Rachel Corrie won’t get 72 virgins but she got what she wanted.”

Saree Makdisi – a close relative of the late Edward Said – has revealed how a right-wing website is offering cash for University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) students who report on the political leanings of their professors, especially their views on the Middle East. Those in need of dirty money at UCLA should be aware that class notes, handouts and illicit recordings of lectures will now receive a bounty of $100. “I earned my own inaccurate and defamatory ‘profile’,” Makdisi says, “…not for what I have said in my classes on English poets such as Wordsworth and Blake – my academic speciality, which the website avoids mentioning – but rather for what I have written in newspapers about Middle Eastern politics.”

Mearsheimer and Walt include a study of such tactics in their report. “In September 2002,” they write, “Martin Kramer and Daniel Pipes, two passionately pro-Israel neo-conservatives, established a website (www.campus-watch.org) that posted dossiers on suspect academics and encouraged students to report behaviour that might be considered hostile to Israel… the website still invites students to report ‘anti-Israel’ activity.”

Perhaps the most incendiary paragraph in the essay – albeit one whose contents have been confirmed in the Israeli press – discusses Israel’s pressure on the United States to invade Iraq. “Israeli intelligence officials had given Washington a variety of alarming reports about Iraq’s WMD programmes,” the two academics write, quoting a retired Israeli general as saying: “Israeli intelligence was a full partner to the picture presented by American and British intelligence regarding Iraq’s non-conventional capabilities.”

Walt says he might take a year’s sabbatical – though he doesn’t want to get typecast as a “lobby” critic – because he needs a rest after his recent administrative post. There will be Israeli lobbyists, no doubt, who would he happy if he made that sabbatical a permanent one. I somehow doubt he will.

ROBERT FISK writes for the Independent.

PRO-ISRAEL PAC CONTRIBUTIONS TO U.S. SENATORS AS OF 12/31/10
State Candidate Party Status Next Election Cycle Career Total Committees
Alabama Sessions, Jeff R I 2014 224,325 AS, B
Shelby, Richard R I 2016 199,825
Alaska Murkowski, Lisa D I 2016 62,100 FR
Begich, Mark D I 2014 6,500
Arizona Kyl, Jon R N 2012 170,525
McCain, John R I 2016 177,500 AS, C
Arkansas Lincoln, Blanche D I 2016 63,027
Pryor, Mark D I 2014 61,000 AS
California Boxer, Barbara D I 2016 245,794 FR(NE)
Feinstein, Dianne D I 2012 147,342 A(D), I
Colorado Udall, Mark D I 2014 48,250
Bennet, Michael D I 2016 12,500
Connecticut Blumenthal, Dick D I 2016 24,000 ?
Lieberman, Joe I N 2012 373,851 AS
Delaware Coons, Chris D I 2016 18,000
Carper, Thomas D I 2012 41,600
Florida Rubio, Marco R I 2016 5,100
Nelson, Bill R I 2012 127,221 AS, B, FR
Georgia Chambliss, Saxby R I 2014 84,500 AS, I
Isakson, Johnny R I 2016 41,500 W
Hawaii Akaka, Daniel K D I 2012 122,000 AS
Inouye, Daniel K D I 2016 262,425 A
Idaho Risch, James R I 2014 13,500
Crapo, Mike R I 2016 56,500 B
Illinois Durbin, Richard D I 2014 373,421 A(D, FO)
Kirk, Mark R I 2016 336,386
Indiana Lugar, Richard R I 2012 70,450
Coats, Dan R I 2016 68,060
Iowa Grassley, Chuck R I 2016 160,323 B
Harkin, Tom D I 2014 552,950 A(D, FO)
Kansas Moran, Jerry R R 2016 15,700
Roberts, Pat R I 2014 51,000 AS, I
Kentucky Paul, Rand R I 2016 2,000
McConnell, Mitch R I 2014 485,141 A(FO)
Louisiana Landrieu, Mary L D I 2014 205,389
Vitter, David R I 2016 82,000
Maine Collins, Susan M. R I 2014 109,000 AS
Snowe, Olympia R I 2012 89,500 I
Maryland Cardin, Benjamin D I 2012 93,015 W
Mikulsi, Barbara D I 2016 213,099 A(D, FO)
Massachusetts Brown, Scott R I 2012 4,000
Kerry, John D I 2014 23,502 FR
Michigan Levin, Carl D I 2014 728,737 AS, I
Stabenow, Debbie D I 2012 131,606 B
Minnesota Klobuchar, Amy D I 2012 32,835
Franken, Al D I 2014 5,680
Mississippi Cochran, Thad R I 2014 3,500 A(D)
Wicker, Roger F. R I 2012 49,900 AS,C
Missouri Blunt, Roy R I 2016 78,350
McCaskill, Claire D I 2012 19,335
Montana Baucus, Max D I 2014 349,648
Tester, Jon D I 2012 10,224
Nebraska Johanns, Michael R I 2014 22,250
Nelson, E. Benj. D I 2012 99,260
Nevada Ensign, John R N 2012 44,200 AS, B
Reid, Harry D I 2016 393,001 A(D)
New Hampshire Ayotte, Kelly R I 2016 14,500
Shaheen, Jeanne D I 2014 42,100
New Jersey Lautenberg, Frank D I 2014 503,578
Menendez, Robert D I 2012 128,318 B
New Mexico Bingaman, Jeff D I 2012 272,425
Udall, Tom R I 2014 41,500
New York Gillibrand, Kirsten D I 2012 62,450
Schumer, Charles D I 2016 84,385 AS
North Carolina Burr, Richard D I 2016 34,250
Hagen, Kay D I 2014 8,000
North Dakota Conrad, Kent D N 2012 267,539 B
Hoeven, John R I 2016 29,500
Ohio Brown, Sherrod# D I 2012 63,750 IR
Portman, Rob R I 2016 16,500
Oklahoma Coburn, Tom R I 2016 23,500
Inhofe, James M. R I 2014 128,800 AS
Oregon Merkley, Jeff D I 2014 21,600
Wyden, Ron D I 2016 344,962 B, I
Pennsylvania Casey, Bob D I 2012 16,000
Toomey, Pat R I 2016 30,250
Rhode Island Whitehouse, Sheldon D I 2012 77,000
Reed, Jack D I 2014 158,850 AS
South Carolina DeMint, James R I 2016 28,470
Graham, Lindsey R I 2014 62,500 AS, B
South Dakota Johnson, Tim D I 2014 192,737 A(FO), B
Thune, John R I 2016 54,730 AS
Tennessee Alexander, Lamar R I 2014 8,000 FR
Corker, Bob R I 2012 14,000
Texas Cornyn, John R I 2014 67,480 AS, B
Hutchison, Kay Bailey R N 2012 31,000 A(D)
Utah Lee, Mike R I 2016 20,500
Hatch, Orrin G. R I 2012 57,700 I
Vermont Sanders, Bernard I I 2012 4,000
Leahy, Patrick D I 2016 145,911 A(D,FO)
Virginia Webb, James D N 2012 0 AF, FR
Warner, Mark D I 2014 39,000 AS, I
Washington Cantwell, Maria D I 2012 2,844
Murray, Patty D I 2016 195,293 A, B
West Virginia Manchin, Joe D I 2016 9,000
Rockefeller, John D. IV D I 2014 235,700 I
Wisconsin Johnson, Ron R I 2016 5,000
Kohl, Herb D N 2012 0 A(HS)
Wyoming Barrasso, John A. R I 2012 11,000 FR
Enzi, Mike R I 2014 26,250 B
KEY: The “Career Total” column represents the total amount of pro-Israel PAC money received from Jan. 1, 1978 through Dec. 31, 2010. S=Senate, H=House of Representatives. Party affiliation: D=Democrat, R=Republican, Ref=Reform, DFL=Democratic Farmers Labor, Ind=Independent, Lib=Libertarian. Status: C=Challenger, I=Incumbent, N=Not Running, O=Open Seat (no incumbent). *=Senate election year, #=House member running for Senate seat, †=Special Election. Committees: A=Appropriations (D=Defense subcommittee, FO=Foreign Operations subcommittee, NS=National Security subcommittee), AS=Armed Services, B=Budget, C=Commerce, FR=Foreign Relations (NE=Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs subcommittee), I=Intelligence, IR=International Relations, NS=National Security, W=Ways and Means. “–” indicates money returned by candidate, “0” that all money received was returned, “[]” = independent expenditures on behalf of candidate (not included in candidate totals). All 2012 races are in bold.

CALLED TREASON, CORRUPTION, SYNDICATED “ORGANIZED_CRIME” ANY WHERE ELSE

ONLY A UNITED REVOLUTION BY THE PEOPLE CAN CHANGE IT. THE BRITS ARE DOING IT. DON’T LET IT STOP THERE.

WE DO NOT NEED OR WANT GLOBALIZATION. THE TAKING OF OUR ECONOMY. MAKING US ANOTHER THIRD

WORLD COUNTRY. DEMAND CHANGE, DEMAND PUBLIC REFERENDUMS ON THE ISSUES. DEMAND TERM LIMITS.

PROTECT OUR CONSTITUTIONS. JOIN B.D.S, FIGHT OUR WORST ENEMY RIGHT HERE AT HOME. DESTROY THE TOP

2%, THE MOST CORRUPT, IMMORAL, RUTHLESS, FORM OF SOCIETY. “ZIONISM”.

PEACE FOR PALESTINE “OUR HOLY-LAND”, and the Rest of the WORLD…

Ronald L. Waldron
June 26, 2016
Reply

The entire establishment that has torn the USA down for the last sixty years, attacks TRUMP from every angle.
THAT MEANS, that just like the BRITS, we all need to vote against the giant corrupt political system.

VOTE for TRUMP to lead our revolution against the ESTABLISHMENT.. THE REAL CHANGE WE NEED.

Lefty Wright
June 28, 2016
Reply

CONSIDER ALL FACTORS WHEN YOU VOTE.

Considering all things regarding the Clinton Campaign..
Foreign Policy, foreign aid, foreign spending and corruption
will not change.
The 21 Scandals have not changed. Ethics & Integrity is
unheard of as a Clinton virtue .
Consider all, I say ALL the baggage she would bring to OUR
White House with her. One of the nations biggest known
Womanizer in the nation coming tailing behind.

Do you really want the WHITE HOUSE to go back to being a
WHORE HOUSE.

THAT certainly is too much luggage in my view..

Lefty Wright

Ronald L. Waldron
June 29, 2016
Reply

FEEL THE TENSION EVERY WHERE IN AMERICA

POLITICIANS ARE IN SO DEEP, THEY CAN’T GET OUT

I was told that the Dear Governor Cuomo , signed an executive order
creating a BLACKLIST of Institutions & persons that support BDS, and
brags about how he is encouraging and helping other Governors to do
the same.. Such comes from a good source.( Ari Wohlfeiler–Deputy
Director of Jewish Voice For Peace, which I’m a member of).

Such failure most likely will remain the same as long as campaign funding
from Foreign Interest Lobbies controls decisions made.

No wonder the most qualified people for Military, POLICE, and other
government positions are not interested in making a commitment when
the STATE no longer gives or supports the benefits .

Thank You for any attempt that may have been made.

Ronald L. Waldron

No Dam Wonder that the Quality of Law Enforcement is at an all
Timer LOW AND GETTING WORSE EVERY DAY.

I will remain proud of the service I gave to the Community.

The community comments to me regularly, how they WISH
There were COPS like I was, out there today, Serving the
community rather then BULL-DOGS and GESTAPO agents
of a coming POLICE STATE trained by Mossad tactics..

JUSTICE, EQUALITY, and DIGNITY. What a JOKE..

FBI reports:
Isis is now in all 50 States.
KKK now making a BIG come back.
Muslims organizing against the attacks against them.
Skin head Nazi’s are regrouping.
Marshal Law being considered by our Fascist officials.
American,s preparing for a complete revolution.
ZIONIST occupiers keep MEDIA & Officials SILENCED.

DONALD TRUMP is the only CHANCE we have for CHANGE.

Video’s, Documentaries, and open discussions & Debates on
Social Media is the only path to follow putting lights on the
atrocities of Zionist Israel & the occupation of Palestine.

Ronald L. Waldron
June 30, 2016
Reply

AIPAC’s Christian Community:

The evangelical Christian community plays an increasingly vital role in AIPAC’s work to strengthen ties between the United States and Israel. Religiously-motivated pro-Israel Christians, those whose affinity for Israel reflects their theology and faith, represent a diverse cross-section of American Christianity. Many evangelical Christians affiliate with non-denominational churches across the country, from small rural churches to larger “megachurches” with more than 2,000 weekly attendees. Furthermore, polls indicate that support for Israel is highly related to adherence to evangelical beliefs and frequency of church attendance. By one estimate, 20-25 million Americans define themselves as evangelical Christians, representing a tremendous pool of potential pro-Israel advocates.

AIPAC’s evangelical Christian Outreach effort seeks to identify pro-Israel Christian leaders in districts with large evangelical populations, encourage their involvement in pro-Israel advocacy among their communities and educate them how to engage their members of Congress most effectively.

“There’s so much desire in the Christian community to take a stand for this relationship between the United States and Israel, but many people don’t know how to do it, and so AIPAC says, ‘Okay, we’ll show you how to do it.’…As Christians, we should be Israel’s strongest supporters and friends and we need to translate that into political activism.”

After 60 years of PROPAGANDA and MANIPULATION there is not a thing left in AMERICA that ZIONISM is’nt involved with. YET no one will discuss it,
debate it, or recognize how our CONSTITUTION is ignored. The polarized preachers, officials, media conglomerates, and their minions call it all
just conspiracy theory’s. . Folks look around you. Go to the NEW testament for CHRISTIAN BELIEF & KNOWLEDGE. Learn about the Anti-Christ,
Revelations. No theory as to WHO Lucifer and his minions are.

REVOLUTION by the American People now. OR Live under FASCISM and ZIONISM tomorrow as a total globalized WORLD..

THAT my friends is what HELL ON EARTH WILL BE. LED BY THE DEVIL HIMSELF.

The only Candidates for president that will represent “AMERICANS” are DONALD TRUMP & BERNIE SANDERS.
WHAT A TEAM IF THEY RAN TOGETHER. Of course no DUEL CITIZEN appointees, Think Tanks, Staffers , ETC.

Get back to THE UNITED–UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. NO MORE OF THE UNITED STATES OF ISRAEL.
No more WAR, No more FINANCIAL SUPPORT for a religious state or their atrocities & human rights violations.
YES: BOYCOTT, DIVEST, and SANCTION.

CLOSE OUR BOARDERS: CLOSED to the ZIONIST organized syndicate FIRST. including MOSSAD, that is scattered
all over the USA, in all 50 States, CANADA and MEXICO.

Prepare, the next BLACK FLAG OPERATION will be bring WAR to us, right here in AMERICA.

The Clinton’s are ZIONIST.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 1, 2016
Reply

Sorry, this comment could not be posted. Censored..

BE AWARE—Be CAUTIOUS:

UN vehicles now located around the USA. Their personnel are also here, along with suspected Interpol personnel .
It looks like governments International are quite interested in the coming elections.
It seems the International community is tracking the corruption involved between certain special interest lobby
and our officials.
What is also interesting is the fact that the restless foreign agents are seen on the shooting ranges .
Possessing weapons and 30 shot clips, that are illegal for a citizen to have . Two such individuals
were asked about their weapons, the response was not at all friendly. None of our business.
If you live with-in a say 50 mile distance from the border North or South, be watchful you will see
activity that is OUT OF THE ORDINARY. Fleets of new all alike white Chargers. A few foreign sounding
MEN tough looking, dark eyes, some bearded, PAY ATTENTION. Early breakfast or dinner time at
restaurants, motels etc. NOT the typical business looking group. PAY attention. Make note of it.
KEEP yourself and yours safe. If you feel uncomfortable, MOVE it on OUT.
Agents like the movers on 911, are certainly all over the Country also. NOT at all here for our interest.
BE AWARE, things are changing very rapidly, not at all for the good.

Officials will again call this another CONSPIRACY THEORY. What do you feel?

Anonymous
July 2, 2016
Reply

Hillary to Bernie: You Smear Me When You Tell the Truth

Ronald L. Waldron
July 2, 2016
Reply

Hillary to Bernie: You Smear Me When You Tell the Truth

GOOD-BYE Hillary—-HELLO BERNIE

BERNIE SANDERS will be our next PRESIDENT

fightcorruption02@gmail.com

Ronald L. Waldron
July 6, 2016
Reply

THE CORRUPT SYSTEM, OF USA Government, WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN,& WHY..–and– ” HOW”.!!

ZIONISM–A political & Economic movement for Globalization & Control world wide

Zionist Israel: Israel of today, run and controlled by Zionist organized corrupt
Syndicate.. Developed in Communist, Atheist, Russia 1900’s.. By way of
developing AIPAC, a foreign interest lobby with the only interest is control of
governments for complete globalization . They have had control of congress
both sides of the ISLE during the administrations of the last five presidents.

Total obstruct of the Obama administration by congress and Homeland Security
which has control of all Federal Enforcement agencies, including the SECRET
SERVICE.to ZIONIST power..Duel citizens now in all phases of our government.

The detriment to America & Americans has become so evident, even with the
silence of officials & Media. A revolution is developing very fast against such.

Social media by the informed, has and will continue to bring all issues into the
open.and on the table. Silence and calling fact CONSPIRACY THEORY is at
an end. BDS will come about quickly. Beginning July 18, 2016.

Hillary Clinton has been and will always be an asset to and for ZIONIST ISRAEL..

THE holocaust , killing of 6 Million True Jewish people, that objected to
forceful taking of Palestine.. Hitler was supported by the Zionist, that
stole the Jewish Identification afterwards.

The good Jewish people still live under Zionist rule & abuse.Along with the
atrocities and human rights violations against Palestine that Jews do object to..

False Flag operations, and Mossad assassinations , will continue for as long
as our congress finances , and our Sons & Daughters die protecting
their illegal occupations, false pretenses of WMD, & their being victimized.

Here is a very short list of Jewish organizations that are opposed to ZIONISM,
and ZIONIST ISRAEL, AIPAC, and THE ZIONIST CONTROLLED USA
CONGRESS. WAR MONGERS FOR PROFIT.

47 Million Americans living in poverty, while our TAXES go to support the
atrocities.of Zionism.

Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump know the truth .

THE ISSUES THAT WILL BE DEBATED and CHANGED OVER ALL ELSE..

The fraud super delegates stand in the way of progress for the real CHANGE
we need.

WE need Bernie Sanders..If not available, Trump is the one to vote for, for
CHANGE.

LIST:

he Jewish people against Zionism & occupation. Against AIPAC Lobby.& ZIONISM.

info@truetorahjews.org
,Jews Against Zionism And Rothschilds,Why Orthodox Jews are opposed to the Zionist “State”,
Neturei Karta – Orthodox Jews United Against Zionism,
Against Israeli Apartheid – Support action for peace & justice‎,
Jews United Against Zionism – Rense,
International Jewish Anti-Zionist Network (IJAN),
Anti-Zionist Rabbi’s Debating Zionist on Press TV,
Jews United Against Zionism – YouTube,
1,000 Rabbi’s against Zionism,

Rabbi Israel
Domb explains the Neturei Karta & Jews United Against Zionism Movement – Full Documentary,

Review of Jewish Identity and Civil Rights in America,
70 FACES MEDIA
70 Faces Media is a not-for-profit digital
media company that aspires to connect
as many people as possible to all sides
of the unfolding Jewish story.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 9, 2016
Reply

FROM the desk of: Judicial Watch President TOM FITTON

Judicial Watch Seeks Testimony of Hillary Clinton

First the good news, the FBI/Justice Department cover-up won’t derail Judicial Watch’s independent effort to get at the truth about the Clinton email scandal.
In fact, a few hours ago we submitted to a federal court judge a request for permission to depose former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

We also asked permission to depose the Director of Office of Correspondence and Records of the Executive Secretariat (“S/ES-CRM”) Clarence Finney; and the former Director of Information Resource Management of the Executive Secretariat (“S/ES-IRM”) John Bentel.

udicial Watch alerted the State Department and Justice Department last week that we would seek this additional testimony from Clinton and others, but Justice Department lawyers informed us that the State Department opposes the request.

FBI Director Undermines the Rule of Law

Shamefully ignoring the law, FBI Director James B. Comey recommended that the Department of Justice not indict Hillary Clinton for the disclosure of classified information on her non-state.gov email. Sure enough, Obama Attorney General Loretta Lynch closed the investigation without charges the next day.

Comey first detailed Clinton’s massive destruction of government records and grossly negligent handling of classified information. But then came an enormous disconnect between these devastating findings and Comey’s weak recommendation not to prosecute.

By not acting on these charges, Comey has torpedoed his bureau’s reputation.

Also shows the POWER of the controlling HOMELAND SECURITY over all of our enforcement agencies. Such brakes down the entire Justice Department, THEN look at WHO benefits.

Comey’s FBI Helped Convict Navy Reservist who “Handled Classified Materials Inappropriately”

Among many things making Comey’s decision infuriating was the fact that his FBI helped convict a Navy reservist who “handled classified materials inappropriately.” Our Corruption Chronicles blog had that story:

Illustrating that FBI Director James Comey is a liar and a fraud, his agency helped convict a Navy reservist last summer of the same crime that he just cleared Hillary Clinton of committing. In that case the reservist from northern California got criminally charged—as per FBI recommendation—for having classified material on personal electronic devices that weren’t authorized by the government to contain such information. The FBI investigation didn’t reveal evidence that the reservist intended to distribute classified information to unauthorized personnel, so he was just being “extremely careless” like Clinton and her top aides.

Until next week…

Tom Fitton
President

Anonymous
July 10, 2016
Reply

IT IS TIME FOR PEACE, STARTING IN THE MIDDLE EAST. ++

NO PEACE HERE UNTIL THERE IS !!

The responsibility for the mess we are in, lays with the UNITED
STATES FEDERAL GOVERNMENT..
The needless Iraq war, over false WMD, 1.2 million civilians murdered.
The no bid contracts and immunity given to murder by BLACK-WATER
Security a complete ruthless company, along with Cheney’s role with
Halliburton.
The total disregard for America and the American people by the
TREASON congress has committed since 2000.
The disregard for our troops sent unequipped with proper armor etc.
The disrespect for the veterans coming home with lack of proper care
& support.
The criticism of Police officers, that have had their benefits cut to the bone.
Their retirement messed with for years and years, particularly by
New York State and governor Cuomo.
The VETO’S of 68+ sanctions against the biggest violator of human rights,
Israel.
Total obstruction against any thing at all that would benefit America,
all for the ZIONIST Globalization plans for Zionist Israel, that has
infiltrated every USA agency, government office in Washington DC, and
all States. NOW actively doing the same in CANADA.
The political greed, accepting billions in pay offs. To the point that
for the first time, over 50% of congress are millionaires. ALL in
bed with WALL STREET , AIPAC, on & on.
Jobs out sourced, 96% of money to 2 %.with off shore accounts.
Duel citizens with Israel running our Universities, Think tanks, and
Foreign policies, Trade agreements and AID. No audit of the FED
since the 50″s. The number of false flag operations. The number of assassinations by Mossad around the World .
All done with approval, agreement, and support of OUR embedded
CONGRESS. Along with governors, that stop investigations such as
the Moreland Commission. Executive orders against anyone supporting
BDS. Which apparently takes $$$ out of their greedy hand outs.
OF course MEDIA the biggest joke among us the people.
We recognize the control, the silence on important issues. The beating to death
of irrelevant topics. TOP CRIMINALS in office, with syndicate management.

Officials & the Media act like you can not understand the anger, Anger that
is every where in the Country. YOU CAN NO LONGER BLAME PRESIDENT
OBAMA. IT IS YOU ASS HOLES, MEDIA, and freaking ZIONISM.

We the people supported President Obama, Elected him twice, and
we still support him. NOT any of you, wait and see.
You started the prejudice toward him immediately, questioning his
birth certificate, calling him a Muslim, non-American. Criticized his
every move. Especially any thing he wanted for America.
You jerks have wrongfully given all to a rogue State of Israel, that does
not support the Jewish people, or represent them .
You have attempted to put him and all of us to the back of the BUS.
WELL it will never happen again. We want you in BALL & CHAINS.

LOOK in the mirror , that is the glass that is shattering.

The only way to fix it, we need to exile every one of you. YOU are the FAULT.

WE will continue with B.D.S.. Now against You and THEM…

We all will keep an EYE out for you.;.

Lefty Wright —-LEFT and Wright

UNITED WE STAND

Allen D. Post
July 25, 2016
Reply

THE NUMBER ONE CHANGE AMERICANS DEMAND::

America needs, and Americans demand CHANGE. The number
one issue for change is ENDING THE OCCUPATIONS..

Palestine, Washington D.C., State capitals, Media, Wall Street,
Banking, and legal/illegal drug distribution. World Wide.

We will fight Tooth & Nail against GLOBALIZATION !!

We give them $3 Billion a year in direct aid. Each Israeli receives
subsidy every year. They also receive $10.3 million military aid
every single day.

They also receive appropriations from Germany every year.

In return all our official candidates that they want elected
go before the AIPAC lobby, and lobby for funds & support,
go on junkets to Israel, make commitments to the demands,
which starts right out of the gate with treason against the tax
payers & American people.. CORRUPTION which has become
the normal agenda. No Ethics or integrity just turn America into
a third world Country, Fascism all the way.

Now, over 50% of congress are millionaires, of course it is only
Conspiracy Theory to think there is any insider info. to the
privileged MINIONS..

Check out the 14 characteristics of Fascism, GLOBALIZATION
completes the mission. Hillary & Tim’s support system to a Tee.

Fourteen Defining
Characteristics Of Fascism
By Dr. Lawrence Britt
Source Free Inquiry.co
5-28-3

Dr. Lawrence Britt has examined the fascist regimes of Hitler (Germany), Mussolini (Italy), Franco (Spain), Suharto (Indonesia) and several Latin American regimes. Britt found 14 defining characteristics common to each:

1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.

2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.

3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.

4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread
domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.

5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.

6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.

7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.

8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.

9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.

10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.

11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.

12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.

13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.

14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.

From Liberty Forum

DONALD TRUMP is our only hope for change, and survival from the occupation we have been under
since the fraud elections of 2000. Developing since 1929 and the stock market crash.
Zionism began take over by assisting in recovery. ??

If you think you can slide again by staying silent , think again !! This is a movement like you have
never before witnessed. WE the AMERICAN people are ANGRY, PISSED OFF, and are ready for
revolution if necessary.

THE Polarized and Corrupt will be held accountable. Republican & Democrats alike.

LAW & ORDER is on the way. International Justice , and Interpol has enough intelligence to nail you
all to the wall. Including the controlled media. Justice coming by way of Al Jazeera & The Guardian;
remember them, and informants—much much more to think about. No pardons this time folks.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 26, 2016
Reply

RECENT POLL ON US AID TO ISRAEL

According to a recent survey, over 60% of Americans believe the United States gives “much too much” or “too much” foreign aid to Israel.Read more
HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED FROM GAZA ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL?

Total fatalities in the history of rocket and mortar attacks from Gaza into Israel: 44 Read more…
RELATED ARTICLES
6 in 10 Americans say “U.S. gives too much foreign aid to Israel”
The Staggering Cost of Israel to Americans
A Conservative Estimate of Total Direct U.S. Aid to Israel: Over $130 Billion
Should the U.S. End Aid to Israel?
Funding Our Decline
On Middle East Policy, a Major Influence
More articles on US Aid to Israel
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Congressional Research Service:
U.S. Aid to Israel
Congressional Research Service:
U.S. Aid to the Palestinians
Book – Fallen Pillars: US Policy towards Palestine and Israel since 1945
Palestine Monitor Fact Sheet on US Aid
Times of London Graphic on US Aid
Arms Transfers to Israel: 1993 to Present
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
Jewish Virtual Library on US Aid
ORGANIZATIONS
Council for the National Interest
US Campaign to End the Israeli Occupation

AIPAC: We now have 68 year record. This is a foreign LOBBY
The only Interest is Zionist support, Development of ISRAEL,
and Globalization and control. NOTHING Jewish, all about
Zionist political movement. ROBIN-HOODS (criminals)

Ronald L. Waldron
July 26, 2016
Reply

Today: Israel still controls 98 percent of Palestine (everything except Gaza) and continues to expand its Jewish settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Meanwhile, according to the United Nations, there are now more than five million Palestinian refugees living in camps who hope to someday return to their land.

Conclusion: We are repeatedly told that the Palestinians are terrorists while Israel is simply defending itself despite the reality that the overwhelming majority of those killed and displaced are Palestinians. Consequently, we never hear US and Canadian political leaders or the mainstream media accuse Israel of perpetrating state terrorism. It was not until after Israel illegally occupied the West Bank and Gaza in 1967 that the Palestinians, unable to engage in traditional combat with the powerful US-backed Israeli military, began to regularly utilize terrorist tactics in an attempt to liberate themselves from a brutal occupation. Furthermore, the decades-long occupation and military actions by Israel have only fuelled the rise of extremist groups such as Hamas at the expense of the more moderate Palestinian factions that dominated prior to the 1990s. And yet, despite the military and humanitarian reality of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, our political leaders and the mainstream media repeatedly portray Israelis as the victims.
Palestinian Genocide

INVESTIGATE THE CORRUPTION INVOLVED.

Palestinian Genocide by Israel..

No more VETO’S by the .UNITED STATES , of United Nation’s sanctions against ISRAEL

Presently 68 have been VETOED.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 26, 2016
Reply

PRO-ISRAEL-PRO-AIPAC TIM KAINE–Received $283,271 FUNDS ???

Pro-Israel
ContributionsBills supported and opposed
Top Senate Recipients Funded

Recipient Amount
Mark Kirk $718,246
Mitch McConnell $425,023
Cory A. Booker $364,876
Robert Menendez $341,170
Kirsten E. Gillibrand $292,837
Lindsey Graham $286,350
Tim Kaine $283,271
Charles E. Schumer $270,199
Sherrod Brown $270,051
Gary C. Peters $250,716
Bill Nelson $250,100
Barbara Boxer $243,154
Benjamin L. Cardin $241,293
Ron Wyden $240,031
Harry Reid $233,358
Claire McCaskill $207,871
Jeanne Shaheen $202,149
Richard J. Durbin $198,840
Christopher A. Coons $189,124
Tammy Baldwin $180,980
Joni Ernst $179,700
Debbie Stabenow $167,852
Martin Heinrich $158,373
Pat Roberts $152,300
John McCain $151,849
Kelly Ayotte $151,048
Marco Rubio $147,430
Brian Schatz $146,850
Robert P. Casey, Jr. $143,075
Dianne Feinstein $140,541
Al Franken $137,900
Roy Blunt $137,100
Edward J. Markey $135,200
Jon Tester $133,971
Bill Cassidy $132,994
Barbara A. Mikulski $132,175
Tim Scott $132,146
Patrick J. Toomey $128,420
Ben Sasse $123,000
Joe Manchin, III $122,110
Jeff Flake $119,350
Sheldon Whitehouse $115,100
John Cornyn $114,816
Susan M. Collins $112,310
Tom Udall $109,179
Michael F. Bennet $108,776
Bob Corker $102,950
Richard Blumenthal $100,684
Ted Cruz $100,354
David Vitter $100,069
John Thune $98,825
Jeff Merkley $98,386
Mark R. Warner $98,339
Maria Cantwell $94,562
Orrin G. Hatch $91,500
Rob Portman $89,765
Amy Klobuchar $89,547
Lisa Murkowski $88,050
Elizabeth Warren $87,838
Patty Murray $86,700
John Barrasso $86,200
Richard Burr $80,000
Joe Donnelly $78,062
Mike Rounds $78,050
Patrick J. Leahy $76,762
James E. Risch $76,060
James Lankford $75,800
Dean Heller $71,100
Jack Reed $70,350
Michael B. Enzi $69,225
John Hoeven $68,660
Roger F. Wicker $67,600
Steve Daines $66,700
Tom Cotton $65,400
David Perdue $63,343
Thomas R. Carper $62,700
Heidi Heitkamp $62,188
Thad Cochran $60,500
Chuck Grassley $59,150
Mike Lee $56,955
Jerry Moran $54,900
Daniel Coats $49,960
Mike Crapo $49,750
Christopher Murphy $49,550
Cory Gardner $49,050
John Boozman $47,950
Angus S. King, Jr. $46,500
Lamar Alexander $43,500
Deb Fischer $39,900
Mazie K. Hirono $39,050
Daniel Sullivan $36,783
Shelley Moore Capito $29,700
Johnny Isakson $27,800
Richard C. Shelby $27,750
Thom Tillis $24,250
James M. Inhofe $12,575
Ron Johnson $12,400
Jeff Sessions $7,600
Rand Paul $5,000
Contributions shown for the last six years of available data, Apr 1, 2009 – Mar 31, 2015, including contributions to presidential campaigns.

Top House Recipients Funded

Recipient Amount
Eliot L. Engel $134,150
Edward R. Royce $130,850
Robert J. Dold $118,320
Steny H. Hoyer $109,150
Theodore E. Deutch $97,770
Patrick Murphy $94,875
Nita M. Lowey $91,496
Carlos Curbelo $86,450
Cheri Bustos $78,822
Bill Foster $69,950
Tammy Duckworth $69,301
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen $67,650
Raul Ruiz $66,986
Peter J. Roskam $66,950
Janice D. Schakowsky $63,850
Ami Bera $63,361
Scott H. Peters $63,024
Pete Aguilar $62,391
Ann M. Kuster $62,288
Brad Sherman $59,200
Paul D. Ryan $55,240
Kathleen M. Rice $48,860
Kevin McCarthy $48,775
Jackie Walorski $46,400
Mike Bishop $45,025
Marcia L. Fudge $44,402
Nancy Pelosi $41,950
Sean Patrick Maloney $38,206
Doug Lamborn $37,353
Harold Rogers $37,130
Frank Pallone Jr. $34,250
Lee M. Zeldin $34,000
Mike Quigley $33,300
Gwen Graham $32,036
Lois Capps $31,956
Mario Diaz-Balart $31,450
David P. Joyce $29,950
Kay Granger $29,250
Martha McSally $27,510
Adam Smith $27,145
Donald S. Beyer Jr. $25,631
Adam B. Schiff $25,316
Julia Brownley $23,850
Michael M. Honda $23,700
Christopher H. Smith $23,650
Mark Takano $23,025
Matt Salmon $22,850
Adam Kinzinger $22,150
Debbie Wasserman Schultz $22,100
Eric Swalwell $21,950
Elizabeth H. Esty $21,900
Frank A. LoBiondo $21,700
John Garamendi $20,850
Alexander X. Mooney $20,600
Carolyn B. Maloney $20,250
Scott Garrett $19,650
Jeff Miller $19,600
Albio Sires $19,400
Ann Kirkpatrick $18,586
Trent Franks $18,550
Steven M. Palazzo $18,100
Jim Costa $18,050
David Young $17,900
Ryan A. Costello $17,700
Charles B. Rangel $17,700
Lois Frankel $17,600
Marc A. Veasey $17,100
Mark Meadows $17,010
Kyrsten Sinema $16,654
Todd Rokita $16,550
John Lewis $16,400
Joseph Crowley $16,400
James E. Clyburn $16,350
Steve Scalise $16,200
Cathy McMorris Rodgers $15,300
Katherine M. Clark $15,250
Jeff Denham $15,200
Diana DeGette $15,200
Mike Rogers $14,500
Bradley Byrne $14,300
Loretta Sanchez $13,850
Tony Cárdenas $13,850
Robin L. Kelly $13,750
Rodney Davis $13,700
Tom Reed $13,699
Anna G. Eshoo $13,450
Michael G. Fitzpatrick $13,350
David Schweikert $13,300
Billy Long $13,300
Andy Harris $13,250
Bill Posey $13,100
David Loebsack $13,100
Suzan K. DelBene $13,050
Walter B. Jones $13,000
Linda T. Sánchez $12,950
Alan Grayson $12,950
Alan S. Lowenthal $12,725
Gerald E. Connolly $12,550
Zoe Lofgren $12,100
Garret Graves $12,100
Bob Gibbs $12,000
Sander M. Levin $11,700
Jason Chaffetz $11,500
Mike Coffman $11,400
David N. Cicilline $11,250
Bonnie Watson Coleman $11,200
Todd C. Young $11,000
Bob Goodlatte $10,950
Tulsi Gabbard $10,850
Reid J. Ribble $10,600
Elise M. Stefanik $10,516
Gwen Moore $10,450
Barbara Comstock $10,266
Earl Blumenauer $10,200
Peter Welch $10,000
James R. Langevin $9,950
Ron Kind $9,933
Evan H. Jenkins $9,750
Elijah E. Cummings $9,700
Mike Thompson $9,500
Lloyd Doggett $9,500
Ed Whitfield $9,500
Steve Stivers $9,361
Hakeem S. Jeffries $9,300
Jerrold Nadler $9,250
Susan W. Brooks $9,100
David E. Price $9,091
Cedric L. Richmond $8,726
Emanuel Cleaver $8,600
Thomas MacArthur $8,500
Ryan K. Zinke $8,500
Tim Ryan $8,500
Luke Messer $8,300
Michelle Lujan Grisham $8,250
Raúl M. Grijalva $8,100
Jared Polis $8,000
Sean P. Duffy $7,750
Leonard Lance $7,700
John A. Yarmuth $7,620
Suzanne Bonamici $7,600
Ron DeSantis $7,600
Bill Pascrell Jr. $7,500
Donna F. Edwards $7,350
Betty McCollum $7,250
Ted S. Yoho $7,250
Louie Gohmert $7,100
Daniel T. Kildee $7,000
Niki Tsongas $7,000
Luis V. Gutiérrez $7,000
Derek Kilmer $7,000
Richard B. Nugent $6,750
Susan A. Davis $6,750
Henry C. “Hank” Johnson Jr. $6,500
Jackie Speier $6,500
David W. Jolly $6,500
Matt Cartwright $6,250
Gus M. Bilirakis $6,250
Erik Paulsen $6,250
Paul A. Gosar $6,250
Randy Hultgren $6,200
Keith Ellison $6,100
Steve Cohen $6,100
Paul Cook $6,000
Ben Ray Luján $6,000
John Fleming $6,000
Michael F. Doyle $6,000
Rodney P. Frelinghuysen $6,000
Devin Nunes $5,900
Pete Sessions $5,900
Charles W. Dent $5,750
James P. McGovern $5,750
Will Hurd $5,750
Thomas J. Rooney $5,750
Jim Cooper $5,500
John Conyers Jr. $5,500
Peter A. DeFazio $5,500
John Kline $5,500
Doug Collins $5,400
Mike Pompeo $5,300
Jared Huffman $5,250
Eddie Bernice Johnson $5,200
Martha Roby $5,100
Christopher P. Gibson $5,100
Wm. Lacy Clay $5,000
Jim McDermott $5,000
Chellie Pingree $5,000
Paul Tonko $5,000
Danny K. Davis $5,000
Sam Farr $5,000
Mark Pocan $4,983
Barbara Lee $4,750
Ken Buck $4,600
Michael E. Capuano $4,500
Renee L. Ellmers $4,500
Dina Titus $4,500
Judy Chu $4,500
Bill Johnson $4,500
Xavier Becerra $4,500
Scott R. Tipton $4,250
Roger Williams $4,200
Marlin A. Stutzman $4,100
Richard M. Nolan $4,036
Mark Takai $4,036
Ander Crenshaw $4,000
Gregg Harper $4,000
Kristi L. Noem $4,000
Mike Bost $4,000
Daniel Lipinski $3,950
Virginia Foxx $3,800
Kathy Castor $3,700
J. French Hill $3,500
Mac Thornberry $3,500
Peter J. Visclosky $3,000
Ralph Lee Abraham $3,000
Robert B. Aderholt $2,948
David Scott $2,750
David B. McKinley $2,600
Lucille Roybal-Allard $2,500
Mark Sanford $2,500
Mo Brooks $2,500
Frank C. Guinta $2,500
Norma J. Torres $2,500
Bill Huizenga $2,500
Ted Lieu $2,500
Karen Bass $2,500
E. Scott Rigell $2,000
Brad R. Wenstrup $2,000
J. Randy Forbes $2,000
Curt Clawson $2,000
Dennis A. Ross $1,750
Frederica S. Wilson $1,500
Joe Wilson $1,500
Steve Chabot $1,500
Robert Pittenger $1,300
Ted Poe $1,000
Charles W. Boustany Jr. $1,000
Jeff Fortenberry $800
Rod Blum $750
Brian Babin $750
Jim Jordan $500
Jason Smith $500
Steve King $500
Rick W. Allen $500
John K. Delaney $500
Michael T. McCaul $500
Michael R. Turner $300
Robert E. Latta $300
Tim Huelskamp $300
Patrick Meehan $250
Contributions shown for the last two years of available data, Apr 1, 2013 – Mar 31, 2015, including contributions to presidential campaigns.

Ronald L. Waldron
July 29, 2016
Reply

WHAT IS THE NETUREI KARTA?
Neturei Karta opposed the establishment of and retain all opposition to the existence of the so-called “State of Israel”!

Neturei-Karta is the Aramaic term for “Guardians of the City. The name Neturei-Karta originates from an incident in which R. Yehudah Ha-Nassi (Rabbi Judah the Prince) sent R. Hiyya and R. Ashi on a pastoral tour of inspection. In one town they asked to see the “guardians of the city” and the city guard was paraded before them. They said that these were not the guardians of the city but its destroyers, which prompted the citizens to ask who, then, could be considered the guardians. The rabbis answered, “The scribes and the scholars,” referring them to Tehillim (Psalms) Chap. 127. (Jerusalem Talmud, Tractate Hagiga. 76c).

The name was given to a group of Orthodox Jews in Jerusalem who refused (and still refuse) to recognize the existence or authority of the so-called “State of Israel” and made (and still make) a point of publicly demonstrating their position, the position of the Torah and authentic unadulterated Judaism.

The group was founded in Jerusalem, Palestine in 1938, splitting off from Agudas Yisroel. Agudas Yisroel was established in 1912 for the purpose of fighting Zionism. Gradually lured by money and honor they sold out to the “Golden-Calf” (see Exodus, XXXII) of Zionism. Those who wanted to maintain their faith and continue the struggle against Zionism, dissociated themselves from Agudas Yisroel and associated parties.

Over the years, a number of Neturei Karta activists and followers settled outside of Palestine. Some of the reasons that these individuals abandoned the country in which they and their families had lived for many generations (having lived there many years prior to the establishment of the illegitimate so-called “State of Israel”) include; ideological refusal to live under the illegitimate heretical “Israeli” regime, their being exiled by the Zionist government for their insistence of remaining independent of the illegitimate heretical regime or them being unable to live a normal family life due to them and their families being persistently harassed, repeatedly incarcerated and many times even physically tortured by the Zionist police and agents. This dispersion resulted in the emergence of various Neturei Karta establishments on the broader international scene. These establishments include synagogues, educational institutions, publishing houses and organizations. The establishments in New York include three synagogues in Brooklyn (Boro Park and Williamsburg), three upstate, and organizations include the Friends of Jerusalem in NY, NY.

Neturei Karta is not – as is often alleged – a small sect or an extremist group of “ultra-orthodox” Jews. The Neturei Karta have added nothing to nor have they taken anything away from the written and oral law of the Torah as it is expressed in the Halacha and the Shulchan Aruch. The Neturei Karta are fighting the changes and inroads made by political Zionism during the past one-hundred odd years. Guided by the rabbis of our time and under the inspiring leadership of the late Reb Amram Blau, the Neturei Karta refuse to recognize the right of anyone to establish a “Jewish” state during the present period of exile.

There are those who wish to play down the Neturei Karta and its’ Torah-true beliefs. This has been attempted many a time by stating that the Neturei Karta is a minority group and that compared to other Jewish groups the Neturei Karta aren’t even noticeable in terms of number.

The name Neturei Karta is a name usually given to those people who regularly pray in the Neturei Karta synagogues (Torah Ve’Yirah Jerusalem, Torah U’Tefillah London, Torah U’Tefillah NY, Beis Yehudi Upstate NY, etc.), study in or send their children to educational institutions run by Neturei Karta, or actively participate in activities, assemblies or demonstrations called by the Neturei Karta. Although it is true that the number of families which could be classified as Neturei Karta members or activists per-se is relatively small (several thousand), the number of Orthodox Jews who believe in the anti-Zionist ideology which Neturei Karta is known for, number in the hundreds of thousands.

Neturei Karta oppose the so-called “State of Israel” not because it operates secularly, but because the entire concept of a sovereign Jewish state is contrary to Jewish Law.

All the great rabbis who in accordance with Jewish Law opposed Zionism at its inception did not do so merely due to consideration of the secular lifestyles of the then Zionist leaders or even for their opposition to Torah heritage and rejection of its values and practices, but due to the fact that the entire concept of a Jewish state is in direct conflict with a number of Judaism’s fundamentals.

Condemnation of and segregation from anything connected to or affiliated with the so-called modern day “State of Israel” is based on the Talmud, the key fundamental doctrine of the Oral Tradition handed down by G-d to Moses on Mt. Sinai. The Talmud in Tractate Kesubos (p. 111a), teaches that Jews shall not use human force to bring about the establishment of a Jewish state before the coming of the universally accepted Moshiach (Messiah from the House of David). Furthermore it states that we are forbidden to rebel against the nations and that we should remain loyal citizens and we shall not attempt to leave the exile which G-d sent us into, ahead of time.

Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.

Neturei Karta forbid any participation with the so-called “State of Israel” or any of its subsidiaries. Neturei Karta followers do not participate in “Israeli” elections nor do they accept any aid from “Bituach Le’Umi” (Social Security), and the educational institutions of the Neturei Karta reject any form of financial support from the so-called “Va’ad HaYeshivos” (equiv. to Department of Education).

The Zionist state employs a set of chief rabbis and uses religious parties to ornament their state with a clerical image. They study the Torah with commentaries altered to clothe the words with nationalistic nuances. Our rabbis have countless times proclaimed that it matters little which individuals or parties govern in the Zionist state because the very establishment and existence of the state itself is to be condemned and to be deplored.

The true Jews remain faithful to Jewish belief and are not contaminated with Zionism.

The true Jews are against dispossessing the Arabs of their land and homes. According to the Torah, the land should be returned to them.

Neturei Karta deplore the systematic uprooting of ancient Jewish communities by the Zionists, the shedding of Jewish and non-Jewish blood for the sake of Zionist sovereignty and the Neturei Karta favor a peaceful transition from the present Zionist rule to a non-Zionist entity.

According to Judaic Law the Torah has the last word. There is no such thing as a majority of Jews who happen to be Jewish by birth who can alter Torah Law in any way. In fact even the greatest rabbi or as Maimonides writes, “even the greatest prophet” [referring actually to an authentic prophet], has no right to distort or amend even one letter of the Torah.

Rabbi Blau stated shortly before his death that the acceptance by the United Nations of the Zionist state as a member state constituted a grave injustice to the Jewish people. Neturei Karta hope that this great error will be corrected at the earliest opportunity. The Neturei Karta regret that the Zionist state has usurped the holy name of Israel and that the Zionists so often pretend to speak in the name of the Jewish people and assume the right to act on our behalf. Only those rabbis who have not been affected or influenced by the poison of Zionism, can be considered the spiritual leaders of today’s Jewry.

The world must know that the Zionists have illegitimately seized the name Israel and have no right to speak in the name of the Jewish people!

Ronald L. Waldron
July 29, 2016
Reply

well intentioned, are doomed to failure. Jews are
forbidden to exercise political sovereignty over
the Holy Land. They are called upon to seek peace
with all people. Jews are forbidden to oppress any
human being. For all of these reasons, Jews are
required to restore the full rights of the Palestinians
and free all of Palestine. The Zionist enterprise is
metaphysically doomed to moral and practical
failure.
Q – What should be the Jewish approach to the Islamic
world?
A – Jews are called upon to deal ethically and
honestly with all people. Zionism has misled many
Jews into acts of aggression against the Palestinian
people. Therefore, it behooves all Jews, as best
we can, to rectify this situation by seeking peace,
reconciliation and dialogue when dealing with
Palestinian people and all Islamic nations. This
is one of the great spiritual tests confronting the
Jewish people – to establish a moral relationship
with their Islamic brethren.
Q – Realistically speaking, does your program have
any chance of implementation?
A – First, the Creator runs the world, with Him all
things are possible and the truth and justice will
ultimately prevail. Second, there is a tremendous
sense of disillusionment and exhaustion among
Jews worldwide with the Israeli state and Zionism
in general. Many realize that following Zionist
principles leads to one dead end after another. They
are longing for another solution. Our solution,
which is simply the ancient tradition of Judaism, is
appearing increasingly plausible to many and may,
in the not too distant future, with the help of the
Creator, carry the day, until then we hope and pray

Ronald L. Waldron
July 31, 2016
Reply

WHERE DONALD TRUMP’S SUPPORT COMES FROM.
HE IS THE ONLY ONE THAT IS NOT A ZIONIST PIG OR
SUPPORTER OF IT .

YOU ALL know it, but fear those that control you.

THE NUMBER ONE CHANGE AMERICANS DEMAND::

America needs, and Americans demand CHANGE. The number
one issue for change is ENDING THE OCCUPATIONS..

Palestine, Washington D.C., State capitals, Media, Wall Street,
Banking, and legal/illegal drug distribution. World Wide.

We will fight Tooth & Nail against GLOBALIZATION !!

We give them $3 Billion a year in direct aid. Each Israeli receives
subsidy every year. They also receive $10.3 million military aid
every single day.

They also receive appropriations from Germany every year.

In return all our official candidates that they want elected
go before the AIPAC lobby, and lobby for funds & support,
go on junkets to Israel, make commitments to the demands,
which starts right out of the gate with treason against the tax
payers & American people.. CORRUPTION which has become
the normal agenda. No Ethics or integrity just turn America into
a third world Country, Fascism all the way.

Now, over 50% of congress are millionaires, of course it is only
Conspiracy Theory to think there is any insider info. to the
privileged MINIONS..

Check out the 14 characteristics of Fascism, GLOBALIZATION
completes the mission. Hillary & Tim’s support system to a Tee.

Fourteen Defining
Characteristics Of Fascism
By Dr. Lawrence Britt
Source Free Inquiry.co
5-28-3

Dr. Lawrence Britt has examined the fascist regimes of Hitler (Germany), Mussolini (Italy), Franco (Spain), Suharto (Indonesia) and several Latin American regimes. Britt found 14 defining characteristics common to each:

1. Powerful and Continuing Nationalism – Fascist regimes tend to make constant use of patriotic mottos, slogans, symbols, songs, and other paraphernalia. Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays.

2. Disdain for the Recognition of Human Rights – Because of fear of enemies and the need for security, the people in fascist regimes are persuaded that human rights can be ignored in certain cases because of “need.” The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc.

3. Identification of Enemies/Scapegoats as a Unifying Cause – The people are rallied into a unifying patriotic frenzy over the need to eliminate a perceived common threat or foe: racial , ethnic or religious minorities; liberals; communists; socialists, terrorists, etc.

4. Supremacy of the Military – Even when there are widespread
domestic problems, the military is given a disproportionate amount of government funding, and the domestic agenda is neglected. Soldiers and military service are glamorized.

5. Rampant Sexism – The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated. Under fascist regimes, traditional gender roles are made more rigid. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution.

6. Controlled Mass Media – Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives. Censorship, especially in war time, is very common.

7. Obsession with National Security – Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses.

8. Religion and Government are Intertwined – Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion. Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government’s policies or actions.

9. Corporate Power is Protected – The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.

10. Labor Power is Suppressed – Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed.

11. Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts – Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia. It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested. Free expression in the arts and letters is openly attacked.

12. Obsession with Crime and Punishment – Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws. The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism. There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations.

13. Rampant Cronyism and Corruption – Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability. It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders.

14. Fraudulent Elections – Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham. Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media. Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.

From Liberty Forum

DONALD TRUMP is our only hope for change, and survival from the occupation we have been under
since the fraud elections of 2000. Developing since 1929 and the stock market crash.
Zionism began take over by assisting in recovery. ??

There is a GENOCIDE going on by Israel against Palestine with FULL
support of USA Government, Media, and the top 2% making $$$.

The World “UN” is and has been against the Genocide.

3,795 Israeli’s killed total in conflict & occupation.
91,983 Palestinians murdered, 79,983 seriously injured from attacks
by Israeli military occupation troops backed by the USA occupied
congress, including Hillary Clinton.

A GENOCIDE, all against the values of the American people. TIME
for CHANGE. “Rid America of the AIPAC, Israeli occupation of
both parties. Charge & prosecute the Corruption, and Treason
involved. Boycott, Divest, and Sanction AIPAC & Israel.

If you think you can slide again by staying silent , think again !! This is a movement like you have
never before witnessed. WE the AMERICAN people are ANGRY, PISSED OFF, and are ready for
revolution if necessary.

THE Polarized and Corrupt will be held accountable. Republican & Democrats alike.

LAW & ORDER is on the way. International Justice , and Interpol has enough intelligence to nail you
all to the wall. Including the controlled media. Justice coming by way of Al Jazeera & The Guardian;
remember them, and informants—much much more to think about. No pardons this time folks.

Start reading and listening. 65% of Americans agree, polls of many
of our supporters conduct face to face around the Country of the
USA and Canada.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 2, 2016
Reply

American’s realize who is to blame for the problems we face.

Donald Trump is not responsible for any of the problems we face.

He will help hold those that are,accountable when he is Elected President.
We the UNITED PEOPLE of AMERICA will stand by his side and FIGHT
the CORRUPT. Corruption that has consumed both political parties.

He & We did not cause it, nor will we support those that DID.

1. Allowing a National Debt of $ 21 TRILLION, to pass on to our KIDS.

2. Voting for a WAR based on False Intel. from a foreign Country of
False WMD. Or agreeing to a preemptive WAR.

3. Voting for trade Bills that have destroyed our economy.

4. Sitting back while Companies out sourced thousands of JOBS.

5. Contracting over-seas that took many jobs from tax payers here.

6. Building 300 Military bases on foreign soil, closing them here, that
took many, many more jobs away.

7. He did not create the tax system that allows for religious organizations,
and corporations to rape the middle class.tax payer., and give nothing back.

8. He did not create 47 MILLION Americans living in poverty level and below
here in America.

9. He did not take part in the Corruption of Congress, or sit back allowing such
to continue, with out saying a word, or do nothing while in office.

10.He has not made commitments to the foreign lobby AIPAC, or sit and
allow our complete congress to be Occupied by such or by Israel.

11. He will not sit back and let the Genocide of Palestine, the Apartheid
of 60+ years of illegal occupations and human rights violations continue
by Israel. He will not support nor remain silent like all others.
With the exception of Jimmy Carter who has advocated against Human
Rights violations his entire life.

12. He will not go along with the private no bid contracts such as with
Halliburton, or Black-Water SE. Causing nothing but disasters

13. He will not sit back and watch the wasteful spending that has
consumed Congress, now or every Congress with the intervention
of lobbies since World War !!

14. Our borders have been left unprotected & unsecured for far to long,
Illegal immigration has been an unanswered question since Columbus
sailed the open seas. We trust Donald Trump to change it.Even the
controlled MEDIA will not be able to keep the truth issues hidden.

These issues will combat the 14 Characteristics of Zionist Fascism &
plans of Globalization that has been the agenda until NOW!!

Get ready for the DEBATES on the real issues of us the American PEOPLE.

We the people that are not polled by the controlled questions asked.

We are the people that do not answer your multiple incorrect answers.

WE ARE REGISTERING AND VOTING UNITED FOR DONALD

TRUMP. JOIN US NOW

WE SUPPORT THE JEWISH PEOPLE AGAINST ZIONISM !!

Ronald L. Waldron
August 5, 2016
Reply

NOTICE THE PANIC.

NOTICE THE PANIC. MEDIA, CONGRESS, BOTH CORRUPTED PARTIES,and TV TALK SHOWS. Their careers are at STAKE.Prosecutions are pending on some, after time of more
pardons, it is just about UP.. The real storm has not HIT yet,
the corrupted are showing their DEFENSE system NOW!

PRO-ISRAEL-PRO-AIPAC TIM KAINE–Received $283,271 FUNDS ??? Hillary’s and AIPAC’S choice for Vice President ?
Pro-Israel
Contributions Bills supported and opposed
Top Senate Recipients Funded

Recipient Amount
Mark Kirk $718,246
Mitch McConnell $425,023
Cory A. Booker $364,876
Robert Menendez $341,170
Kirsten E. Gillibrand $292,837
Lindsey Graham $286,350
Tim Kaine $283,271
Charles E. Schumer $270,199
Sherrod Brown $270,051
Gary C. Peters $250,716
Bill Nelson $250,100
Barbara Boxer $243,154
Benjamin L. Cardin $241,293
Ron Wyden $240,031
Harry Reid $233,358
Claire McCaskill $207,871
Jeanne Shaheen $202,149
Richard J. Durbin $198,840
Christopher A. Coons $189,124
Tammy Baldwin $180,980
Joni Ernst $179,700
Debbie Stabenow $167,852
Martin Heinrich $158,373
Pat Roberts $152,300
John McCain $151,849
Kelly Ayotte $151,048
Marco Rubio $147,430
Brian Schatz $146,850
Robert P. Casey, Jr. $143,075
Dianne Feinstein $140,541
Al Franken $137,900
Roy Blunt $137,100
Edward J. Markey $135,200
Jon Tester $133,971
Bill Cassidy $132,994
Barbara A. Mikulski $132,175
Tim Scott $132,146
Patrick J. Toomey $128,420
Ben Sasse $123,000
Joe Manchin, III $122,110
Jeff Flake $119,350
Sheldon Whitehouse $115,100
John Cornyn $114,816
Susan M. Collins $112,310
Tom Udall $109,179
Michael F. Bennet $108,776
Bob Corker $102,950
Richard Blumenthal $100,684
Ted Cruz $100,354
David Vitter $100,069
John Thune $98,825
Jeff Merkley $98,386
Mark R. Warner $98,339
Maria Cantwell $94,562
Orrin G. Hatch $91,500
Rob Portman $89,765
Amy Klobuchar $89,547
Lisa Murkowski $88,050
Elizabeth Warren $87,838
Patty Murray $86,700
John Barrasso $86,200
Richard Burr $80,000
Joe Donnelly $78,062
Mike Rounds $78,050
Patrick J. Leahy $76,762
James E. Risch $76,060
James Lankford $75,800
Dean Heller $71,100
Jack Reed $70,350
Michael B. Enzi $69,225
John Hoeven $68,660
Roger F. Wicker $67,600
Steve Daines $66,700
Tom Cotton $65,400
David Perdue $63,343
Thomas R. Carper $62,700
Heidi Heitkamp $62,188
Thad Cochran $60,500
Chuck Grassley $59,150
Mike Lee $56,955
Jerry Moran $54,900
Daniel Coats $49,960
Mike Crapo $49,750
Christopher Murphy $49,550
Cory Gardner $49,050
John Boozman $47,950
Angus S. King, Jr. $46,500
Lamar Alexander $43,500
Deb Fischer $39,900
Mazie K. Hirono $39,050
Daniel Sullivan $36,783
Shelley Moore Capito $29,700
Johnny Isakson $27,800
Richard C. Shelby $27,750
Thom Tillis $24,250
James M. Inhofe $12,575
Ron Johnson $12,400
Jeff Sessions $7,600
Rand Paul $5,000
Contributions shown for the last six years of available data, Apr 1, 2009 – Mar 31, 2015, including contributions to presidential campaigns.

Top House Recipients Funded

Recipient Amount
Eliot L. Engel $134,150
Edward R. Royce $130,850
Robert J. Dold $118,320
Steny H. Hoyer $109,150
Theodore E. Deutch $97,770
Patrick Murphy $94,875
Nita M. Lowey $91,496
Carlos Curbelo $86,450
Cheri Bustos $78,822
Bill Foster $69,950
Tammy Duckworth $69,301
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen $67,650
Raul Ruiz $66,986
Peter J. Roskam $66,950
Janice D. Schakowsky $63,850
Ami Bera $63,361
Scott H. Peters $63,024
Pete Aguilar $62,391
Ann M. Kuster $62,288
Brad Sherman $59,200
Paul D. Ryan $55,240
Kathleen M. Rice $48,860
Kevin McCarthy $48,775
Jackie Walorski $46,400
Mike Bishop $45,025
Marcia L. Fudge $44,402
Nancy Pelosi $41,950
Sean Patrick Maloney $38,206
Doug Lamborn $37,353
Harold Rogers $37,130
Frank Pallone Jr. $34,250
Lee M. Zeldin $34,000
Mike Quigley $33,300
Gwen Graham $32,036
Lois Capps $31,956
Mario Diaz-Balart $31,450
David P. Joyce $29,950
Kay Granger $29,250
Martha McSally $27,510
Adam Smith $27,145
Donald S. Beyer Jr. $25,631
Adam B. Schiff $25,316
Julia Brownley $23,850
Michael M. Honda $23,700
Christopher H. Smith $23,650
Mark Takano $23,025
Matt Salmon $22,850
Adam Kinzinger $22,150
Debbie Wasserman Schultz $22,100
Eric Swalwell $21,950
Elizabeth H. Esty $21,900
Frank A. LoBiondo $21,700
John Garamendi $20,850
Alexander X. Mooney $20,600
Carolyn B. Maloney $20,250
Scott Garrett $19,650
Jeff Miller $19,600
Albio Sires $19,400
Ann Kirkpatrick $18,586
Trent Franks $18,550
Steven M. Palazzo $18,100
Jim Costa $18,050
David Young $17,900
Ryan A. Costello $17,700
Charles B. Rangel $17,700
Lois Frankel $17,600
Marc A. Veasey $17,100
Mark Meadows $17,010
Kyrsten Sinema $16,654
Todd Rokita $16,550
John Lewis $16,400
Joseph Crowley $16,400
James E. Clyburn $16,350
Steve Scalise $16,200
Cathy McMorris Rodgers $15,300
Katherine M. Clark $15,250
Jeff Denham $15,200
Diana DeGette $15,200
Mike Rogers $14,500
Bradley Byrne $14,300
Loretta Sanchez $13,850
Tony Cárdenas $13,850
Robin L. Kelly $13,750
Rodney Davis $13,700
Tom Reed $13,699
Anna G. Eshoo $13,450
Michael G. Fitzpatrick $13,350
David Schweikert $13,300
Billy Long $13,300
Andy Harris $13,250
Bill Posey $13,100
David Loebsack $13,100
Suzan K. DelBene $13,050
Walter B. Jones $13,000
Linda T. Sánchez $12,950
Alan Grayson $12,950
Alan S. Lowenthal $12,725
Gerald E. Connolly $12,550
Zoe Lofgren $12,100
Garret Graves $12,100
Bob Gibbs $12,000
Sander M. Levin $11,700
Jason Chaffetz $11,500
Mike Coffman $11,400
David N. Cicilline $11,250
Bonnie Watson Coleman $11,200
Todd C. Young $11,000
Bob Goodlatte $10,950
Tulsi Gabbard $10,850
Reid J. Ribble $10,600
Elise M. Stefanik $10,516
Gwen Moore $10,450
Barbara Comstock $10,266
Earl Blumenauer $10,200
Peter Welch $10,000
James R. Langevin $9,950
Ron Kind $9,933
Evan H. Jenkins $9,750
Elijah E. Cummings $9,700
Mike Thompson $9,500
Lloyd Doggett $9,500
Ed Whitfield $9,500
Steve Stivers $9,361
Hakeem S. Jeffries $9,300
Jerrold Nadler $9,250
Susan W. Brooks $9,100
David E. Price $9,091
Cedric L. Richmond $8,726
Emanuel Cleaver $8,600
Thomas MacArthur $8,500
Ryan K. Zinke $8,500
Tim Ryan $8,500
Luke Messer $8,300
Michelle Lujan Grisham $8,250
Raúl M. Grijalva $8,100
Jared Polis $8,000
Sean P. Duffy $7,750
Leonard Lance $7,700
John A. Yarmuth $7,620
Suzanne Bonamici $7,600
Ron DeSantis $7,600
Bill Pascrell Jr. $7,500
Donna F. Edwards $7,350
Betty McCollum $7,250
Ted S. Yoho $7,250
Louie Gohmert $7,100
Daniel T. Kildee $7,000
Niki Tsongas $7,000
Luis V. Gutiérrez $7,000
Derek Kilmer $7,000
Richard B. Nugent $6,750
Susan A. Davis $6,750
Henry C. “Hank” Johnson Jr. $6,500
Jackie Speier $6,500
David W. Jolly $6,500
Matt Cartwright $6,250
Gus M. Bilirakis $6,250
Erik Paulsen $6,250
Paul A. Gosar $6,250
Randy Hultgren $6,200
Keith Ellison $6,100
Steve Cohen $6,100
Paul Cook $6,000
Ben Ray Luján $6,000
John Fleming $6,000
Michael F. Doyle $6,000
Rodney P. Frelinghuysen $6,000
Devin Nunes $5,900
Pete Sessions $5,900
Charles W. Dent $5,750
James P. McGovern $5,750
Will Hurd $5,750
Thomas J. Rooney $5,750
Jim Cooper $5,500
John Conyers Jr. $5,500
Peter A. DeFazio $5,500
John Kline $5,500
Doug Collins $5,400
Mike Pompeo $5,300
Jared Huffman $5,250
Eddie Bernice Johnson $5,200
Martha Roby $5,100
Christopher P. Gibson $5,100
Wm. Lacy Clay $5,000
Jim McDermott $5,000
Chellie Pingree $5,000
Paul Tonko $5,000
Danny K. Davis $5,000
Sam Farr $5,000
Mark Pocan $4,983
Barbara Lee $4,750
Ken Buck $4,600
Michael E. Capuano $4,500
Renee L. Ellmers $4,500
Dina Titus $4,500
Judy Chu $4,500
Bill Johnson $4,500
Xavier Becerra $4,500
Scott R. Tipton $4,250
Roger Williams $4,200
Marlin A. Stutzman $4,100
Richard M. Nolan $4,036
Mark Takai $4,036
Ander Crenshaw $4,000
Gregg Harper $4,000
Kristi L. Noem $4,000
Mike Bost $4,000
Daniel Lipinski $3,950
Virginia Foxx $3,800
Kathy Castor $3,700
J. French Hill $3,500
Mac Thornberry $3,500
Peter J. Visclosky $3,000
Ralph Lee Abraham $3,000
Robert B. Aderholt $2,948
David Scott $2,750
David B. McKinley $2,600
Lucille Roybal-Allard $2,500
Mark Sanford $2,500
Mo Brooks $2,500
Frank C. Guinta $2,500
Norma J. Torres $2,500
Bill Huizenga $2,500
Ted Lieu $2,500
Karen Bass $2,500
E. Scott Rigell $2,000
Brad R. Wenstrup $2,000
J. Randy Forbes $2,000
Curt Clawson $2,000
Dennis A. Ross $1,750
Frederica S. Wilson $1,500
Joe Wilson $1,500
Steve Chabot $1,500
Robert Pittenger $1,300
Ted Poe $1,000
Charles W. Boustany Jr. $1,000
Jeff Fortenberry $800
Rod Blum $750
Brian Babin $750
Jim Jordan $500
Jason Smith $500
Steve King $500
Rick W. Allen $500
John K. Delaney $500
Michael T. McCaul $500
Michael R. Turner $300
Robert E. Latta $300
Tim Huelskamp $300
Patrick Meehan $250
Contributions shown for the last two years of available data, Apr 1, 2013 – Mar 31, 2015, including contributions to presidential campaigns.

Amount of tax-payers money given in exchange.
Our National Defense Budget. $610 Billion. 3/4 spent Defending
Israel.
TOTAL AID to ISRAEL. $300 Billion for Ten year period.
After 60 years, they now own us. How does that happen
except in Polarized Washington, DC.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 5, 2016
Reply

How soon before MARSHALL LAW ? Just watch, that is about the only way out for the Corrupt system
and that is on the table behind closed doors.. Be prepared LOCK & LOAD–

Ronald L. Waldron
August 5, 2016
Reply

JUST REMEMBER, It is Hillary that wants your “GUNS” !!

Ronald L. Waldron
August 6, 2016
Reply

THE FAMILY TRADITION

In keeping up with the Clinton tradition, Hell-ary has already ordered
a substantial supply of HAND-ROLLED Cuba cigars. In preparation
for the frequent visits to the White House by Netanyahu.
A long term relationship, that is far more dangerous for America ,
then any Zionist dreamed up charge they can make against
Donald Trump.
The list of scandals will not stop at the White House steps IF
she is Elected. She will be a HUGE asset for ISRAEL, not for
AMERICA.

Seriously, America can not with-stand another term with Zionist
occupation of Washington, DC. We need to stand strong and UNITED
against such. We also have a MORAL obligation to end the GENOCIDE
and occupation of PALESTINE, they are the true victims of Human
rights violations of Israel, and sadly speaking the United States
congress.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 8, 2016
Reply

ASSASSINATION PLOT FAILS:

PANIC struck the regime of the Corrupt Washington
establishment. As witnessed by all AMERICA. The complete Zionist controlled establishment, which
includes MASS MEDIA , made a huge Assassination
attempt to completely discredit Donald Trump.
Called character Assassination.
They went as far as to expose, what should be classified
information, all about how the “FOOTBALL” is handled.
Violation of information regarding our nuclear power,
and the control of such by our commander–in–Chief,
at all times.
Which then went to the most outrageous attack on
Donald Trump. Our candidate for change from the
corrupt established system (Zionist syndicate)
If you do not recognize the attack as an attempt to
avoid prosecution for Treason and other crimes
against we the PEOPLE, start your research.
The pictures of the puzzle are right in front of you.The
last sixty years of history is the evidence to convict.

Vote for Donald Trump

PLAY BOY plans on the January, 2017 center fold,
to be none other then Bill Clinton in his speedo.

History repeating itself. Hillary’s third term !!

Ronald L. Waldron
August 24, 2016
Reply

UNITED WE STAND–FIGHT AGAINST THE SYSTEM..

We the American people want an all American party in
charge of our constitution, and laws for every one

We are sick and tired of being pushed into being peasants,
GENTILES, slaves for the Zionism elite, that influence and
have bought out both political parties threw their special
interest money. We all have witnessed it for the last 60 years.
Reality of such under the Bush, Clinton,Bush administrations.

The only chance for change and hope is Donald Trump and
his campaign to make America & Americans great again.

The system is no doubt in trouble, and completely corrupted.
There is no fix with any of the present insiders. We need to
vote them out, and prosecute those involved with the Treason
that is and has been committed against ALL Americans with
the exception of the top 2%, and the political machine.

Donald Trump needs our support and unity for anything
constructive to be accomplished.

Raise your voices, forward this posting, register to vote,
and encourage others to do the same. DO YOUR PART
NOW.

Thank Donald Trump for having the courage, putting all
to risk of ZIONIST retaliation , and retribution to attempt
what no other man has been willing to do.

THANK HIM BY VOTING AND SUPPORTING HIM and all
others that plan on working with him.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 26, 2016
Reply

Dear VOTERS, please read and forward this message..
AMERICA:

We face the fight of our lifetime. We The People are going up against Hillary Clinton’s monstrous machine of elites, lobbyists, and special interests who have sent our country down a very dark road.

To win this fight, Trump is turning to his most trusted advisers: the
American People.

VOTERS

Guccifer 2.0 has shown us just how blatantly the media has colluded with the Clinton campaign to disadvantage the Trump campaign.
Few of our readers likely found this surprising. We are aware of just how corrupt our Media is and it’s no surprise to us that the Establishment Media will do anything to protect the status quo.,
Zionism is not a religion, Nationality, or victim of hate. They are the
perpetrators of crime, hate, and atrocities against Palestine, all
neighbors, and their own people that disagree with the agenda.
If you’re feeling the way we are, you have had enough.

Israel, a Zionist State, and occupier, violators of Human rights,
International law.and non compliant with the moral values of
the faithful Jewish People.

The identity of the Jewish people stolen by AIPAC & Zionism

Boycott CNN, The New York Times, NPR, The Washington Post, and any other neocon Corporate Media source that refuses to speak truth to power.

Stand with the tiny minority of organizations like NationofChange with integrity.

Jewish Organizations that oppose ZIONISM, and want & will fully
debate the issues and the true facts. Including many Rabbis,
and other professionals.

The Jewish people against Zionism & occupation. Against AIPAC Lobby.& ZIONISM.

,Jews Against Zionism And Rothschilds,Why Orthodox Jews are opposed to the Zionist “State”,
Neturei Karta – Orthodox Jews United Against Zionism,
Against Israeli Apartheid – Support action for peace & justice‎,
Jews United Against Zionism – Rense,
International Jewish Anti-Zionist Network (IJAN),
Anti-Zionist Rabbi’s Debating Zionist on Press TV,
Jews United Against Zionism – YouTube,
1,000 Rabbi’s against Zionism,
Rabbi Israel Domb explains the Neturei Karta & Jews United Against Zionism Movement – Full Documentary,

Review of Jewish Identity and Civil Rights in America,
70 FACES MEDIA
70 Faces Media is a not-for-profit digital
media company that aspires to connect
as many people as possible to all sides
of the unfolding Jewish story.

Politicians, and religious leaders need to get their ducks in
a roll. They will have to face the true facts, and the facts
of malfeasance, treason, and corruption by congress.
Hillary, along with 80% of both parties support Zionism
simply for personal monetary gain. So much so, that for
the first time, well over 50% of congress are Millionaires.

NOW!! is the opportunity and chance for us to unite and
change the complete agenda. No more Globalization for
the benefit of ZIONISM.

Hillary’s support of & by Zionism is prejudicial toward all of us
others.

Many Christians are finding that religious leaders are
following Zionist ideals, and more interested in the golden
investments, rather then worshiping God and giving back
to the community. Human rights violations are no longer an
issue. No longer advocating PEACE rather than WARS.
They see leaders abusing the Tax exempt benefits,
and ignoring what the principle of giving with-in the community.
more and more are dropping out, or study their bibles & worship
at home. Giving where they see a need, 100% of such helping
rather then 3% if that benefiting. They also are realizing the
difference between Zionism, and the Jewish faith.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 27, 2016
Reply

If Americans Knew Team via salsalabs.org
12:12 AM (7 hours ago)

to me

Dear Ronald l,

Please share this email with anyone you know in California!

The California Senate just passed AB 2844, a bill designed to punish businesses and organizations participating in the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) movement, with 34 votes in favor and just 1 vote against.

We’ve just learned the CA Assembly is expected to vote on the bill this coming Monday, so time is running out!

TAKE ACTION

We’re requesting that you take three very quick actions:

1) Contact your Assembly member and ask them to vote against this bill! Find contact info here.

While it’s unlikely at this point that we can defeat the bill, it’s important to decrease the number of people voting for it, so that we can then attempt to get Governor Jerry Brown to veto it.

While Brown generally does what the Israel lobby wants him to do, counter pressure from voters could have an effect.

2) Therefore, it’s also important to urge California Governor Jerry Brown to veto this bill if it passes:

FAX: (916) 558-3160

PHONE: (916) 445-2841

EMAIL: Use this form

3) Finally, please sign this petition and share it with your social networks.

CONTEXT

The ACLU says that the bill is “part of a concerted national effort to squelch the growing, non-violent protest movement for Palestinian human rights, against the increasing extremism of Israel policies – and against U.S. support for them.”

Criminalizing criticism of Israel

AB 2844 would require businesses and organizations who want to contract with a state agency for more than $100,000 to promise under the penalty of perjury that they have not adopted any “policy” against a sovereign nation or peoples, including Israel.

Attacking First Amendment rights

Boycott is protected political speech, but the writers of this bill jumped through hoops to craft a law that could still punish people who boycott Israeli institutions or businesses by finding their actions to be “discriminatory.”

Wasting taxpayer dollars

It is unclear what would actually constitute a crime under this bill, and the state of California would undoubtedly face countless lawsuits from businesses and individuals being accused, not to mention the cost of investigations into the motivations and behaviors of those supporting BDS.

The law could cost Californians a possible $140 million in higher contract costs to the state because of a likely smaller pool of applicants, plus $625,000 a year for extra staff and other costs to deal with possible charges of perjury.

From the Department of Finance Bill Analysis, 06/20/2016: “The Department of Finance opposes this bill because it would result in unknown, potentially significant costs without providing additional protections against discrimination beyond existing state law.”

All legal briefs are available at http://www.palestinelegal.org/california.

Please make your voice heard today!

In solidarity,

The If Americans Knew team

America’s officials are bought out by fascism. Federal. State, and local. AIPAC Lobby Chapters in every state. Now spreading
fast in Canada. Fight them and their Globalization policies.

Do you believe they still will call the peoples knowledge of Israeli occupation of our government and media a Conspiracy
theory, rather then the absolute TRUTH.

Trump is presently our only hope for transparency and prosecution of the criminals in office.

Ronald L. Waldron
August 27, 2016
Reply

Politicians & Preachers are one & the same.

Worshiping the Golden Calf, and the DEVIL himself

Existence of Israel contrary to
Torah teachings:Rabbi Weiss

let’s show the world what it means to be American:
Not occupied by Zionist AIPAC & ISRAEL.

THE ZIONIST SYNDICATE

Have bought out both political parties threw their special
interest money. We all have witnessed it for the last 60 years.
Reality of such under the Bush, Clinton,Bush administrations.

The only chance for change and hope is Donald Trump and
his campaign to make America & Americans great again.

The system is no doubt in trouble, and completely corrupted.
There is no fix with any of the present insiders. We need to
vote them out, and prosecute those involved with the Treason
that is and has been committed against ALL Americans with
the exception of the top 2%, and the political machine.

Donald Trump needs our support and unity for anything
constructive to be accomplished.

Raise your voices, forward this posting, register to vote,
and encourage others to do the same. DO YOUR PART
NOW.

Thank Donald Trump for having the courage, putting all
to risk of ZIONIST retaliation , and retribution to attempt
what no other man has been willing to do.

THANK HIM BY VOTING AND SUPPORTING HIM and all
others that plan on working with him.

Existence of Israel contrary to
Torah teachings:Rabbi Weiss

let’s show the world what it means to be American:
Not occupied by Zionist AIPAC & ISRAEL.

Lefty Wright
August 27, 2016
Reply

WHY women should boycott Hillary:

Hillary Clinton is a strong supporter of AIPAC,, ISRAEL, the Zionist regime.

She is against BDS, doing so she will do nothing regarding the Human Rights violations.
NOT only the violations against Palestine, but also their own people.

She has full knowledge of the criminal activities, trafficing Drugs, blood diamonds,and human
trafficing. Which is trafficing of WOMEN, young girls in sex trade, and abuse.

Prostitution to high level eletes, such as Monica Lewinski, and others that have trapped
several American officials, when their preformence did not comply with the demands made.

Zionism completely disrespects the female gender. Even their own mothers, sisters, wives,
and daugthers. Say nothing about women with no family connection.

She has sold her sole to them for the financial & political support. Which has defined her as
a WHORE also.  Netanyahu’s BITCH.

How anyone especially women, would want her as the first United States Female President
is  inconceivable.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 1, 2016
Reply

SPREAD THE WORD—STOP THE APARTHEID
Finally all our hard work is paying off:
The economic boycott of Israel aims to put pressure on Israel to comply with international law and to persuade private companies to end their participation in Israel’s crimes.

The Israeli economy is especially dependent on international trade and investment, making it especially susceptible to international economic boycotts. Many international companies such as G4S and HP profit from helping Israel to maintain its system of apartheid and settler colonialism.

The economic boycott of Israel aims to put pressure on Israel to comply with international law and to persuade private companies to end their participation in Israel’s crimes.

Boycott Israeli products!

Targeted consumer boycotts are convincing retailers across the world to stop selling products from companies profiting from Israel’s crimes. Many Israeli exporters complain that it is getting harder for them to export their products.
Find out more

The Who Profits website and theInvestigate website both provide detailed information about companies involved in Israel’s regime of apartheid and settler-colonialism. You can use the Who Profits website to search for complicit companies operating or headquartered in your country.
Join an international campaign against a complicit company

Palestinian BDS National Committee and its network of partners across the world run international campaigns against some of the biggest corporate abusers of Palestinian rights. Head over to our Campaigns Hub to find out about our active campaigns and how you can get involved.
Start a local campaign

Many of the complicit companies targeted by the BDS movement have extensive global operations. For example, G4S – targeted over its role in Israel’s prison system – provides security services to local governments, universities and other public bodies across the world. This provides us with an opportunity to build strong local grassroots campaigns.
Tell your bank or pension fund to divest

Virtually all banks and pension funds are invested in Israeli companies and international companies that are complicit in Israeli apartheid and settler-colonialism. Get in touch with your bank or pension fund and ask them about which companies they are invested in.
Campaign for divestment

Many bodies that should be accountable to us such as universities, governments, and local municipalities invest in Israel and complicit international companies.
WHEN YOU GO TO THE POLLS:
Remember Hillary is totally against BDS. Totally supports Israeli’s actions.
WHILE WE THE PEOPLE want total withdrawal from Israel, and NO MORE
LOPSIDED foreign aid & military aid. WE want it all stopped..
VOTE FOR TRUMP FOR CHANGE. THE ONLY ONE NOT BOUGHT. OUT by AIPAC & ISRAEL.

NO MORE DUEL CITIZENS ELECTED OR APPOINTED.

Share

Ronald L. Waldron
September 14, 2016
Reply

TERM LIMITS HAVE BECOME NECESSARY

How anyone especially women, would want her as the first United States Female President is inconceivable.

Is it only Hillary as a criminal? Hell NO. 98% of CONGRESS is involved with the
same foreign lobby and syndicate that now runs Washington DC ZIONISM.
All as polarized as Hillary.

THAT IS WY WE NEED TRUMP FOR CHANGE. 360 degree change.

The only way Americans,, Christians, and any other
gentile has a chance at a decent life in this world of ” Falsehood” of Zionist.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 24, 2016
Reply

60+ years of unfulfilled promises from the polarized politicians of both Parties.
While the whole time the foreign lobby AIPAC, Israel, and Mossad have gained
complete occupation & control of our system of government, or non-government
of the people’ by the people, for the people, as it was prior to 1948-1950.

No one studies World History or American history any more, nor is it allowed
in public schools any longer. BUT we keep getting a distorted view of the
Holocaust jammed at our youth that is more fiction then fact. Just ask the true victims of it. The Torah Jews.. Trust Israel–ask a True Jew !! Trust America, just
ask a Native American.!!

Trust any politician–We all know the answer to that.

That is why we must demand term limits. AND develop a complete new
WATCH system. We were able to depend on Journalism at one time, but
we all know what has happened to Media. who owns it, controls it.
assassinates with-in very frequently. 127 in Iraq.

If any trust can be established, I would say it is only with Donald Trump presently, How long can he hold out against the established syndicate, who
knows. Obama caved in after the 2012 Elections .

Ready For A Fresh Start!

THAT COMES BY WAY OF TRUMP, FOR THIS ELECTION !!!

Hillary is a co-founder of the corruption in Washington,DC, NY
++++

mossad christian muslim clash

Muslim impostor and Zionist asset, Omar Bakri aka Fustuk, has, once again, revealed himself as what he truly is, a filthy Israeli Jew–and not just any Israeli mole but one directly tied to the Woolwich scam. Posing as a puffed-out Muslim preacher, in fact, Bakri is a Syrian Jew whose entire purpose is to wage war against Islaam for his Zionist handlers. Fully capable in English, he attempts to disguise himself with his fake “broken English Arabic-style” accent. A fraudster to the extreme Bakri’s purpose is to create the platform for the demonization of Islaam and draw untoward attention to it, all unfavorable and derogatory, so that the Zionist crimes go unanswered.

Ronald L. Waldron
September 30, 2016
Reply

Boycott the VIEW

60+ years of unfulfilled promises from the polarized politicians of both Parties.
While the whole time the foreign lobby AIPAC, Israel, and Mossad have gained
complete occupation & control of our system of government, or non-government
of the people’ by the people, for the people, as it was prior to 1948-1950.

No one studies World History or American history any more, nor is it allowed
in public schools any longer. BUT we keep getting a distorted view of the
Holocaust jammed at our youth that is more fiction then fact. Just ask the true victims of it. The Torah Jews.. Trust Israel–ask a True Jew !! Trust America, just
ask a Native American.!!

Trust any politician–We all know the answer to that.

That is why we must demand term limits. AND develop a complete new
WATCH system. We were able to depend on Journalism at one time, but
we all know what has happened to Media. who owns it, controls it.
assassinates with-in very frequently. 127 in Iraq.

If any trust can be established, I would say it is only with Donald Trump presently, How long can he hold out against the established syndicate, who
knows. Obama caved in after the 2012 Elections .

Ready For A Fresh Start!

THAT COMES BY WAY OF TRUMP, FOR THIS ELECTION !!!

Hillary is a co-founder of the corruption in Washington,DC, NY
++++

mossad christian muslim clash

Muslim impostor and Zionist asset, Omar Bakri aka Fustuk, has, once again, revealed himself as what he truly is, a filthy Israeli Jew–and not just any Israeli mole but one directly tied to the Woolwich scam. Posing as a puffed-out Muslim preacher, in fact, Bakri is a Syrian Jew whose entire purpose is to wage war against Islaam for his Zionist handlers. Fully capable in English, he attempts to disguise himself with his fake “broken English Arabic-style” accent. A fraudster to the extreme Bakri’s purpose is to create the platform for the demonization of Islaam and draw untoward attention to it, all unfavorable and derogatory, so that the Zionist crimes go unanswered.

FACT CHECK BY MEDIA: WHAT A JOKE. THE AMERICAN MEDIA
Conglomerate’s owned lock , stock, & Barrel by the Zionist Syndicate
that controls CONGRESS.. WHO IS KIDDING WHO ??

THE ONLY CHANCE, for CHANGE is to VOTE FOR TRUMP..

BOYCOTT the VIEW: Attacks Trump as directed by corrupt Syndicate that owns
the network. Have we ever witnessed such on any one before. Any leader good or
bad. Tell me Hillary represents anything moral or ethical.

These bitches are paid to do & say as DIRECTED TRUMP represents change
against the corrupt system of control by SPECIAL INTEREST.
The American peoples worst enemy. Israel, Aipac, Mossad.and Russian Zionist
Syndicate…

Ronald L. Waldron
October 7, 2016
Reply

YOKO ONO:“I HAD AN AFFAIR WITH HILLARY CLINTON IN THE ’70S”

yoko-ono
Los Angeles | Yoko Ono shocked reporters yesterday when she responded to a question concerning the presidential run of Hillary Clinton and the possibility that she could become the first woman President of the United States in American history.

The artist and widow of John Lennon, who is in Los Angeles to present a collection of cups and saucers she is exhibiting at the Museum of Modern Art, totally took reporters by surprise by admitting she had not only met the former First Lady at various times during a series of protests against the Vietnam War in New York in the 1970s but also knew her “intimately”.

The celebrity admitted laughingly to having “a fling” with her at the time and acknowledged her election “would be a great advancement for LGBT and Women rights in America” she added.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 10, 2016
Reply

Donald Trumped Hillary:so BAD she now suffers from “MAD COW DISEASE” !!

Ronald L. Waldron
October 11, 2016
Reply

“TRUMP LOSS WILL ONLY HAPPEN BY FRAUD”:

Just like the “DOG and PONY SHOW” the MEDIA calls a DEBATE.
A MEDIA run agenda of questions and answers that have nothing at
all to do with the issues WE the people are concerned with.

ALL we hear and see addressed are beneficial to foreign special interest
group called AIPAC, the most powerful Lobby, Snydicate, corrupt political
system in the WORLD.

Lets have the debate on ZIONISM, AIPAC, HOMELAND SECURITY,
THE FIXED SYSTEM TRUMP REFERS TO. Washington is occupied
by Israel, our worst enemy. OWNERS of our congress.MEDIA, Wall Street, FED.
and MORE.

OPEN up the conversations we really need. IT IS COMING !!

EXAMPLE: 2000 Court appointment of our President.

Florida, Fraud. with chads

2004 Ohio fraud investigation…

TRUMP !! Nothing but media and AIPAC character assassination has
been the agenda from DAY ONE.. Any one with a 45 IQ + can recognize
the facts from HOLLYWOOD style FICTION.

Hillary Clinton being Netanyahu and Israel’s bitch is a real problem.
Donald Trump and supporters are aware of it, but are also very much
aware that all of congress, and Washington agencies are occupied by
Israel & AIPAC, that the total system needs a house cleaning.

FIGHT IS ON, WE ALL KNOW IT, MARSHALL LAW WILL NOT BE
ABLE TO CONTROL THE ANGER OF THE FORGOTTEN PEOPLE.

WE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE , are the FORGOTTEN PEOPLE,
American, Red, Yellow, Black, Brown, or White. Young, old, Male,
or female, Poor, and Poorer. We are the victims of all the corruption
of the last 60-70 years by ZIONIST CRIMINALS.

That Change will be by WE THE PEOPLE, THE AMERICAN PEOPLE,
ALL OF US THAT HAVE BEEN VICTIMS of ZIONIST REPRESSION,
TAKING ALL WE HAD FOR “THEIR” GLOBALIZATION AGENDA.

DONALD TRUMP CAN ONLY LOSE BY FRAUD.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 14, 2016
Reply

Media, Congress, Wall Street, The Fed. AIPAC, Mossad, and Israel.

Conspiracy Theory:

Is it true? certainly seems to be.. No one denies the facts that corruption is
common practice in both political parties . Who occupies or owns mainstream
media, congress, the Supreme Court , Homeland Security.

AIPAC, the largest most powerful special interest lobby in the World.
The evidence of the last 60 years is proof of the conspiracy theory

President Eisenhower warned congress as to what would happen if this
foreign lobby was accepted as AMERICAN. Nothing but Beggars and
Zionist manipulators for the benefit of ISRAEL only . BILLIONS UPON
BILLIONS of American tax-payer’s money wasted in the Middle East.
Over 65 years of lies, deception, corruption, and Treason.

Lets do the true investigation necessary to answer everyones questions.

Let Americans ask the Questions, not the MEDIA puppets.

43 % of Democrats, 47% of Republicans, and even more of Independents
believe there is a Zionist Syndicate, (Organized Crime, World Wide)

Who is going to take the necessary steps to PROVE IT.

YES!! DONALD TRUMP WILL PROVE IT.

HELP HIM HELP YOU ———

Ronald L. Waldron
October 17, 2016
Reply

View Notifications to Donald Trump

PLEASE continue to challenge the entire political system.
It is corrupt, it is Zionist Syndicate occupying MEDIA, CONGRESS,
Wall Street, On & on.

Force it all out into the open, and open for debate. The evidence can,
and will be presented.

You can get all the evidence you need. let it be known how serious you
are, how committed you are. Many, Many organizations and mmbers will
come forward with all.

Examples Rabbi’s against Zionism. Jews against Zionism, Not in Our name.
The Ugly Truth, Jewish Voice for Peace, Women in Black.

GO TO; fighting terrorism at home & abroad peace actions. ALL FACTUAL
information to follow though on.

Do not back down. HELP and SUPPORT WILL COME FROM EVERY WHERE.

The people know our government is foreign occupied. WE need you to
be the leader you have promised to be. Start now, UNITE AMERICANS
now before the Criminals in charge declare MARSHAL–LAW and put
us into the Fema Internment CAMPS..

FOR YEARS AND YEARS AMERICA HAS BEEN WARNED AND WE
HAVE BEEN IGNORED.

WHAT DO YOU THINK NOW. ? PREPARE TO PROTECT & DEFEND

Americans will have to change it. It will not change under the POLARIZED PUPPETS

We have to illimitable even the possibility, that a coup has or about to happen.

THIS IS THE PRESENT REALITY, NOT A MYTH, NOT A THEORY, THIS IS CALLED
ZIONIST GLOBALIZATION and FASCISM , by their numbers.

Ronald L. Waldron
October 18, 2016
Reply

THIS IS MY FINAL POSTING, I ‘M RETIRING from everything at last.
I realize my failures and waste of time. It took 16 yrs of attempting to
get the message out there, there is not much recognition of what that
might be.BUT I did not achieve any of what I sat out to do.
THUS, I apologize to any one that wasted their time reading such
material. I will be having a series of surgeries very soon, after such
spending time with family & friends.

Remember UNITED WE STAND PEACE 4 ALL

STAY SAFE, HAPPY, SECURE & FREE

VOTE FOR DONALD TRUMP..

May GOD bless us ALL.

Your up!! It is now your turn, GOOD–LUCK

Allen D. Post
November 5, 2016
Reply

U.S. aid to Israel totals $233.7b all to a country that is
committing atrocities against the Palestinian People, the worst seen since
the Zionist Holocaust against the Jewish people, Stealing their Identity Hillary
Clinton is committed to giving Israel another $3 b (BILLION) each year while in office.

Next: We now spend $610 BILLION on National DEFENSE, where and for who.

FOR US. HELL, you all know better. $20 TRILLION IN DEBT. To WHO do we owe.
For WHO do we owe it. Bill Clinton, George Bush. this Adm & This bought out
Congress. Including Hillary. CORRUPTION YOU BET.

Who will clean it up. We the People along side Donald Trump and Contracted
Agreement to be held to..

NO OTHER Option is available…

Unite and vote for TRUMP

BRING BACK THE AMERICA WE KNEW< PRIOR to 1950 and on..

The History of this Country and World History that is no longer taught

and what is available becomes distorted. Talk and ask questions,

Check it out. Several have, will you??

REMEMBER THE POLARIZED POLITICIANS SOLD US ALL OUT !!

1ST. Thing we all need to do is get the vote out for Donald Trump. We sure need to have change in Washington, DC.

Next become familiar with the issues, and what problems we
as Americans are facing no matter as to culture. We are all
in the same boat, UNITED WE STAND–DIVIDED WE HAVE FALLEN !!

Take back from the Foreign Lobby what is ours. AMERICA.

READ: Fighting Terrorism At Home & Abroad Peace Actions.

Go to the end, and read back. WE NEED A REAL DEBATE,

DONALD STEP UP ON THESE ISSUES NOW!!

Showing results for North Dakota Pipeline, and Government atrocities against Native Americans.

NO ONE is paying attention as to the fascism going on across the country.

U.S. Government Just Declared WAR On Native Americans, State Gives Cops the Green Light To Shoot DAPL Protesters On Sight. Foreign Benefactors again, MEDIA stays silent as usual.

"This is a new beginning, not just for our tribe, but for all tribes in this country," said Standing Rock Sioux spokesman Ron His Horse is Thunder, one of the leaders hoping for a rebirth of Native American activism beyond the pipeline battle.

This government does not represent America. We need to change it
now. SEE ALL THAT IS HAPPENING, TRUMP will change it.

Heroine: Black hole money by your government, no investigation
since reported years ago. Same with Cocaine previously.

NEXT: Government is attempting to make "KRATOM" illegal, with
out any study on the benefits, and relative proof of grest benefits.

They will control, and profit, or it won't be available.'

There is so much to be done to stop the syndicate take over,
but with the ignorance of so many, many do not pay attention
to what has happened around them.

YOUR GOVERNMENT, MEDIA, CONGRESS, HAS BEEN SELLING
US OUT.

GET OUT THE VOTE FOR DONALD TRUMP, or learn
Hebrew, the language of the Syndicate in charge.

Radio Host and Trump supporter Alex Jones claims ‘Jewish mafia’ controls US

That is a fact, NOT a Conspiracy Theory but FACT.

Plenty of proof–Classified and non-classified.

DONALD STEP UP ON THESE ISSUES NOW!!

Showing results for North Dakota Pipeline, and Government atrocities against Native Americans.

NO ONE is paying attention as to the fascism going on across the country.

U.S. Government Just Declared WAR On Native Americans, State Gives Cops the Green Light To Shoot DAPL Protesters On Sight. Foreign Benefactors again, MEDIA stays silent as usual.

"This is a new beginning, not just for our tribe, but for all tribes in this country," said Standing Rock Sioux spokesman Ron His Horse is Thunder, one of the leaders hoping for a rebirth of Native American activism beyond the pipeline battle.

This government does not represent America. We need to change it
now. SEE ALL THAT IS HAPPENING, TRUMP will change it.

Heroine: Black hole money by your government, no investigation
since reported years ago. Same with Cocaine previously.

NEXT: Government is attempting to make "KRATOM" illegal, with
out any study on the benefits, and relative proof of grest benefits.

They will control, and profit, or it won't be available.'

There is so much to be done to stop the syndicate take over,
but with the ignorance of so many, many do not pay attention
to what has happened around them.

YOUR GOVERNMENT, MEDIA, CONGRESS, HAS BEEN SELLING
US OUT.

GET OUT THE VOTE FOR DONALD TRUMP, or learn
Hebrew, the language of the Syndicate in charge.

Allen D. Post
November 13, 2016
Reply

Ronald Waldron
15 mins ·
TODD ALEXANDER-Lakeood-Bemus Point-and Buffalo.
Todd is the biggest bi-polar CON-ARTIST in the nation.
The reality from anyone that knows him is as follows.
As a young man, he was an abuser of his own mother,
including sexual as is his psychic history, with 25 admissions.
He is a dead beat husband or partner several times over.
He is a real dead beat father, that avoids paying any support.
More then one case.
He has not paid any income tax or filed since 2006.
He spends all he earns on Cocaine, Booze, prostitutes,
He has conned several into business agreements, each and every time, runs out on paying his bills, over $11,500 in my case .
No one has had a good experience with him from his youth on.
Multiple run ins with police departments. Loss of license for several
Drunk driving charges, leaves utility bills, rents, personal losns
behind. Stole and sold inventory, living on such for the last year plus. Then he writes untrue stories about people that tried to help
him, got conned and screwed by him, and he tries to ruin their
character & reputation.
He has had more affairs then 20 whores, using each girl for
his support and expenses.
BEFORE doing any business with this individual, check him out,
ask for referrals and references.
GOOD LUCK WITH ANY DEALINGS. Works when and if he wants to, will want his money up front. If you pay it, he won’t finish on
any time frame expected.
Like

Ronald Waldron DAM RIGHT, next most every time, he will use religion, his false faith,
Like · Reply · 11 mins
Ronald Waldron
Ronald Waldron He is a manipulator, but false morality all the way.
Like · Reply · Just now
Ronald Waldron

Not one friend in long time relationship
Choose File
Ronald Waldron

Write a comment…
THERE IS NOTHING YOU CAN TRUST ABOUT THIS INDIVIDUAL.

Allen D. Post
November 17, 2016
Reply

Alison Weir and the If Americans Knew team

Dear Ronald l,

It’s now more important than ever to educate Americans about Israel-Palestine and the powerful interests that are invested in protecting the unjust status quo.

We were disappointed that the presidential candidates who had potentially good positions on this issue were not the primary contenders in this race.

Both of the two main contenders took huge amounts of money from pro-Israel partisans seeking to influence U.S. foreign policy.

Haim Saban’s millions to Clinton

Entertainment mogul and billionaire Haim Saban, who has repeatedly stated “I’m a one-issue guy, and my issue is Israel,” put $10 million dollars into Hillary Clinton’s SuperPAC and hosted a fundraiser for her that added another $5 million to her campaign.

The money in came shortly after Clinton wrote a letter to Saban professing her opposition to the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement (BDS), which Saban then leaked to media.

Saban and his wife Cheryl have also given up to $25 million to the Clinton Foundation over the years.

Sheldon Adelson’s millions to Trump

On the other side, casino magnate and mega billionaire Sheldon Adelson, who became a Republican in large part because he believed Republicans are more sympathetic to Israel than Democrats, gave $25 million dollars to a Donald Trump SuperPAC in the last few months before the election. Adelson once said that he regretted serving in the U.S. military rather than Israel’s:

“I am not Israeli. The uniform that I wore in the military, unfortunately, was not an Israeli uniform. It was an American uniform, although my wife was in the IDF and one of my daughters was in the IDF … our two little boys, one of whom will be bar mitzvahed tomorrow, hopefully he’ll come back–his hobby is shooting–and he’ll come back and be a sniper for the IDF.” (Video here)

Adelson had privately pledged to pour as much as $100 million into Trump’s campaign if needed.

Trump’s changing position on Israel-Palestine

At the beginning of his campaign, Trump actually tweeted that Adelson was using “big dollars” to try to mold Marco Rubio into his puppet. Trump had also initially stated that he would be neutral on Israel-Palestine, but soon after Adelson’s $25 million pledge, Trump met with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu in New York and told him that he would recognize Jerusalem as the “undivided capital of the State of Israel.”

The day after Trump was declared the winner, Netanyahuproclaimed that “President-elect Trump is a true friend of the State of Israel,” while Israeli Education Minister Naftali Bennett said, “Trump’s victory is a tremendous opportunity for Israel to immediately announce its intention to renege on the idea of establishing Palestine in the heart of the country… This is the president-elect’s outlook as it appears in his platform, and that definitely should be our way… The era of the Palestinian state is over.”

Our Job

The movement for peace and justice in Israel-Palestine is up against enormous political and financial power. Our movement must reach out to all Americans, giving them the facts they need to demand principled, rational U.S. policies.

We are determined to expose the real facts on this issue and to get this information to the American public every way we can – through billboards, books, videos, speeches, social media, websites, events, and everything and anything else we can think of!

Please help us continue our work by donating whatever you can, and contact us to host an educational presentation on Israel-Palestine in your community.

Thank you,

Alison Weir and the If Americans Knew team

Dr. Stephen Sniegoski has just written an extremely positive, detailed review of Alison Weir’s book. This follows positive reviews inCounterPunch, Truthout, Dissident Voice, The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, and diverse other publications.

Order the book Against Our Better Judgment on Amazon and donate to help us overcome censorship

Donate Now

ABOUT US If Americans Knew is a nonpartisan educational organization. We are happy to provide information on Israel-Palestine to individuals and groups of all religious, ethnic, racial, and political backgrounds. We support justice, truth, equal rights and respect for all human beings, and we oppose racism, supremacism, and discrimination of all forms. Mission Statement

CONTACT US To invite Alison Weir to give a presentationon Israel-Palestine, or to learn more about putting up a billboard in your city, write here. For general comments or questions, write here. Order educational materials to distribute from our website. Mailing address: If Americans Knew, 5694 Mission Center Rd, Suite 602-710, San Diego, CA 92108. Phone: 202-631-4060

Ronald L. Waldron
November 21, 2016
Reply

Public trust in media is at an all time low
According to a September Gallup Poll, Americans’ trust in mass media has hit an all time low, with only 32% of respondents claiming to have at least a “fair amount of trust” in mass media outlets.

This figure sinks even lower among younger respondents.

Part of NationofChange’s mission over the last five years, as an independent news and activism organization, has been to expose the mainstream media as the journalistically bankrupt shills that they are and provide an alternative that puts integrity first.

Why integrity matters
This problem is far more insidious than it may seem. When you have a poorly educated population, with a complete lack of trust in journalistic institutions, consuming their media in a fact-free echo chamber, you’re going to get a lot of people believing some ridiculous things.

Facts have, unfortunately, become a matter of opinion to most people. We’re facing a crisis right now that threatens the very democracy under which we live.

This is why independent, nonprofit media organizations like a NationofChange are more important than ever before. If we lose this fight, there’s no telling how much propaganda and insane conspiracy theories will continue to divide us.

Difficult times for independent media
This election season has been very challenging for nonprofit media outlets like ours. The divisiveness, identity politics, and finger-pointing of the Left has resulted in a toxic environment where almost any political stance an organization takes guarantees to offend and alienate a portion of its supporters.

This challenge has put a tremendous financial strain on our organization, yet we have refused to pull punches or report on anything less than what we consider to be the truth.

How you can keep NationofChange alive
This week we begin our year end fundraiser, and we need your help today to continue operations through the end of 2016.

Right now, we’re asking you to support our work with a $10 quick donation. It takes only a moment, and it is 100% tax-deductible. We are funded by our readers, and we simply cannot operate without your direct support.

If you read NationofChange, if you appreciate the work we’re doing, please click here and donate what you can.

Thank you, Friend.

Donate to NationofChange
In solidarity,

NationofChange

“I think NationofChange is doing a great and badly needed job. This is what inspired me to support it.” —Noam Chomsky

Allen D. Post
December 10, 2016
Reply

IF AMERICANS KNEW—THEY WOULD DEMAND “NO AMERICAN LEFT BEHIND”, ALL others shall PAY DEARLY !!

Sanctions from the United Nations

America has declined over the past administrations from policies, of the last
few administrations, and the occupation of Washington by Israel, and their
Lobby.

BECAUSE, of the relationship between Congress, AIPAC, & Israel , and the
continued support even with the atrocities committed,and continued human
rights violations, the whole WORLD has turned against the USA..
We the American people realize the corruption & connection of special Interest
which we believe is no less then TREASON.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 10, 2016
Reply

CENSORSHIP has been occurring on POSTINGS from me..

Ronald L. Wlaldron

WATCH—Dogs needed..

Stop, Look, & Listen. REPORT findings.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 12, 2016
Reply

“MAD COW” and BEYOND.

We listen to the corrupt and their minions. We knew that when Donald
Trumped Hillary and the Syndicate supporting her. That Hillary was then
suffering from “mad cow disease “.
We also realized that the only partisanship in government is the members
of both parties involved in the wide spread corruption with in government.

officials and the special interest group, better known as Zionist.Is and has been the
biggest obstacle to being the America we once were.

The control of Media, and 85% of TV broadcast, is owned and run by the
special interest groups, That every program is managed and dictated to by
such. Best example is “THE VIEW” talk about ” MAD COW”, every day is to
run our President Elect into the ground HOT-TOPICS that are dictated by
the Goons in charge, that sign their checks.

We elected Donald Trump knowing we are facing the biggest fight in our lives.
To save our Country and be GREAT AGAIN, instead of it turning into a
Fascist Regime. A government that has been occupied by Foreign interest
Zionist lobby.

The support for Donald Trump, and the Revolution is not going away.

The present Media, and Corrupt politicians & Financial backers have
more to lose and fear. It is us the people who will continue to demand
prosecution , and removal from office for TREASON, and HIGH CRIMES.

If the continued disrespect for us Gentile American People, our Constitution,
and Bill of Rights, prepare for a much larger Fight.

Congress has the lowest ratings ever with Media next. THAT is not a
conspiracy theory.nor is any of the facts that are yet to be fully investigated
by international Agencies.

The American people, and much of the World have no trust or faith in any
USA official or of their developing Fascist organizing..

Now lets talk more about Foreign Involvement in our political elections,
and financial backing for Billions of tax payer money. AND the lives of
our Sons & Daughters fighting in WARS demanded by ISRAEL.

The mistakes made, and would be continued by Hillary and the Zionist
regime of the polarized bipartisan corruption.

THE difference, Donald Trump listened and is responding to us.
The American people who are sick of being stolen from.
The same as the true Jewish people are sick of the Zionist regime also.

Israel has a much bigger fight coming then their small minds can fathom.
Palestine will have their own Country, not reservations for Israel to control.

They have seen those examples.

Donald Trump will respond to American Intelligence, once it is American
instead of the present day , MOSSAD intelligence.

We know Donald has a real grip on what has been thje past common
practice.

WAKE UP. , ZIONISM, and ZIONIST are no longer going to be running
America’s business.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 12, 2016
Reply

Pieces of the PUZZLE put together. !!

WHO–Zionist Israel.

WHAT–Globalization of All .

WHERE– Middle East & USA Congress Occupations.

WHEN–Beginning in 1948 to present. CHANGE is now HERE.

WHY–Religious Myth of CHOSEN people & ID Theft by ZIONISM.

HOW–Bribing Congress, corruption, and TREASON by Congress.

SOLUTION: By Electing a President that recognizes the extent

of the problem we have, and willing to CHANGE IT !!

HOW CAN WE HELP. ? Support the President Elect.

LEAVE NO AMERICAN BEHIND.

THE AMERICAN ECONOMY is already gaining a real come back !

WHY ?? WASHINGTON will no longer be occupied by FOREIGN

interest LOBBIES for the benefit of ZIONIST only.. OUR friends

and real allies are also coming back. for an ETHICAL and HONEST

working relationship.with ALL..

Sanctions from the United Nations

America has declined over the past administrations from policies, of the last
few administrations, and the occupation of Washington by Israel, and their
Lobby.

BECAUSE, of the relationship between Congress, AIPAC, & Israel , and the
continued support even with the atrocities committed,and continued human
rights violations, the whole WORLD has turned against the USA..
We the American people realize the corruption & connection of special Interest
which we believe is no less then TREASON.

The fact of “LAW & ORDER and promises to prosecute the corruption.
LAW & ORDER – WAR on DRUGS & CORRUPTION.

The war on drugs has been fought at the Street level & Cartels since the
Kennedy administration on..
It is like trying to contain the horses, after the barn door was left open.

We now see that the problem has been governments being involved in the
markets. It is no surprise that is the case. How ever when our own government,
and their # 1 Ally are responsible for the Heroin epidemic. One that is destroying
community after community it is beyond time for a WAR ON OFFICIAL
MISCONDUCT & CORRUPTION.

You will be finding that they are ONE & THE SAME.

Ronald L. Waldron
December 16, 2016
Reply

IS CIVIL WAR COMING, THE CHATTER SOUNDS IT !!

The present attempts to create a way to CHANGE THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE VOTE.

People I talk to are determined to fight against the corrupt present day political system, If

any attempt to undermine the results of the election succeeds, it will certainly create

demonstrations and possible Civil WAR. Weapon & Ammo sales are soaring across

the Country

FACE THE FACTS,

None of the electors are constitutionally bound to follow the will of the people they represent, and so in this bizarre election (and post-election) season, an arcane system that was established at the Constitutional Convention of 1787 could — and this is very likely, but could legally — go rogue and potentially deny Trump the presidency.

We need to be prepared to challenge any decision that would change the results as they are.

Remember, $20 Trillion dollar national debt, that was not spent on infrastructure or jobs, or on Americans interest.

Remember the false flag operations we have witnessed and paid for. Remember the False WMD of the Intelligence

community previously. Remember that our intel, is that of Israeli Intel. and influences on our AGENCIES.

Realize the extent of ” CORRUPTION & TREASON” that is involved up & down with-in our own government.

To change it is the fight we are in. We are succeeding, thus continue supporting the President Elect and Team.

Remember, Law & Order. No one will be above the LAW, prosecution of the Corrupt is on the WAY !!

allendpost@yahoo.com
December 16, 2016
Reply

This present government is corrupt and influenced by foreign country Israel with out any doubt of most Americans.

Allen D. Post
December 27, 2016
Reply

Run your polls, you will not believe ours.!

You will find that more then 50% of Donald Trump supporters also support
Boycott, Divestment, and sanctions against the illegal state of Israel.

The total atrocities since 1948 until now with no peace agreement in sight,.
The amount of sacrifice of resources, lives, and reputation of Americans in
complete disarray, WE HAVE GIVEN MORE THEN ENOUGH, with no
acceptable results. All we receive back is more & more demands, no respect
for lives lost, no thank yous, no respect for America or Americans. We
remain as GENTILES “SLAVES” to the most corrupt,, immoral, Evil,
uncivilized group of dirt bags ever.

It is America first from now on. Israel has received all we have to give.
We insist that they stand on their own all the way from this point.

They have never done anything for America, only take and rely on religious
propaganda to keep supporting them. They deserved to be EXILED, and
they have proven they deserve it over & over again.

The majority of Americans support the facts that government & media will not debate.

WE VOTED FOR COMPLETE CHANGE FROM ZIONIST SYNDICATE
CORRUPTION & CONTROL of CONGRESS & OUR ECONOMY.

PALESTINE WAS OUR HOLY LAND FOR 2000 YEARS.
THAT DOES NOT CHANGE ever !!

Do you think GOD will forgive with out repentance.

Lefty Wright
December 28, 2016
Reply

We were promised, LAW & ORDER

That would include, Treason by Congress. + International Law, regarding corruption and human rights violations.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 6, 2017
Reply

AUDIT THE FED:

President Trump:

President Eisenhower was the last President to have the Fed audited.

It is time for an American president to take charge immediately and
shake up the corrupted system. Holding people accountable.

By executive order, audit the Fed like they are doing to you and your
companies.

TAKE CHARGE, clean our house first !!

Ronald L. Waldron

Ronald L Waldron
January 15, 2017
Reply

John Lewis is wrong on this one:

The election had nothing to do with race. The democrats thought that
Hillary would win thumbs down.. None of the Democrats gave a dam
what the people wanted, the change we needed, they fealt that their
special interest groups and money would keep the polarized criminals
on the syndicates pay roll for ever.

The people, including African Americans that elected Barrack Obama,
also wanted change from the polarized failed system of government.
Congress of which John Lewis is a member has the lowest approval
rating in history of America.

A congress that has given the American economy away to foreign
interest lobbies & special interest.groups.

Barrack Obama, that still maintains a 55% approval rating of the
people, tried to influence that support to vote for Hillary Clinton.

Most of that support, including African American’s, either voted for
Trump, or stayed HOME on election day.

Democrats , Black or White have no one to blame but themselves.

Donald Trump was elected legally as President of the United States.

We the people, not you politicians or media giants, will support our
elected President.

There are things with every past Elected President that were not
supported by the people, BUT they were respected as being our
President. PRESIDENT ELECT TRUMP DESERVES THE SAME.

Ronald L Waldron
registered Democrat
Worked hard for Obama 2008 & 2012.
Worked hard & voted for Donald Trump.
Have worked hard against the Corruption with-in politics.

email: fightcorruption02@gmail.com

Also see: Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad Peace Actions

President Trump should demand an audit of the Fed, that eas last done by a Republican president in the 50’s. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

That is were the most amount of corruption is covered up at.

Ronald L Waldron
January 18, 2017
Reply

Remember WHO disrespects your voting rights:and MORE.

Fear of prosecution for the corruption they have been involved with
for years and years, congress members are showing disrespect for
our Elected President, the Election process, and the American people’s
choice for president..

It certainly calls for removal from office. It is up to us the voters to
boycott each one of the absentees to the inauguration, a list needs to
be published and circulated in each district prior to an election.

We must realize that none of these representatives are there for our
benefit. They are there for self interest, and for the special interest
groups that finance their campaigns. Rather such groups or lobbies are
domestic or foreign.

We also need to demand an international investigation into the Heroine
production, and distribution into the USA.. WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN
and WHY.

The Truth. Washington, DC and The Middle East Syndicate & Ally..

WE THE PEOPLE, whether Democrat, Republican, Independent, or
or none of the above. We are all aboard a sinking Ship We must
pull together, UNITED or drowned in the SWAMP.

here

Ronald L. Waldron
January 20, 2017
Reply

UNITE or face the consequences of the people.

The hate and disruption spread by main line media such as CNN, programs
like THE DAM VIEW, a group of nasty talking bitches against making America
great again , is at the core of stirring up all the protest by the ignorant that have
no idea of what is really needed here in America.

They certainly haven’t listened to common sense, or what the message is.

President Trump has turned control back to the people. We the people will
decide who remains in office. Those not cooperating with our President, will
dam well be removed. Either by elections, or prosecution for the corruption
with special interest and foreign interest lobbies.

There is a long line of proof regarding treason against the American people
and displacement of our wealth.

Either it all changes and fast or go home, or directly to JAIL.
BUT you better believe we demand the change.

We will demand term limits, public referendums, we the people will be
represented first as Americans. All Americans.Including the 47 million
Americans prior government people have put at the poverty level and
below for their GLOBALIZATION WET DREAMS.

Believe it when the people announce our acceptance of the challenge
to become involved…

Ronald L. Waldron
January 22, 2017
Reply

WE WANT TRUTH ABOUT NORTH DAKOTA ATROCITIES

We’re missing 90 percent of – the Dakota Pipeline story – earthjustice.org‎

Here’s What You Should Know About The Dakota Pipeline Pro
test …

Dakota Access Pipeline: What to Know About the Controversy
– Time

The Real Story: The Dakota Access Pipeline – VOA News

5 Things You Need To Know About The Dakota Access Pipelin
e line…

WHY IS THE PIPELINE CONTROVERSIAL?

Comparable in size to the rejected Keystone XL, the Bakken pipeline has generated controversy from the beginning and inspired months of protests.

The protests have been the most intense in Sioux County, North Dakota, home of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and a reservation of 8,000 people. The Native American group says the pipeline endangers sacred sites and drinking water resources.

The core of the dispute centers around the issue of tribal sovereignty and claims that the U.S. government approved the project without consulting tribal governance, something they are obligated to do, according to U.S. treaties and the United Nation’s Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Thousands of Native Americans from across the country are protesting the pipeline in solidarity with the Standing Rock Sioux.

The pipeline has also brought together environmentalists and climate activists intent on blocking the construction of new fossil fuel infrastructure. They have raised concerns about the dangers of oil spills. A study by the International Energy Agency found that U.S. pipelines spilled three times as much crude oil as trains from 2004 to 2012. Even though pipeline accidents happen less frequently than train accidents—a fact that some people use to argue that transporting oil by pipeline is safer than rail—they can be larger and more difficult to clean up.

Finally, questions have also surfaced about the estimated economic benefits of the project. Dave Swenson at Iowa State University believes that the job numbers have been overstated. While the project claims to create as many as 4 In the meantime, the project is in legal limbo. The D.C. Circuit Court is currently hearing the legal challenge to the pipeline and the case could take months

Even though the federal government’s suspension of construction is temporary, the future of the North Dakota Access Pipeline looks uncertain.

Given the significant outcry from several dozen environmental organizations and multiple Native American groups, it remains to be seen if the Obama Administration will choose to cancel the pipeline’s federal permits, as it did with Keystone XL last year.
NOW===Enter President Trump, Did we all hear his
speech on 01-20-2017.
Well fellow Americans, that is all of us Americans,
which includes African Americans, NATIVE AMERICANS,
Spanish Americans etc. We need to unite and protest.
FIRST the controlled MEDIA that stir up violence against
our elected President, YET NO COVERAGE OF THE
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS occurring with-in the
native american brothers & sisters tribal sovereignty.

Where are the civil rights people like John Lewis, I would
think our NATIVE AMERICAN people ahould have the same
representation and respect for their RIGHTS as for the
African American communities and people..

We all are the American people that have been ignored
by the established polarized system of government.

We all know that the real truth is censored and not properly
reported on. REQUEST the alternate press organizations to
cover NORTH DAKOTA TRIBAL situation.
NATIONAL & INTERNATIONAL PRESS ORGANIZATIONS.

Interview President Trump regarding such violations, what
will he do.

Lefty Wright
January 22, 2017
Reply

TIME TO QUIT WASTING AMERICAN TAX PAYER MONEY ON RELIGIOUS MYTH

We are in support of the constitution for separation of Church & State.
We also respect the fact that Christianity is the most recognized religion
in America. With freedom of religion for all beliefs including atheism.

At the present time our government representatives have wasted billions
of tax payer money in the middle east supporting a religious state that
illegally occupy Palestinian lands. The Christian Holy land being
destroyed. NONE of our tax payer money should be spent in that manor.

The press and politicians have ignored how much of an issue this has
been for the American people, and religious organizations here in America.
They have ignored that such organizations and people support,
B.D.S. Boycott, Sanction, and Divest.from the Israeli atrocities and
Human Rights Organizations.

They ignore the Jewish organizations that apposes the occupation
and actions of Israeli forces.
They ignore the treason & corruption of American officials by
accepting millions of campaign dollars, turning around to spend
Billions in give away in the middle EAST supporting the atrocities.

They will not report or take truthful polls on the true issues.
They will not debate the true issues. They try to bury the issues,
but they will not be able to do so. The CAT is out of the BAG.
The ignore the Blag Flag operations taken by Israel against
america.

OUR problem with intelligent agencies is the relying on Israeli
involvement in it, and their providing the leaks of classified info.

Ronald L. Waldron
January 29, 2017
Reply

IMMIGRATION into the UNITED STATES:

YES, we have always been the land of opportunity. A land that people came to. That always had rules & regulations attached to it.
ALMOST all immigrants came through ELLIS ISLAND. They were sponsored, came with job skills, willing to learn ENGLISH, and
worked hard to become part of the AMERICAN CULTURE they so desired to be a part of. YES, they brought diversity, different
music, food recipes, religious worship.

Skills they brought of cabinet making, furniture building, machinist, tool & die , farming skills, forestry skills, construction skills.

The immigrants of the past, are very different from beggars , expecting and demanding support and hand outs, bringing hate of
life, radical ideals and intent of blowing up buildings nd kill America.

What skills do they bring, how will they support themselves, we have high unemployment now, with 47 Million Americans living
below poverty level. Why should we accept more. Why do they think we have to take them in with out proper venting. Much
more then ever before.

Look at the damage and demands made on other Countries accepting the immigration. Look at the garbage, trash they leave
behind they expect someone else ro take care of. There are cultures today that will not comply to any rules, regulation , or laws
of the land. Arrest records, and prison population shows a strong resistance to our laws today, that was not present before.

Education. is now a mess, but multi-culture folks expect that we pay to teach their children our language, with no effort on their
part to do so.

I think the President is correct in making sure the system is up grading to protect AMERICA FIRST. QUALIFY first like it was in
the past. Back when America was great, and immigrants built it, NOT TEARING IT ALL DOWN..

Ronald L. Waldron
January 30, 2017
Reply

TAX EXEMPTION & FRAUD:

Tax exemption is not classed as a RIGHT. It is a privilege given by
the government to all religious organizations.
That privilege came with certain under standings. Money given by
the congregations comes with an understanding.
Yes, their is separation of Church & State , but what does exist
is the moral, ethical, and integrity of both and the obligations of
both to the communities they serve,

Both take an oath of responsibility, with their hand on the BIBLE,
when taking on any leadership role. The greatest example of
doing such follows here.

President Jimmy Carter’s Non-Profit work. The Carter Center-carter center.org.
Advancing Human Rights · Alleviating Suffering · Global Peace and Health.
Doing so around the entire WORLD.

Books by Jimmy Carter:: Palestine Peace Not Apartheid, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine, Against Our Better Judgment: The Hidden History of How the U.S. Was Used to Create Israel, Bearing False Witness.

We the people have the biggest responsibility
of it all. First by listening to MEDIA such as
The FOX channel. Bill O’Reilly, Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson,
Meghan McCain, and others.

We have woke up to the changes we need in government, We elected
President Donald Trump to do so. HE IS DOING JUST THAT, er need
to give him our continued support. AMERICA FIRST.
Rid the corruption out of our government, such is under way. Give him
the support needed through the coming FIRE OF DAMNATION from
the left and foreign lobby influences & special interest groups.
Hold the elected officials feet to the FIRE.

NEXT: Look around your community. HOW much tax free property
do you see. It is every where around you. What kind of activity for
the community do you really see. WHAT is your intent when you
give to it, is it your intent to see it invested on WALL STREET,
the theory of saving it for a RAINY DAY.

Now look around your community at the condemned properties,
is there any rehab projects going on by any of the above
organizations.? Are there any homeless people around.? Are the
unemployed hanging out in the coffee shops ? See anyone hungry?

WELL LET ME TELL YOU !! The “RAINY DAYS ARE HERE AND
HAVE BEEN FOR A LONG TIME” demand change in your
organizations, get things done. THESE organizations can hire
contractors to do so. The same as they can Building Big
Buildings, used once a week or so. We do not need more
church buildings. We need community development

Our government and our tax dollars can not keep doing it ALL.

DEMAND ACCOUNTABILITY for your TAX dollars, and your
donations & your tithing..:

Ronald L. Waldron.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 1, 2017
Reply

WILL TRUMP BOW DOWN TO ISRAEL, LIKE SEVERAL PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATIONS

WE ALL KNOW CONGRESS HAS DONE SO SINCE 19
48, ALL FOR PERSONAL GAIN !

“My Hell in an Israeli Jail”: Israel Prison Population 90
Percent Black.

Israel detains and deports American Jews because
they are Black.

The Black Diaspora in Israel — Israel: NO BLACKS
ALLOWED!

Why Is Israel Kicking Out the Africans?

The ethnic cleansing of Africans in Israel | The
Electronic Intifada.

Israel and its black immigrants: Send ’em home .

Black Israelis Are Protesting Against Institutional
racism, Police Brutality.

AFRO-EUROPE: Report: Being Black in Israel.

Why Do So Many Jews Hate Black People? | The Ugly Truth

Do Black Lives Matter In Israel? | Al Jazeera America.

In Israel too, young black men face police racism and
brutality – Haaretz.

Israel: No promised land for Ethiopian Jews | Middle East
Eye.

Israel’s War On Its Black Population • Africanglobe.net.

Black Lives Don’t Matter in Israel | Global Research.

Forced contraception of Jewish Ethopian women is tip
of global Research.

Golda Meir Was First Israeli Leader to Expel African-
American)

Israel’s Rampant Racism Against Black Jews Continues
to be Ignored

Re: Israel rejects black Hebrews as Jews – Race and
History.com

1000+ images about blacks in Israel on Pin terest |
Cancer, Tel aviv

Israel deporting it’s black population back to Africa –
Storm front

Now !! Face some facts. The largest and most influential lobbies in AMERICA

are Israeli lobbies. They occupy our congress, by duel citizenship people in office

with their only true interest in Israel. Others that support for personal gain .

Then we have political appointees in agency leadership positions, vetted to have

the same views. The atrocities against Palestine is another genocide right under our
noses.

This Occupier is far from any Democracy. The black Flag activities against the United States
certainly does not make them any kind of Ally, only to our corrupt congress.

From the Kennedy assassinations, Martin Luther King assassination, and hundreds more.

Any question regarding them becomes classified from us the AMERICAN people

Who are the slum land lords in our inter-cities. Who charges high rents for them.

Who owns the businesses that pay minimum wages or less to you.

Pro-sports pays well, BUT who owns the teams, the stadiums, and rakes in the MONEY.

Who is the top 2% that controls 95% of all the USA Money.

Who receives 75% of all our foreign aid, military aid, and charity donations

Do you understand the difference between Zionism, and Jewish faith ?

Realize that a great deal of the Jewish people are against what Israel does, it is against their Faith.

IF Israel were a Jewish State. Rabbis would be the leaders. Not Fascist, criminal Syndicate leaders.

The biggest share of protesters really don’t know why they are there, only that someone called
them to action, you join it thinking what fun it is.

Let me tell you, the place you belong demonstrating peacefully is at every Israel political lobby.

Demonstrate when Mr. Netanyahu comes visiting President Trump, thinking Trump will dismiss the
sanctions of Obama. No media has covered and let you know that Netanyahu plotted an assassination
of President Obama. The Buffalo Secret Service office investigated such threat, but no media would
report it to the people..

You want to join a great growing group, join B.D.S. Boycott, Divest, and Sanction Israel. More so then Russia.

You have heard political promises from the Democrats for years for your votes and support. WHAT TO HELL
HAVE YOU GOTTEN IN RETURN BUT MORE OF THE SAME.

PRESIDENT TRUMP IS FULFILLING EVERY PROMISE FROM THE VERY START .

Democrats and many Republican congress members are running scared. They are trying to stop him
before he gets to LAW & ORDER, that will meaning cleaning our house first. Count on it.

Read books by Jimmy Carter. Read what Billy Graham has advised Presidents in the past regarding Israel.
Read or listen to Pat Buchanan on Israel. How the occupy our congress & many agencies.

LISTEN to FOX NEWS CHANNEL FOR TRUTH on PRESIDENT TRUMP and HIS PROMISED AGENDA
for America and ALL AMERICANS.

Lefty.Wright
February 2, 2017
Reply

List of members of the United States Congress by longevity of service

Time for term limits–max 15 yrs. Referendum by the people.
Retirement should depend on years of service.
Removal with any criminal conviction. Past, present or future.

U.S. Senate seniority list[edit]
Current
rank Historical
rank Senator (Party-State) Seniority Date Other factors
1 1692 Patrick Leahy (D-VT) January 3, 1975
2 1708 Orrin Hatch (R-UT) January 3, 1977
3 1719 Thad Cochran (R-MS) December 27, 1978
4 1745 Chuck Grassley (R-IA) January 3, 1981
5 1766 Mitch McConnell (R-KY) January 3, 1985
6 1773 Barbara Mikulski (D-MD) January 3, 1987 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (10 years)
7 1775 Richard Shelby (R-AL) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (8 years)
8 1777 John McCain (R-AZ) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years); Arizona 29th in population (1980)
9 1778 Harry Reid (D-NV) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years); Nevada 43rd in population (1980)
10 1801 Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) November 10, 1992
11 1804 Barbara Boxer (D-CA) January 3, 1993 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives
12 1810 Patty Murray (D-WA)
13 1816 Jim Inhofe (R-OK) November 17, 1994
14 1827 Ron Wyden (D-OR) February 6, 1996
15 1830 Pat Roberts (R-KS) January 3, 1997 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (16 years)
16 1831 Dick Durbin (D-IL) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years)
17 1835 Jack Reed (D-RI) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years)
18 1839 Jeff Sessions (R-AL) Alabama 22nd in population (1990)
19 1842 Susan Collins (R-ME) Maine 38th in population (1990)
20 1843 Mike Enzi (R-WY) Wyoming 50th in population (1990)
21 1844 Chuck Schumer (D-NY) January 3, 1999 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (18 years)
22 1846 Mike Crapo (R-ID) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years)
23 1854 Bill Nelson (D-FL) January 3, 2001 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (12 years)
24 1855 Tom Carper (D-DE) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (10 years)
25 1856 Debbie Stabenow (D-MI) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years)
26 1859 Maria Cantwell (D-WA) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (2 years)
27 1873 John Cornyn[6] (R-TX) December 1, 2002
28 1867 Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) December 20, 2002
29 1869 Lindsey Graham (R-SC) January 3, 2003 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives
30 1871 Lamar Alexander (R-TN) Former Cabinet member and Governor of Tennessee (2 terms)
31 1876 Richard Burr (R-NC) January 3, 2005 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (10 years)
32 1879 John Thune (R-SD) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years)
33 1880 Johnny Isakson (R-GA) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (5 years, 10 months)
34 1881 David Vitter (R-LA) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (5 years, 7 months)
35 1885 Bob Menendez (D-NJ) January 18, 2006
36 1886 Ben Cardin (D-MD) January 3, 2007 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (20 years)
37 1887 Bernie Sanders (I-VT)[7] Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (16 years)
38 1888 Sherrod Brown (D-OH) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years)
39 1890 Bob Casey, Jr. (D-PA) Pennsylvania 6th in population (2000)
40 1891 Bob Corker (R-TN) Tennessee 16th in population (2000)
41 1892 Claire McCaskill (D-MO) Missouri 17th in population (2000)
42 1893 Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) Minnesota 21st in population (2000)
43 1894 Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI) Rhode Island 43rd in population (2000)
44 1895 Jon Tester (D-MT) Montana 44th in population (2000)
45 1896 John Barrasso (R-WY) June 25, 2007
46 1897 Roger Wicker (R-MS) December 31, 2007
47 1899 Tom Udall (D-NM) January 3, 2009 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives
48 1901 Jeanne Shaheen (D-NH) Former governor (6 years)
49 1902 Mark Warner (D-VA) Former governor (4 years)
50 1903 Jim Risch (R-ID) Former governor (7 months)
51 1905 Jeff Merkley (D-OR)
52 1909 Michael Bennet (D-CO) January 21, 2009
53 1910 Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) January 26, 2009
54 1911 Al Franken (D-MN) July 7, 2009
55 1916 Joe Manchin (D-WV) November 15, 2010 Former governor
56 1917 Chris Coons (D-DE)
57 1918 Mark Kirk (R-IL) November 29, 2010
58 1785[8] Dan Coats (R-IN) January 3, 2011 Former U.S. Senator
59 1919 Roy Blunt (R-MO) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years); Missouri 17th in population (2000)
60 1920 Jerry Moran (R-KS) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years); Kansas 32nd in population (2000)
61 1921 Rob Portman (R-OH) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (12 years)
62 1922 John Boozman (R-AR) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (9 years)
63 1923 Pat Toomey (R-PA) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years)
64 1924 John Hoeven (R-ND) Former governor
65 1925 Marco Rubio (R-FL) Florida 4th in population (2000)
66 1926 Ron Johnson (R-WI) Wisconsin 18th in population (2000)
67 1927 Rand Paul (R-KY) Kentucky 25th in population (2000)
68 1928 Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) Connecticut 29th in population (2000)
69 1929 Mike Lee (R-UT) Utah 34th in population (2000)
70 1930 Kelly Ayotte (R-NH) New Hampshire 41st in population (2000)
71 1931 Dean Heller (R-NV) May 9, 2011
72 1932 Brian Schatz (D-HI) December 27, 2012
73 1933 Tim Scott (R-SC) January 2, 2013
74 1934 Tammy Baldwin (D-WI) January 3, 2013 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years)
75 1935 Jeff Flake (R-AZ) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (12 years)
76 1936 Joe Donnelly (D-IN) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years); Indiana 16th in population (2010)
77 1937 Chris Murphy (D-CT) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years); Connecticut 29th in population (2010)
78 1938 Mazie Hirono (D-HI) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years); Hawaii 42nd in population (2010)
79 1939 Martin Heinrich (D-NM) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years)
80 1940 Angus King (I-ME) Former governor (8 years)
81 1941 Tim Kaine (D-VA) Former governor (4 years)
82 1942 Ted Cruz (R-TX) Texas 2nd in population (2010)
83 1943 Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) Massachusetts 15th in population (2010)
84 1944 Deb Fischer (R-NE) Nebraska 38th in population (2010)
85 1945 Heidi Heitkamp (D-ND) North Dakota 48th in population (2010)
86 1948 Ed Markey (D-MA) July 16, 2013
87 1949 Cory Booker (D-NJ) October 31, 2013
88 1951 Shelley Moore Capito (R-WV) January 3, 2015 Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (14 years)
89 1952 Gary Peters (D-MI) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years); Michigan 9th in population (2010)
90 1953 Bill Cassidy (R-LA) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (6 years); Louisiana 25th in population (2010)
91 1954 Cory Gardner (R-CO) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years); Colorado 22nd in population (2010)
92 1955 James Lankford (R-OK) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (4 years); Oklahoma 28th in population (2010)
93 1956 Tom Cotton (R-AR) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (2 years); Arkansas 32nd in population (2010)
94 1957 Steve Daines (R-MT) Former member of the U.S. House of Representatives (2 years); Montana 44th in population (2010)
95 1958 Mike Rounds (R-SD) Former governor
96 1959 David Perdue (R-GA) Georgia 8th in population (2010)
97 1960 Thom Tillis (R-NC) North Carolina 10th in population (2010)
98 1961 Joni Ernst (R-IA) Iowa 30th in population (2010)
99 1962 Ben Sasse (R-NE) Nebraska 37th in population (2010)
100 1963 Dan Sullivan (R-AK) Alaska 47th in population (2010)
See also[edit]
114th United States Congress

Complete seniority list[edit]
U.S. House Seniority
Rank Representative Party District Seniority date No.# of term(s) Committee and leadership positions
1 John Conyers D MI-13 January 3, 1965 26th term Dean of the House
Ranking Member: Judiciary
2 Charles B. Rangel D NY-13 January 3, 1971 23rd term
3 Don Young R AK March 6, 1973 22nd term
4 James Sensenbrenner R WI-05 January 3, 1979 19th term
5 Hal Rogers R KY-05 January 3, 1981 18th term Chair: Appropriations
6 Christopher Smith R NJ-04 18th term
7 Steny Hoyer D MD-05 May 19, 1981 18th term Minority Whip
8 Marcy Kaptur D OH-09 January 3, 1983 17th term
9 Sander Levin D MI-09 Ranking Member: Ways and Means
10 Joe Barton R TX-06 January 3, 1985 16th term
11 Pete Visclosky D IN-01
12 Peter DeFazio D OR-04 January 3, 1987 15th term Ranking Member: Transportation and Infrastructure
13 John Lewis D GA-05
14 Louise Slaughter D NY-25 Ranking Member: Rules
15 Lamar Smith R TX-21 Chair: Science, Space and Technology
16 Fred Upton R MI-06 Chair: Energy and Commerce
17 Nancy Pelosi D CA-12 June 2, 1987 16th term Minority Leader
18 John Duncan R TN-02 November 8, 1988 16th term
19 Frank Pallone D NJ-06 Ranking Member: Energy and Commerce
20 Eliot Engel D NY-16 January 3, 1989 14th term Ranking Member: Foreign Affairs
21 Nita Lowey D NY-17 Ranking Member: Appropriations
22 Jim McDermott D WA-07
23 Richard Neal D MA-01
24 Dana Rohrabacher R CA-48
25 Ileana Ros-Lehtinen R FL-27 August 29, 1989 14th term
26 José Serrano D NY-15 March 20, 1990 14th term
27 David Price D NC-04 January 3, 1997
Previous service, 1987–1995.[2] 14th term*
28 John Boehner R OH-08 January 3, 1991 13th term Speaker of the House (until Oct. 29, 2015)
29 Rosa DeLauro D CT-03
30 Collin Peterson D MN-07 Ranking Member: Agriculture
31 Maxine Waters D CA-43 Ranking Member: Financial Services
32 Sam Johnson R TX-03 May 8, 1991 13th term
33 Jerrold Nadler D NY-10 November 3, 1992 13th term
34 Jim Cooper D TN-05 January 3, 2003
Previous service, 1983–1995.[2] 13th term*
35 Xavier Becerra D CA-34 January 3, 1993 12th term Democratic Caucus Chairman
36 Sanford Bishop D GA-02
37 Corrine Brown D FL-05 Ranking Member: Veterans’ Affairs
38 Ken Calvert R CA-42
39 Jim Clyburn D SC-06 Assistant Minority Leader
40 Anna Eshoo D CA-18
41 Bob Goodlatte R VA-06 Chair: Judiciary
42 Gene Green D TX-29
43 Luis Gutiérrez D IL-04
44 Alcee Hastings D FL-20
45 Eddie Bernice Johnson D TX-30 Ranking Member: Science, Space and Technology
46 Peter King R NY-02
47 Carolyn Maloney D NY-12
48 John Mica R FL-07
49 Lucille Roybal-Allard D CA-40
50 Ed Royce R CA-39 Chair: Foreign Affairs
51 Bobby Rush D IL-01
52 Bobby Scott D VA-03 Ranking Member: Education and the Workforce
53 Nydia Velázquez D NY-07 Ranking Member: Small Business
54 Bennie Thompson D MS-02 April 13, 1993 12th term Ranking Member: Homeland Security
55 Sam Farr D CA-20 June 8, 1993 12th term
56 Frank Lucas R OK-03 May 10, 1994 12th term ??
57 Lloyd Doggett D TX-35 January 3, 1995 11th term
58 Mike Doyle D PA-14
59 Chaka Fattah D PA-02
60 Rodney Frelinghuysen R NJ-11
61 Sheila Jackson-Lee D TX-18
62 Walter B. Jones R NC-03
63 Frank LoBiondo R NJ-02
64 Zoe Lofgren D CA-19
65 Mac Thornberry R TX-13 Chair: Armed Services
66 Ed Whitfield R KY-01
67 Elijah Cummings D MD-07 April 16, 1996 11th term Ranking Member: Oversight and Government Reform
68 Earl Blumenauer D OR-03 May 21, 1996 11th term
69 Robert Aderholt R AL-04 January 3, 1997 10th term
70 Kevin Brady R TX-08
71 Danny Davis D IL-07
72 Diana DeGette D CO-01
73 Kay Granger R TX-12
74 Rubén Hinojosa D TX-15
75 Ron Kind D WI-03
76 Jim McGovern D MA-02
77 Bill Pascrell D NJ-09
78 Joe Pitts R PA-16
79 Loretta Sanchez D CA-46
80 Pete Sessions R TX-32 Chair: Rules
81 Brad Sherman D CA-30
82 John Shimkus R IL-15
83 Adam Smith D WA-09 Ranking Member: Armed Services
84 Gregory Meeks D NY-05 February 3, 1998 10th term
85 Lois Capps D CA-24 March 10, 1998
86 Barbara Lee D CA-13 April 7, 1998
87 Robert Brady D PA-01 May 19, 1998 Ranking Member: House Administration
88 Steve Chabot R OH-01 January 3, 2011
Previous service, 1995–2009.[2] 10th term*
89 Mike Capuano D MA-07 January 3, 1999 09th term
90 Joe Crowley D NY-14
91 John Larson D CT-01
92 Grace Napolitano D CA-32
93 Paul Ryan R WI-01 Chair: Ways and Means; Speaker of the House (beginning Oct. 29, 2015)
94 Jan Schakowsky D IL-09
95 Mike Simpson R ID-02
96 Mike Thompson D CA-05
97 Greg Walden R OR-02
98 William Lacy Clay D MO-01 January 3, 2001 08th term
99 Ander Crenshaw R FL-04
100 John Culberson R TX-07
101 Susan Davis D CA-53
102 Sam Graves R MO-06 Chair: Small Business
103 Mike Honda D CA-15
104 Steve Israel D NY-03
105 Darrell Issa R CA-49
106 James Langevin D RI-02
107 Rick Larsen D WA-02
108 Betty McCollum D MN-04
109 Adam Schiff D CA-28 Ranking Member: Intelligence
110 Patrick Tiberi R OH-12
111 Bill Shuster R PA-09 May 15, 2001 08th term Chair: Transportation and Infrastructure
112 Randy Forbes R VA-04 June 19, 2001 08th term
113 Stephen Lynch D MA-08 October 16, 2001 08th term
114 Jeff Miller R FL-01 Chair: Veterans’ Affairs
115 Joe Wilson R SC-02 December 18, 2001 08th term
116 Rob Bishop R UT-01 January 3, 2003 07th term Chair: Natural Resources
117 Marsha Blackburn R TN-07
118 Michael Burgess R TX-26
119 John Carter R TX-31
120 Tom Cole R OK-04
121 Mario Diaz-Balart R FL-25
122 Trent Franks R AZ-08
123 Scott Garrett R NJ-05
124 Raúl Grijalva D AZ-03 Ranking Member: Natural Resources
125 Jeb Hensarling R TX-05 Chair: Financial Services
126 Steve King R IA-04
127 John Kline R MN-02 Chair: Education and the Workforce
128 Candice Miller R MI-10 Chair: House Administration
129 Tim Murphy R PA-18
130 Devin Nunes R CA-22 Chair: Intelligence
131 Mike D. Rogers R AL-03
132 Dutch Ruppersberger D MD-02
133 Tim Ryan D OH-13
134 Linda Sánchez D CA-38 Ranking Member: Ethics
135 David Scott D GA-13
136 Michael Turner R OH-10
137 Chris Van Hollen D MD-08 Ranking Member: Budget
138 Randy Neugebauer R TX-19 June 3, 2003 07th term
139 G. K. Butterfield D NC-01 July 20, 2004 07th term
140 Charles Boustany R LA-03 January 3, 2005 06th term
141 Emanuel Cleaver D MO-05
142 Mike Conaway R TX-11 Chair: Agriculture
143 Jim Costa D CA-16
144 Henry Cuellar D TX-28
145 Charlie Dent R PA-15 Chair: Ethics
146 Jeff Fortenberry R NE-01
147 Virginia Foxx R NC-05
148 Louie Gohmert R TX-01
149 Al Green D TX-09
150 Brian Higgins D NY-26
151 Dan Lipinski D IL-03
152 Kenny Marchant R TX-24
153 Michael McCaul R TX-10 Chair: Homeland Security
154 Patrick McHenry R NC-10
155 Cathy McMorris Rodgers R WA-05 Republican Conference Chairwoman
156 Gwen Moore D WI-04
157 Ted Poe R TX-02
158 Tom Price R GA-06 Chair: Budget
159 Dave Reichert R WA-08
160 Debbie Wasserman Schultz D FL-23
161 Lynn Westmoreland R GA-03
162 Doris Matsui D CA-06 March 8, 2005 06th term
163 Albio Sires D NJ-08 November 7, 2006 06th term
164 Steve Pearce R NM-02 January 3, 2011
Previous service, 2003–2009.[2] 06th term*
165 Gus Bilirakis R FL-12 January 3, 2007 05th term
166 Vern Buchanan R FL-16
167 Kathy Castor D FL-14
168 Yvette D. Clarke D NY-09
169 Steve Cohen D TN-09
170 Joe Courtney D CT-02
171 Keith Ellison D MN-05
172 Hank Johnson D GA-04
173 Jim Jordan R OH-04
174 Doug Lamborn R CO-05
175 Dave Loebsack D IA-02
176 Kevin McCarthy R CA-23 Majority Leader
177 Jerry McNerney D CA-09
178 Ed Perlmutter D CO-07
179 Peter Roskam R IL-06
180 John Sarbanes D MD-03
181 Adrian Smith R NE-03
182 Tim Walz D MN-01
183 Peter Welch D VT
184 John Yarmuth D KY-03
185 Niki Tsongas D MA-03 October 16, 2007 05th term
186 Bob Latta R OH-05 December 11, 2007 05th term
187 Rob Wittman R VA-01
188 André Carson D IN-07 March 11, 2008 05th term
189 Jackie Speier D CA-14 April 8, 2008 05th term
190 Steve Scalise R LA-01 May 3, 2008 05th term Majority Whip
191 Donna Edwards D MD-04 June 17, 2008 05th term
192 Marcia Fudge D OH-11 November 18, 2008 05th term
193 Rick Nolan D MN-08 January 3, 2013
Previous service, 1975–1981.[2] 05th term*
194 Matt Salmon R AZ-05 January 3, 2013
Previous service, 1995–2001.[2] 05th term*
195 Mark Sanford R SC-01 May 7, 2013
Previous service, 1995–2001.[2] 05th term*
196 Jason Chaffetz R UT-03 January 3, 2009 04th term Chair: Oversight and Government Reform
197 Mike Coffman R CO-06
198 Gerry Connolly D VA-11
199 John C. Fleming R LA-04
200 Brett Guthrie R KY-02
201 Gregg Harper R MS-03
202 Jim Himes D CT-04
203 Duncan D. Hunter R CA-50
204 Lynn Jenkins R KS-02
205 Leonard Lance R NJ-07
206 Blaine Luetkemeyer R MO-03
207 Ben R. Luján D NM-03
208 Cynthia Lummis R WY
209 Tom McClintock R CA-04
210 Pete Olson R TX-22
211 Erik Paulsen R MN-03
212 Chellie Pingree D ME-01
213 Jared Polis D CO-02
214 Bill Posey R FL-08
215 Phil Roe R TN-01
216 Tom Rooney R FL-17
217 Aaron Schock R IL-18
218 Kurt Schrader D OR-05
219 Glenn Thompson R PA-05
220 Paul Tonko D NY-20
221 Michael Quigley D IL-05 April 7, 2009 04th term
222 Judy Chu D CA-27 July 14, 2009
223 John Garamendi D CA-03 November 3, 2009
224 Ted Deutch D FL-21 April 13, 2010
225 Tom Graves R GA-14 June 8, 2010
226 Tom Reed R NY-23 November 2, 2010
227 Marlin Stutzman R IN-03
228 Mike Fitzpatrick R PA-08 January 3, 2011
Previous service, 2005–2007.[2] 04th term*
229 Tim Walberg R MI-07 January 3, 2011
Previous service, 2007–2009.[2] 04th term*
230 Bill Foster D IL-11 January 3, 2013
Previous service, 2008–2011.[2] 04th term*
231 Justin Amash R MI-03 January 3, 2011 03rd term
232 Lou Barletta R PA-11
233 Karen Bass D CA-37
234 Dan Benishek R MI-01
235 Diane Black R TN-06
236 Mo Brooks R AL-05
237 Larry Bucshon R IN-08
238 John Carney D DE
239 David Cicilline D RI-01
240 Rick Crawford R AR-01
241 Jeff Denham R CA-10
242 Scott DesJarlais R TN-04
243 Sean Duffy R WI-07
244 Jeff Duncan R SC-03
245 Renee Ellmers R NC-02
246 Blake Farenthold R TX-27
247 Stephen Fincher R TN-08
248 Chuck Fleischmann R TN-03
249 Bill Flores R TX-17
250 Bob Gibbs R OH-17
251 Chris Gibson R NY-19
252 Paul Gosar R AZ-04
253 Trey Gowdy R SC-04
254 Morgan Griffith R VA-09
255 Michael Grimm R NY-11
256 Richard Hanna R NY-22
257 Andy Harris R MD-01
258 Vicky Hartzler R MO-04
259 Joe Heck R NV-03
260 Jaime Herrera Beutler R WA-03
261 Tim Huelskamp R KS-01
262 Bill Huizenga R MI-02
263 Randy Hultgren R IL-14
264 Robert Hurt R VA-05
265 Bill Johnson R OH-06
266 Bill Keating D MA-09
267 Mike Kelly R PA-03
268 Adam Kinzinger R IL-16
269 Raúl Labrador R ID-01
270 Billy Long R MO-07
271 Tom Marino R PA-10
272 David McKinley R WV-01
273 Pat Meehan R PA-07
274 Mick Mulvaney R SC-05
275 Kristi Noem R SD
276 Rich Nugent R FL-11
277 Alan Nunnelee R MS-01
278 Steven Palazzo R MS-04
279 Mike Pompeo R KS-04
280 Jim Renacci R OH-16
281 Reid Ribble R WI-08
282 Cedric Richmond D LA-02
283 Scott Rigell R VA-02
284 Martha Roby R AL-02
285 Todd Rokita R IN-04
286 Dennis Ross R FL-15
287 David Schweikert R AZ-06
288 Austin Scott R GA-08
289 Terri Sewell D AL-07
290 Steve Stivers R OH-15
291 Scott Tipton R CO-03
292 Daniel Webster R FL-10
293 Frederica Wilson D FL-24
294 Steve Womack R AR-03
295 Rob Woodall R GA-07
296 Kevin Yoder R KS-03
297 Todd Young R IN-09
298 Janice Hahn D CA-44 July 12, 2011 03rd term
299 Mark Amodei R NV-02 September 13, 2011 03rd term
300 Suzanne Bonamici D OR-01 January 31, 2012 03rd term
301 Suzan DelBene D WA-01 November 6, 2012 03rd term
302 Thomas Massie R KY-04
303 Donald Payne, Jr. D NY-10
304 Alan Grayson D FL-09 January 3, 2013
Previous service, 2009–2011.[2] 03rd term*
305 Ann Kirkpatrick D AZ-01 January 3, 2013 03rd term*
306 Dina Titus D NV-01
307 Andy Barr R KY-06
308 Joyce Beatty D OH-03
309 Ami Bera D CA-07
310 Jim Bridenstine R OK-01
311 Susan Brooks R IN-05
312 Julia Brownley D CA-26
313 Cheri Bustos D IL-17
314 Tony Cardenas D CA-29
315 Matt Cartwright D PA-17
316 Joaquin Castro D TX-20
317 Chris Collins R NY-27
318 Doug Collins R GA-09
319 Paul Cook R CA-08
320 Kevin Cramer R ND
321 Rodney Davis R IL-13
322 John Delaney D MD-06
323 Ron DeSantis R FL-06
324 Tammy Duckworth D IL-08
325 Elizabeth Esty D CT-05
326 Lois Frankel D FL-22
327 Tulsi Gabbard D HI-02
328 Dennis Heck D WA-10
329 George Holding R NC-13
330 Richard Hudson R NC-08
331 Jared Huffman D CA-02
332 Hakeem Jeffries D NY-08
333 David Joyce R OH-14
334 Joseph Kennedy III D MA-04
335 Dan Kildee D MI-05
336 Derek Kilmer D WA-06
337 Ann McLane Kuster D NH-02
338 Doug LaMalfa R CA-01
339 Alan Lowenthal D CA-47
340 Michelle Lujan Grisham D NM-01
341 Sean Patrick Maloney D NY-18
342 Mark Meadows R NC-11
343 Grace Meng D NY-06
344 Luke Messer R IN-06
345 Markwayne Mullin R OK-02
346 Patrick Murphy D FL-18
347 Beto O’Rourke D TX-16
348 Scott Perry R PA-04
349 Scott Peters D CA-52
350 Robert Pittenger R NC-09
351 Mark Pocan D WI-02
352 Tom Rice R SC-07
353 Keith Rothfus R PA-12
354 Raul Ruiz D CA-36
355 Kyrsten Sinema D AZ-09
356 Chris Stewart R UT-02
357 Eric Swalwell D CA-15
358 Mark Takano D CA-41
359 David Valadao R CA-21
360 Juan Vargas D CA-51
361 Marc Veasey D TX-33
362 Filemon Vela D TX-34
363 Ann Wagner R MO-02
364 Jackie Walorski R IN-02
365 Randy Weber R TX-14
366 Brad Wenstrup R OH-02
367 Roger Williams R TX-25
368 Ted Yoho R FL-03
369 Robin Kelly D IL-02 April 9, 2013 02nd term
370 Jason Smith R MO-08 June 4, 2013 02nd term
371 Katherine Clark D MA-05 December 10, 2013 02nd term
372 Bradley Byrne R AL-01 December 17, 2013 02nd term
373 David Jolly R FL-13 March 11, 2014 02nd term
374 Curt Clawson R FL-19 June 24, 2014 02nd term
375 Alma Adams D NC-12 November 4, 2014 02nd term
376 Dave Brat R VA-07
377 Donald Norcross D NJ-01
378 Robert Dold R IL-10 January 3, 2015
Previous service, 2011–2013.[2] 02nd term*
379 Frank Guinta R NH-01
380 Ralph Abraham R LA-05 January 3, 2015 01st term
381 Pete Aguilar D CA-31
382 Rick W. Allen R GA-12
383 Brad Ashford D NE-02
384 Brian Babin R TX-36
385 Don Beyer D VA-08
386 Mike Bishop R MI-08
387 Rod Blum R IA-01
388 Mike Bost R IL-12
389 Brendan F. Boyle D PA-13
390 Ken Buck R CO-04
391 Buddy Carter R GA-01
392 Barbara Comstock R VA-10
393 Ryan Costello R PA-06
394 Carlos Curbelo R FL-26
395 Mark DeSaulnier D CA-11
396 Debbie Dingell D MI-12
397 Tom Emmer R MN-06
398 Ruben Gallego D AZ-07
399 Gwen Graham D FL-02
400 Garret Graves R LA-06
401 Glenn Grothman R WI-06
402 Cresent Hardy R NV-04
403 Jody Hice R GA-10
404 French Hill R AR-02
405 Will Hurd R TX-23
406 Evan Jenkins R WV-03
407 John Katko R NY-24
408 Steve Knight R CA-25
409 Brenda Lawrence D MI-14
410 Ted Lieu D CA-33
411 Barry Loudermilk R GA-11
412 Mia Love R UT-04
413 Tom MacArthur R NJ-03
414 Martha McSally R AZ-02
415 John Moolenaar R MI-04
416 Alex Mooney R WV-02
417 Seth Moulton D MA-06
418 Dan Newhouse R WA-04
419 Gary Palmer R AL-06
420 Bruce Poliquin R ME-02
421 John Ratcliffe R TX-04
422 Kathleen Rice D NY-04
423 David Rouzer R NC-07
424 Steve Russell R OK-05
425 Elise Stefanik R NY-21
426 Mark Takai D HI-01
427 Norma Torres D CA-35
428 David Trott R MI-11
429 Mark Walker R NC-06
430 Mimi Walters R CA-45
431 Bonnie Watson Coleman D NJ-12
432 Bruce Westerman R AR-04
433 David Young R IA-03
434 Lee Zeldin R NY-01
435 Ryan Zinke R MT
Dan Donovan R NY-11 May 5, 2015
Trent Kelly R MS-01 June 2, 2015
Darin LaHood R IL-18 September 10, 2015
Warren Davidson R OH-08 June 7, 2016
Colleen Hanabusa D HI-01 November 8, 2016
Previous service, 2011–2015.
James Comer R KY-01 November 8, 2016
Dwight Evans D PA-02
Rid ourselves of the polarized failed system. Power of voting is most important.

The child like behavior of the present congress particularly Democrats is the
most embarrassing to the total Country world wide.

We need to remove all that have the nerve to BOYCOTT our newly elected president.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 5, 2017
Reply

WHY MADE IN AMERICA:

It is very important to create jobs in America,

Beyond creating jobs, the concern for higher prices.

Included in higher prices, consider Quality, with quantity.

What we do not see addressed is intentional sabotage.

Example, AIR BAGS as a safety issue, an important one.

The fact that such shrapnel is in air bags, fails inspections,

or it is an intentional act of sabotage, which is never covered

by the media, nor any warning of the cases of such.

In America problems of sabotage of such things as Police

vehicles. They have to be continually inspected in production

because of the number of sabotage events of the past. Again

not much investigation goes into such.

You will find that military equipment, vehicles, and WEAPONS

should definitely be made in AMERICA only.

Next is the fact the many government offices and communication

systems have been out-sourced, we never can understand the foreigner

on the other END, but no politician will tell you that it is a mistake to

give up tax payer American jobs to foreign agencies & Country’s.

BUT look at the data they get, and the hacking that happens.

Americans realize the embedded and polarized way of dloing

business as usual is a failed system, if you can not comply with

wishes of the American people, start packing, you are on your

home. WE SAY GOOD BYE, THANK YOU FOR YOUR PAST SERVICE

BUT WE ARE MOVING ON.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 8, 2017
Reply

Inside America’s powerful Israel lobby:
That which has destroyed the American economy,
drove our infrastructure to the mess it is in.

Drove medical cost beyond affordability.

Drove the illegal drug trade into the biggest
profit business in America.

Pushed our education system to the worst of
the civilized world.

Out-sourced our businesses and jobs.

Taken our riches to off shore accounts, all for
the top 2% Zionist population of America.

Both parties bow to AIPAC, and agree to dispute
any other issue on the table.

They make a mockery of the Trump presidency,
and our democracy.

Stand with our elected president to bring back
AMERICA, then make it GREAT AGAIN !! A topic
no MEDIA will cover, any attempt is censored or
KILLED.

Inside America’s powerful Israel lobby:

In some form.AIPAC, whose own literature notes that it has been described by the New York Times as “the
most important organization affecting America’s relationship with Israel,” has been highly successful in building strong relationships with both U.S. political parties. This year’s conference was attended by everyone from Vice President Dick Cheney to Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama (and other 2008 presidential contenders), as well as former CIA director James Woolsey. Leaders from Congress were there, as were numerous officials from the State Department and White House.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has for some time been pushing for such efforts, and in a closed-door briefing during the conference he said that they could prove fatal to Iran: “Fewer and fewer companies will enter Iran. More and more will leave. Investment dollars and the technology it buys will dry up. The lifeline of a hated regime will be cut, its future imperiled.”

In addition to the many panels at the conference, which often felt akin to pep rallies, delegates also attended “lobbying labs,” where AIPAC staff schooled them on how to effectively persuade their congressional representatives to follow AIPAC policies. These sessions were not open to the media, nor even mentioned on the schedule of events distributed to members of the press. But AIPAC leaders repeatedly urged delegates to attend them. And on Tuesday, the organization deployed its army of lobbyists to push for new sanctions against Iran, which are contained in a new bill called the Iran Counter-Proliferation Act, introduced by Democrat Tom Lantos and Republican Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, the ranking members of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.

When the thousands of lobbyists descended on Capitol Hill, they were greeted by nearly every U.S. senator and more than half the members of the House of Representatives — approximately 500 meetings were held between AIPAC representatives and members of Congress on Tuesday alone. In addition to pushing for the sanctions plan, the goal was to showcase the strength of AIPAC and establish more ties for future communication and lobbying.

The AIPAC activists were aided in their mission by some members of Congress themselves, who advised them how to reach out to their colleagues.

We will never be great again until the occupation in Washington, DC Congress must be cleaned up, the corruption must be driven out, the treason involved must be prosecuted.

Will I live to see it. Most likely not, I’m a target to be silenced. I gladly will give my life if it helps make America Great again for our next family generations. The love of our lives.

We also hope to see an end to the violations of human rights that are violated every day by Israel.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 8, 2017
Reply

IGNORANCE on the BENCH:

It stands to reason that the President has the responsibility to keep
all Americans safe in America.

He knows that not all Muslims are terrorist, yet all terrorist are
Muslim . That alone would give him cause for stronger vetting of
immigrants coming to America.

Foreign people do not have constitutional rights in America, only
citizens enjoy such rights.

Judges certainly should not have any duty or right to interfere,
when they do not have the access to CLASSIFIED information
as the President has, nor should they have such.

The political obstruct we see is going to come back & BITE THE
DEMOCRATS IN THE ASS !!

Allen D. Post
February 9, 2017
Reply

Democrat-ish !

ish–Defined.:

1. Slang term often used to replace “shit.” Derived from the process of editing the vocals of rap-songs by revershing the curse words so said …

2. Oh–ish: unfavorable, disliked, unwanted.

3. ( babyish; girlish; mulish); Like Elizabeth . Wine-ish..

4. “Suffix indicating vagueness”

5. containing words that may be offensive !

NOW !! Dam it, we have to build a wailing wall in America for the Democrats
and their supporters, and partners in the corruption they are so embedded with.

Please voter them ALL out of office, what an embarrassment they are for
AMERICA.

Myself and several friends were Democrats. NOT from now on !

We prefer to be safe, rather then sorry !

Allen D. Post
February 12, 2017
Reply

Elizabeth Warren Is the Surprising Israel Hawk

Elizabeth Warren Defends Israeli Shelling of Gaza Schools, Hospitals …
;
‘Beholden to AIPAC’ — progressive senators Warren, Murphy,

Brown.

“Oh, look who’s making goo-goo eyes at Bebe? Elizabeth Warren, the darling of the Liberal Left. I like to trot out photos like these to try and wake up all the dum-dums who think that the Zionists are all Republican. Guess what folks – the Zionists OWN both parties. Lock, stock and barrel. DEAL with it!” Exposing Rothschild Khazarian Mafia Stooge Elizabeth Warren and her Zionist Agenda.

USA Aid to Israel Totals $233.7 billion, In return for the Millions given to the candidates committed to Israel, which of course is not in the interest of the American People.

Congress waste Billions building a Fascist Zionist regime in the Middle East , while all areas of America have been deteriorating. There is NOTHING about ISRAEL that
represents Democracy.

The BDS movement , Boycott, Divest, and Sanction is growing at a rapid pace in America. The 2018 Elections will show that any candidate accepting such campaign
funds or that support the atrocities of Israel, will be voted against . Call it the Campaign of America & Americans FIRST. The chosen people of AMERICA.

Anti-Semitic—Hell no .. PRO–AMERICAN–Hell Yes..

The give away by congress to Israel, would have built a wall around America twice. Instead we have illegal walls pushing out Palestine, Christians holy land for
2000 years. Now being completely destroyed..

Elizabeth Warren going the same root as Hillary Clinton, how-ever will be beaten in the primaries.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 22, 2017
Reply

Asians Now Outpace Mexicans

Asians Now Outpace Mexicans In Terms of Undocumented Growth
Chinese, South Koreans, and Indians among the fastest-growing segments of undocumented immigrants.

Someone tell Donald Trump that he’s picking on the wrong immigrants. Turns out that, since 2000, unauthorized immigration from Asia has grown at rates much faster than from Mexico and Central America. That’s according to a new report by the Migration Policy Institute. So Trump will need to amend his ideas for “securing our nation’s borders.”Asian criminal activity has grown along with the number of illegals.”

Ronald L. Waldron
February 25, 2017
Reply

WHAT DEMOCRATS MUST DO !!

Before Democrats can recover any trust of the people, they need to
accept the fact that they lost the Election.

The people voted against the polarized system they represent.
The people voted against the corruption with-in congress.

The Democrats need to clean-up the corruption with-in their own
party first. Of course some will call that anti-Semitic, when in reality
it is anti-Zionist. Start with campaign financing.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 26, 2017
Reply

Developers:

Buffalo New York area is the fastest growing area of the North East.

Taking 219 south, you will find the most beautiful nature you can find.

Salamanca,, the only city on an Indian Reservation,has become a

depressed area, with the most reasonable priced real estate in the

Nation.

With the Allegany State Park, Holiday Valley resort area, , Kinzua

Lake & Dam., River & streams, unbelievable views from the surrounding

mountains, Investment here would be a HOME-RUN.

Make our Native Americans part of making America great again.

Vacationing, and recreation year round would be “FUNTASTIC”

Ronald L. Waldron
February 26, 2017
Reply

MEDIA AND THE POLARIZED DEMOCRATS PARTNERSHIP

The agreement, stay silent on the true issues facing our Nation.

Regarding foreign policies that have destroyed AMERICA,

The Zionist syndicate, and the control of the Democrat party,

and many Republicans that now fear prosecution for the crimes

involved..

We want evidence of LAW & ORDER in Washington, DC first.

The only media that may do journalism of such may well be

FOX. More likely , the guardian, BBC, or al jazeera will

step up. Look at the amount of assassination of journalist

during Iraq false WMD etc.

President Trump is our only hope to expose the corrupt system,

and who’s who to go after.

What can we do. Do not reelect any Democrat.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 26, 2017
Reply

MEDIA–President Trump is absolutely correct.

One of our worst enemies, EDITORS CENSORSHIP by

order of ownership. (Research it Yourselves)

Sumner Redstone, is the majority owner and chairman of the National Amusements chain, through which he controls the US TV stations CBS, MTV, Showtime, Nickelodeon and BET, among others, the film studio Paramount Pictures, various publishing houses and 1,500 movie screens across the United States, the UK, Latin America and Russia.In his most serious business acquisition, he engineered a hostile takeover of the Viacom media company in 1987.

Who Owns the Media?
Massive corporations dominate the U.S. media landscape. Through a history of mergers and acquisitions, these companies have concentrated their control over what we see, hear and read. In many cases, these companies control everything from initial production to final distribution. In the interactive charts below we reveal who owns what.

TV and Radio

Broadcasters make billions in profits while using the public airwaves for free. In return, they are supposed to provide programming that fulfills community needs. Instead, lobbyists have successfully fought to make it easier for broadcast companies to gobble up even more free airspace while doing less to serve the public.

Take Action to end the big broadcast swindle.

Cable and Telecommunications

Access to high-speed Internet service — also known as broadband — has become a basic public necessity, just like water or electricity.

Yet despite its importance, broadband access in the United States is far from universal. Millions of Americans still stand on the wrong side of the “digital divide,” unable to tap into the political, economic and social resources of the Web. Meanwhile, cable and phone companies — which hold virtual monopolies over the infrastructure of the Internet — often refuse to build out high-speed broadband to regions that need it most, and actively seek to block communities from seeking their own broadband solutions.

Take Action to stop their shenanigans.

Print

onsolidation has contributed to tough times for the newspaper industry. When the industry was swimming in profits in the 1990s, big media companies used 14–27 percent profit margins to buy up other properties rather than invest in the quality of their existing products or innovate for the future. Now they want to make it possible for a given company to own a newspaper and a broadcast station in the same market.

Take Action to save the print industry from itself.

Internet

Giant companies like Apple, Facebook and Google are slowly reconstituting the Internet’s walled gardens of old. As these companies try to steer us to their increasingly closed versions of the Internet — and to marketers who benefit from mining our personal information — we must fight for policies that protect our rights as Internet users.

Take Action to stand up for your online rights.

Ronald L. Waldron
February 28, 2017
Reply

t’s unbelievable.

The Hollywood Elite and the liberal mainstream media are relentlessly attacking our president once again! They will do just about anything to tear down President Trump at every opportunity.

We cannot let the Democrats and their allies in liberal Hollywood and the media win,.

President Trump and Senate conservatives are working hard for the American people and they need to know that you have their backs.

Show that you stand with President Trump and our conservative team:

Fight for America, help make America Great Again !

We have less than 30 hours left. We need you to fight back now.

Will you take a stand against the Far Left and show that you stand with President Trump and our Republican majority today?

Fight for America, help make America Great Again !

Stand with President Trump and our conservative team:

Ronald L. Waldron
February 28, 2017
Reply

DEMOCRATS ACTIONS, AN EMBARRASSMENT TO AMERICA:.

The most disgusting display of ignorance by all
Democrats at the President’s address to congress.

I hope you watched. Ugly Nancy, Ugly Liz, the
stupid white dress of the out of touch female
democrats, looked utterly ridiculous.

Who to hell voted them into office. The lobbies
of foreign countries campaign funds, and the MEDIA
owned by the same lobbyist.

Sick enough for you true Americas, look at the
duel citizenship politicians that do not have
America’s interest as their AGENDA.

It is time to rebuild America, and our system of
government. The corruption is so evident in
politics, complete reform is necessary.

Under our newly elected President, Law & Order
will prevail.

We can help at the polls. Do not vote for anyone that
does not show the respect for our President that he
certainly deserves.

There is nothing for Donald Trump to gain, but
success for America. There is nothing he needs,
or ask for. Except to make America Great again.

No more give away’s, no more building of
nations at our expense. Democrats have left
behind 47 Million Americans living in poverty.

Broken borders, homeless people & Veterans,
wore out infrastructure, high crime & drug use.

COME on DO ANY OF THEM DESERVE
to be in office ??

Ronald L. Waldron
March 2, 2017
Reply

“INVESTIGATIONS INTO RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE:”

The first indication of Russian interference was the hacking done to the
Democrats regarding Hillary’s campaign.

As I remember the primaries, the contest between Hillary and Bernie
Sanders became as contentious as Clinton and Trump.

My questions are was any one from the Sanders campaign in contact
with Russian diplomats at that time. Were there any Democrats connected to either campaign in contact with Russian people with-in such time frame.
Lets not leave this all as a partisan issue.

The reports from our intelligence community should include all contacts with
any American representative, and the reasoning behind such contact.

The corrupt can of worns in Washing ton is not limited to one side of the isle.

Allen D. Post
March 2, 2017
Reply

WE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE REQUEST TREASON CHARGES:

WE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE REQUEST TREASON CHARGES against
the democrats that have spent billions of tax-payer money in the middle
east, and on no bid contracts with special interest contractors on wars
created from false foreign intelligence.

WE the people need to petition the justice department for investigation
into the corruption in congress and foreign special interest groups and
campaign financing, and paid trips & vacations as payment.

The violations of ethics, integrity, and obligations to America & Americans.

We Elected Donald Trump to fight against the polarized & corrupt
congress that for the last sixty years have given all away to foreign
interest demands.

We are aware, and voted for change. We will fight for our elected
President and his administration tooth & nail. We need to rid
ourselves of this ridiculous MESS the Democrats have made of
our goverment..

Congress has a rating of less than 40%, the media less then that.

Trumps favorable rating is higher, and gaining much to the dismay of the
corrupt. They know if they can not stop him now, THEY WILL BE
BEHIND BARS SOON.

PROSECUTE CONGRESSIONAL CORRUPTION NOW !

Lefty Wright
March 2, 2017
Reply

HERE WE GO BUSINESS AS USUAL

No matter what the issue, there is compliance between parties, not
to get a DAM THING done for AMERICA or AMERICANS.

Bring in the immigrants for slave labor, prior to building an efficient
economy for Americans.

Continue to send $3 Billion TAX PAYER Dollars to ISRAEL every year ++
, Then go another 6 trillion in debt defending their atrocities,Then prosecute any one that gets angry over it for antisemitism , when in reality no one is angry with the Jewish people, that don”t benefit a dime from the $3 Billion.
Nothing goes toward the poverty they live in in ISRAEL.

The total population of Israel 2017 is 8,325,000..

Of New York State 19 Million
Of Fla. 19 Million

There are nine USA States that have 10 million or more in
population.

Not one USA State gets $3 Billion a year, every year from the Federal Government.

LOOK at what we don’t have here in America any more, and who to hell
other then the Democrats & special Interest groups of theirs have SHOOK
US DOWN. IT IS COMPLETE CORRUPT FRAUD & LARCENY.

WHO gets audited, no government agency, or the FED.

President Trump is working on every promise made.to America.

LAW & ORDER IS COMING.

President Trump, name a special prosecutor, to prosecute Hillary.

FIGHT BACK !!

What are the connections of Schumer to Israel & AIPAC, and black flag cover-ups.

What are Nancy Pelosi’, fourth-richest Californian , connections to AIPAC & Israel.

Lefty Wright
March 6, 2017
Reply

SANCTIONS ON ISRAEL:

WATCH:

No one can deny that the AIPAC lobby with chapters in every State has
any American interest. It is strictly a foreign interest lobby. Look at the
complete history of such.

No one can deny the illegal occupations, the Human rights violations, the
war crimes and false intelligence of WMD for Iraq. No one can justify
calling Israel a democracy. Nothing about Israel represents democracy as
we know it.

The influence that AIPAC, and foreign interest money financing campaigns
of a majority of congress and the accepting of such is nothing more then
treason, when it is so detrimental for the American people.

$3 Billion a year guaranteed from American tax payers, that not a dime goes
toward the poverty of its own people.

Nothing at all as the American people are lead to believe it is for.

We feel, not only should the present Sanctions be enforced. We know
that Boycott, Divestment, and sanctions will become very necessary
before Mr. Zionist himself Netanyahu will realize how serious America
is about a Peace agreement, and how much we support the Jewish
people, but not the Zionist regime of Israel.

There is no reason for any poverty to exist, just the profits from legal & illegal
drugs alone would support all if it were not used for the multiple Black Flag
operations against their neighbors & America.

Government blaming Mexico for the illegal Drug trade is a real stretch,
the open border has been very beneficial to a much larger syndicate.

Why should the facts be covered up, by making anything related to the true
issues made classified or silenced even the Media fails on the TOPIC.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 15, 2017
Reply

Congrats, your article has been published!
Share it with your other networks to broaden your reach.

Share on FacebookShare on Twitter
How Wire tap is easily conducted.
Edit article
Published on March 15, 2017
LikeHow Wire tap is easily conducted.0Comment0ShareShare How Wire tap is easily conducted.0
Ronald Waldron
Ronald Waldron
—
proof of monitoring. Not sent by server

How Wire tap is easily conducted.

Trash

x

Ronald L. Waldron

11:51 AM (28 minutes ago)

to president, bcc: comments, bcc: Housh

If you would review a wire tap case and testimony before a grand juryin Chautauqua county, New York. How such can be conducted, was conducted

and can still be conducted, and information passed on. With out recorded.

Such information was not released to the Public. It was done by Law Enforcement

officers with the knowledge of higher officials.

There was sufficient testimony as how it was done, but no electronic

evidence available.

With acccess to the phone company equipment , and line can be monitored

even by a technician, and information passed on.

High tech of today, a tech can listen to any line any phone, reather he claims

trouble shooting, or just eves dropping.

n the Chautauqua County case officers were shone how to use the equipment

they did so, for the purpose of Drug enforcement, but also did so for political

reasons, listening to the Mayor of Lakewood etc.

The district Attorney at the time is now a County Judge.

Honorable John Ward

Ronald L. Waldron
March 16, 2017
Reply

Hypocrisy, condemning out-sourcing

Hypocrisy, condemning out-sourcing, when State & Federal
governments are most likely the biggest violators of eliminating
American jobs by out-sourcing. Especially for communications,
we have to speak to someone who can hardly speak English
or Spanish, when attempting to contact any office.of government.

Nothing gets done by either party for the American people, yet
they all can agree on sending Billions & Trillions to the Middle
East. All called payola for politicians, when it is killing America.

You can not name one that will stand up against it.

Remember it at election time. Yes, we need a third Party an
American Interest Party ONLY. LOBBY the same.

B.D.S. is gaining, thank you JESUS.

Ronald L. Waldron
March 19, 2017
Reply

Tax Exemption, a privilege, not a right.

My taxes should not support religious institutions or States.

They are not giving anything back to the community..

Every thing has a subsidy from government. Enough of it.

Allen D. Post
March 19, 2017
Reply

Right on Ronald

The highest amount of embezzlement is Church donations & Tithing’s.
simply because no one will prosecute them, The Church will accepts resignation
and they go else where to do the same..

The more the money, the more the internal budget, the bigger the building
the bigger the salary, Very small amount to the community.

No longer a need for tax exemption, churches turn away the homeless vets
quicker then the government or RED CROSS.

Allen

Lead-Foot
March 24, 2017
Reply

VETO EVERY BILL,

We have 2 million people in our group that supported Republicans and your campaign.

The next elections will be very important for republicans, we better see different candidates in the primaries.

IF you fail to VETO EVERY BILL, AND SPENDING BILL INTRODUCED BY DEMOCRATS, you will lose our support.

No co-operation for any of their special interest groups regardless.

Lead-Foot
March 25, 2017
Reply

The FEAR of JUDGE GORSUCH:

All the Democts have a real fear of JUDGE GORSUCH:!!

“When” not if, they are convicted of the corruption and Treason
charges. That will soon be the major topic by Media. The Democrats
know what the Judges decision will be if they take their cases
before the supreme Court. It will be strictly by the letter of the LAW.

The fear is very much justified.

We want active LAW & ORDER

Lead-Foot
March 30, 2017
Reply

DRAIN THE SWAMP

Black Flag operation by Democrats and AIPAC.
The whole idea of Russian interference to the degree the MEDIA, Owned
by Zionist, and the Democrats is a major intentional operation to take
the attention off DRAINING THE SWAMP of all rheir corruption, and who
is responsible for the down fall of America’s economy.

Religious leaders , past political figures, business leaders, Jimmy Carter,
Labor leaders, professors, Rabbi’s , Jewish organizations, Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Billy Graham, Law enforcement members, and military leaders have warned and reported to government leaders repeated over the last sixty years to no avail .

When it comes to Israel, every issue seems to become classified away from
the American people. Just how long have they been active in every faze of
our political, financial, media, and political elections.

ZIONIST AIPAC, a foreign interest lobby and syndicate has by financial
manipulation, after the stock market crash, gained control of the FED.,
Wall Street,all major media, congress, governors, and many mayors.

The heavy trafficking of Drugs, legal & illegal, human trafficking of young
girls, prostitution on all levels even for politicians, gambling, casinos,
gaming & ownership of sports teams & arenas. Billions from the commercials
on all TV channels.

Malls, Super markets, auto conglomerates, all driving the small businesses,
and family owned businesses out in the cold, While prices skyrocket.

That is the reality of the REAL SHARK TANK AMERICA faces.

The only opportunity we have is DONALD TRUMP and his promises,
is it any wonder that they are attacking with every force they can to
stop him, and we the people.

American people will always take the easy way out, and believe the
garbage that they are spreading,is not true, unverified , and propaganda
at the least.

The illegal monopolies they have developed by legal manipulation is
killing America. How many of our laws have been changed to benefit
them. Another example of congressional treason.

Look close at Zionism & Hitler, and how the Jewish Identity was stolen,
by Zionism.

Now consider how all of a sudden North Korea and its leader is becoming
the next Hitler, with America as the target, imagine being in a nuclear
death camp. How did they become nuclear, the same way China bought
our missile system. The same way Isis was conveniently ARMED.

What is on the horizon. Pay attention The only solution is to DRAIN
THE SWAMP.

I have lived and watched this development from 1943 until now.

America of the 50’s & 60’s was the America everyone loved, and
enjoyed life.

America today is a victim of syndicate greed for power, money, and
control. . No faith in GOD what so ever. THAT is ZIONISM.

There is no resemblance to a Democracy in Israel at ALL.

The attack will come to Washington,DC when congress is no longer needed
by Israel, or no longer accessible in Prison where they belong.

MAKE AMERICA “GREAT” AGAIN..NO MORE FOREIGN SPECIAL INTEREST

THEY HAVE CREATED A POLITICAL FIRE STORM AGAINST OUR
PRESIDENT.

NOW WE NEED TO FIGHT BACK ” FIGHT BACK TO WIN!!

Lead-Foot
March 30, 2017
Reply

Russian & Israeli partnership

Israeli-Russian Relations

he two countries will likely continue to cooperate, especially on the economic and military fronts, Anna Borshchevskaya

October 2016 will mark 25 years since Russia and Israel officially restored diplomatic relations after the Soviet Union severed them in 1967 following the Six Day War. New Israeli Ambassador to Russia Zvi Heifetz said in November 2015 that Russia and Israel plan to mark this anniversary “at the highest possible level,” as reported by the Interfax news agency. For his part, Russian President Vladimir Putin said the same month, “We are satisfied with our constructive partnership with Israel. Relations between our states have reached a high level.”

Indeed, Putin pursued improved ties with Israel since he came into office in March 2000 and the two countries have significantly improved ties on a number of fronts. Russian and Israeli officials hold meetings and telephone conversations on a regular basis and maintain multiple open channels of communication. The two countries have an agreement on visa-free tourist travel for their citizens. Israel is home to over a million immigrants from the former Soviet Union, which bolsters Russia’s ties to Israel. Russian is the third most popular language in Israel after Hebrew and English. Economic relations between the two countries have especially improved, exceeding $3 billion in 2014, a figure slightly higher than Russia’s trade with Egypt the same year. Military relations improved as well. Indeed, in late 2015, according to press reports, Israel sold ten search drones to Russia, despite Israel’s concerns about Russia’s military and political ties to Iran.

Several factors drove Putin’s policy toward Israel, particularly in his early years in office. One was the struggle with the breakaway republic of Chechnya in the North Caucasus, a struggle which began in the early 1990s, originally as a secular separatist movement that grew increasingly radical Islamist in nature in no small part due to Moscow’s heavy-handed policies and egregious human rights abuses. Putin has drawn parallels between Russia’s and Israel’s respective struggles against terrorism. Over the years, he has made this very comparison in meetings with many top Israeli officials. Ariel Sharon, a Russian speaker who formed a close personal bond with Putin, in November 2003 called the Russian leader “a true friend of Israel,” as reported by TSG IntelBrief. Israel was among the few countries that did not criticize Putin over his actions in Chechnya.

Another driver in Putin’s Israel policy involved his emphasis on developing economic ties in the Middle East. He has correspondingly pursued trade with Israel, such as high-tech trade in areas including nanotechnology. Overall, Russia-Israel trade grew to $1 billion annually by 2005 and more than tripled this amount by 2014, to approximately $3.5 billion. This figure is slightly higher than Russian-Egyptian trade in the same year. Over one million Russian-speakers from Russia live in Israel, which matters to the Kremlin. In terms of Russia’s domestic considerations, Putin also had to balance Russia’s policy toward Israel given Russia’s large Muslim and small Jewish population, the persistence of anti-Semitism, and the growth of anti-Muslim sentiment and concerns about terrorism.

Finally, Putin has sought a Russian role in the Middle East peace process, guided by hopes of replacing the West and of simply appearing important. Indeed, under Putin, Russia has grown increasingly assertive, seeking to make its imprint on the peace process since joining the Quartet more than a decade ago. In June 2012, Putin traveled to Israel, nine months before Barak Obama made his first visit as U.S. president. Meeting with Israeli president Shimon Peres in Jerusalem, Putin said, “It is in Russia’s national interest to provide peace and tranquility in the Middle East, peace and tranquility to the Israeli people. It is not by accident that the Soviet Union was among the initiators and supported the creation of the state of Israel,” according to a Kremlin transcript. Putin here conveniently left out Stalin’s quick policy reversal after Israel had aligned with the West.

Ron Waldron
April 1, 2017
Reply

Called Wasteful Spending: ( CORRUPTION)

How much wasteful spending:
US: $19,931,228,821,003 – The debt keeps growing‎ !!

This has been done over the last TWENTY FIVE years:

How much of it is the result of corruption. “ALL OF IT” !!

WHO, WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, & WHY. We need to add HOW ??

Richest in Washington, Lobbyist, then Congress.

Over 50% of our congress are rated as being Millionaires.

Special Interest groups. No bid contracts to connected companies

such as Halliburton, Black Water SE, and foreign Contractors.

The largest being AIPAC, a foreign interest Lobby “SYNDICATE”,

Biggest influence on congress, and our Department of Justice.

By FRAUD, DECEPTION, INSIDER INFORMATION-Wall Street,

check the pattern of Congressional Investments.

NO AUDIT OF THE FED. Since the 50’s by Dwight D. Eisenhower.

Globalization is part of the intent of many. World Bank, Trade,

energy and resources. POWER, CONTROL, World Dominance.

We need to have a stronger party, ALL natural born Americans

with American values, and MAKING AMERICA GREAT AGAIN.

Support our President that is fighting the system tooth & nail

to change the polarized system of corruption & greed .

America & Americans first.

The aim of the corrupt, is to keep battling on each issue,

while nothing gets done for USA, and legitimate Americans .

EACH AND EVERY VOTE CAST DOES MATTER. DO YOUR PART

AND VOTE RESPONSIBLY, Fight for what is right. ” THE RIGHT”

Ron Waldron
April 1, 2017
Reply

PUT WOMEN IN THEIR PLACE. BARE FOOT, PREGNANT, AND USING THEIR BROOM TO SWEEP THE FLOORS,

NOT FOR TRANSPORTATION !!!

April Fools !!

Lefty Wright
April 1, 2017
Reply

WE WERE DEMOCRATS

We never seen such a mess Pelosi and Schumer have made of the PARTY.

We can not see anyone with any integrity or ethical thinking voting for any

DEMOCRAT in the future, they have sold out the Country for several years.

They do nothing for the Country, only their foreign backers keep them in office.

We want to see a better America, and the Dam Dem’s do not represent such.

Join us and switch to make AMERICA GREAT AGAIN.

Lefty Wright

Ronald L. Waldron
April 8, 2017
Reply

WHY DOES THE USA GOVERNMENT IGNORE THE FOLLOWING:

The Impact of the Conflict on Children

2,150 Palestinian children and 134 Israeli children
have been killed since September 29, 2000.

Hover over each bar for exact numbers. Save chart as image.

“The majority of these [Palestinian] children were killed and injured while going about normal daily activities, such as going to school, playing, shopping, or simply being in their homes. Sixty-four percent of children killed during the first six months of 2003 died as a result of Israeli air and ground attacks, or from indiscriminate fire from Israeli soldiers.”

Ronald L. Waldron
May 9, 2017
Reply

RUN HILLARY RUN !!

“AWAY” or GO DIRECTLY

TO

JAIL !!

Ronald L. Waldron
May 11, 2017
Reply

Add your name – we MUST have an independent investigation into Trump and Russia

Inbox
x

DNC Rapid Response May 9 (2 days ago)

We need an independent investigation led by a special prosecutor Add your nam…

Ronald L. Waldron

11:57 AM (3 minutes ago)

to DNC

You are on a witch hunt at the cost of tax payers. We are more interested in ther corruption in congress, and the
treason between Aipac–Israel and our government. We are sick of the middle east foreign policies.

Ronald L. Waldron

11:59 AM (0 minutes ago)

to president, comments

Ronald L. Waldron
May 11, 2017
Reply

DRAIN THE SWAMP

It is up to the American people to DRAIN THE SWAMP.

The corruption in government rest with the Senate and House.

How to DRAIN the SWAMP is up to the American people.

That boils down to the following.

Do not vote for an incumbent.( Federal elections)

Demand campaign finance reform, no foreign Interest lobby funds
should be accepted by any candidate .

Israel is a foreign Country, is not a democracy. AIPAC Lobby is a
foreign interest lobby only, 60 year history proves such.

Do your home work, study the facts.

It has cost the American tax payers $3 BILLION a year in aid.
6 Trillion in unnecessary wars. Much more in corruption, Drugs,
Wall Street insiders, and Campaign funding & propaganda.
Control of 90% of media and other monopolies.

Anti-Corruption, Anti-foreign interest. Anti-Syndicate, Anti-Zionism,
pro Christianity. Does not constitute Antisemitism.

Ronald L. Waldron
May 14, 2017
Reply

Michele Obama

Michele Obama is the only person that could defeat Donald Trump in
2020, if she were to run.
How-ever, I doubt that she would consider a run after spending 8 yrs in
Washington. Witnessing the corrupt system with in a non functioning
congress. The power given to special interest lobbies, and failed
foreign policies. Creating congressional Treason, that the FBI under
the control of Home-land Security has failed to pursue to date.

Drain the swamp, ends up being a campaign slogan only.
Which many suspected from the beginning.

110 days of executive orders that don’t mean a dam in reality.

Making America great again, only amounts to making the rich,
richer, the poor poorer, and a death wish to the sick. More drugs
to kill off our young.

Read the next TWEET from TWEETIE, and laugh your butt
off with the rest.

Ronald Waldron
May 24, 2017
Reply

Judicial Watch: FBI Court Filing Reveals Grand Jury Targeted Hillary Clinton

APRIL 27, 2017
Email Print Text Size
Documents contain statement on subpoena given by FBI Assistant Director

Assigned to ‘counterintelligence and counterespionage matters’

Who supervised Clinton Investigation

(Washington, DC) — Judicial Watch today released new State Department documents including a declaration from FBI Special Agent E.W. Priestap, the supervisor of the agency’s investigation into Hillary Clinton’s email activities, stating that the former secretary of state was the subject of a grand jury investigation related to her BlackBerry email accounts.

The declaration was produced in response to Judicial Watch’s lawsuit seeking to force Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to take steps to “recover emails of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton” and other U.S. Department of State employees (Judicial Watch, Inc. v. Rex Tillerson (No. 1:15-cv-00785)). The lawsuit was originally filed against then-Secretary of State John Kerry. The Trump State Department filing includes details of the agency’s continuing refusal to refer the Clinton email issue to the Justice Department, as the law requires.

In the filing Priestap declares under penalty of perjury that the FBI “obtained Grand Jury subpoenas related to the Blackberry e-mail accounts, which produced no responsive materials, as the requested data was outside the retention time utilized by those providers.”

On April 30, 2015, Judicial Watch sued Kerry after the State Department failed to take action on a letter sent to Kerry “notifying him of the unlawful removal of the Clinton emails and requesting that he initiate enforcement action pursuant to the [Federal Records Act],” including working through the Attorney General to recover the emails.

After initially being dismissed by the district court, Judicial Watch’s lawsuit was revived on appeal by a decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit on December 27, 2016.

While at the State Department, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton conducted official government business using unsecured email server and email accounts. Her top aides and advisors also used non-“state.gov” email accounts to conduct official business. Clinton left office February 1, 2013.

“The FBI convened a grand jury to investigate Hillary Clinton in 2016. Why is this information being released only now?” said Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton. “And it is disturbing that the State Department, Justice Department and FBI are still trying to protect Hillary Clinton. President Trump needs to clean house at all these agencies.”

Ronald Waldron
May 24, 2017
Reply

International campaign is criminalizing criticism of Israel as ‘antisemitism’

﻿For two decades, some Israeli officials and Israel partisans have worked to embed a new, Israel-focused definition of antisemitism in institutions around the world, from international bodies and national governments to small college campuses in heartland America. This effort is now snowballing rapidly. As a result, advocacy for Palestinian rights is well on the way to being curtailed and even criminalized as “hate.”

The human cost of the conflict records photos and information for each person who has been killed in the ongoing violence.

Ambassador Nikki Haley brags about bullying UN for Israel

Starting in 2019, the U.S. will give Israel $38 billion over the next 10 years – $3.8 billion per year, which is $10.41 million per day

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is one of the world’s major sources of instability. Americans are directly connected to this conflict, and increasingly imperiled by its devastation.

It is the goal of If Americans Knew to provide full and accurate information on this critical issue, and on our power – and duty – to bring a resolution.

Please click on any statistic for the source and more information.

Statistics last updated April 24, 2017

Israeli and Palestinian Children Killed

September 29, 2000 – Present

134 Israeli children have been killed by Palestinians and 2,154 Palestinian children have been killed by Israelis since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information)

Israelis and Palestinians Killed

September 29, 2000 – Present

1,213 Israelis and at least 9,478 Palestinians have been killed since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information)

Israelis and Palestinians Injured

September 29, 2000 – Present

11,838 Israelis and 92,452 Palestinians have been injured since September 29, 2000. (View Sources & More Information.)

Daily U.S. Military Aid to Israel and the Palestinians

Fiscal Year 2013

During Fiscal Year 2016, the U.S. is providing Israel with at least $9.8 million per day in military aid and $0 in military aid to the Palestinians. (View Sources & More Information)

UN Resolutions Targeting Israel and the Palestinians

1955 – 1992

Israel has been targeted by at least 77 UN resolutions and the Palestinians have been targeted by 1. (View Sources & More Information)

Current Number of Political Prisoners and Detainees

0 Israelis are being held prisoner by Palestinians, while 6,500 Palestinians are currently imprisoned by Israel. (View Sources & More Information)

Demolitions of Israeli and Palestinian Homes

1967 – Present

0 Israeli homes have been demolished by Palestinians and at least 48,488 Palestinian homes have been demolished by Israel since 1967. (View Sources & More Information)

Israeli and Palestinian Unemployment Rates

The Israeli unemployment rate is 5.6%, while the Palestinian unemployment in the West Bank is 17.7% and 44% in Gaza. (View Sources & More Information)

Current Illegal Settlements on the Other’s Land

Israel currently has 261 Jewish-only settlements and ‘outposts’ built on confiscated Palestinian land. Palestinians do not have any settlements on Israeli land. (View Sources & More Information)

lefty Wright
September 7, 2017
Reply

Six Months no Senate Session..

Governor Andrew M. Cuomo:

Sir, why is it that the New York State Senate is the only State Senate in the Country
that takes six months in a row, June until January off.

No one we talk to was aware that happens every year. Nor do they agree with
their doing so.

Every one is happy with your performance, especially Western New York, many
people feel you are the candidate of choice to run for President 2020.

With all that NEEDS to be done in the State of New York, nothing will get done
or getting done all summer long. The approval rating is very low as it is,

I would think they would consider mid June to mid Sept off. WORK mid Sept.
to mid Oct. then off until January.

Of course it would also be more acceptable if the Senate President could
stay out of rehab.

It isn’t any surprise that New York State government is considered the most corrupt..

As we see it, these are the areas for attack in the future political arena when it
comes time to campaign.

I realize you are not at all familiar with who we are. BUT we consider our efforts
for President Obama and President Trump added considerably to their
campaigns. We were recognized by them for doing so.

Yours Respectfully;

Ronald L. Waldron

Your Moreland Commission was a great start toward draining the Swamp.

Lefty Wright
September 7, 2017
Reply

Hello All:
A friend just informed me of more censorship. His first amendment rights have been violated by having his post removed from
this very site. Just moments ago. He left a good-bye message. It was immediately denied, and removed.
A copy of such will be filed with other sites. That being Ronald L. Waldron. Most likely the same will happen to this mesage,

BUT, that will not stop the circulation.

Good Luck in the future. BUYER beware of the fascism all of us will soon be living under.

Lefty Wright
September 7, 2017
Reply

Mis- characterization of President Trump by Democrats, Media, AIPAC and some members of the Republican Party is more about what is between the lines.

We are seeing people who are fighting everything our President attempts to do, just to cause disruption. They know he fully intends to do all he possibly can do to fulfill the promises he make on the campaign trail..

They know he will get to “DRAINING THE SWAMP”, they know preparations are being developed to do so, that is their biggest fear, their corruption has gone on for so long, there is no hiding from it.

No longer can they brush off the true issues by calling them ” Conspiracy-Theory”.

The true issues have become so evident, you can not hide the TRUTH. My life work has been, and will continue to be one of exposing facts of political wrong doing. We have to get back to doing what is right for all.

America has to get back to being a shining light in the World, to be know for strength not as WAR MONGERS .

Moral values, ethics, integrity, and fair play is the life that matters..I’m not exposing any secrets in putting out what I’am when it all can be found on the internet. HERE it is. I.m a proud 32 degree Mason,

I hate seeing our Christian Holy land being destroyed

2000 years ago the filth and immoral conduct be came so prevalent, GOD exiled people out of Israel, for good reason. His children should never take it back by force. World War 11 saw his children murdered again.and identity stolen by a Zionist regime (Syndicate).

Now 60 + years later, our nation has become controlled by remnants of that same immorality. Movies, liberals, every filthy act broadcasted everywhere, demoralizing our youth, drugs sold every where, American history no longer taught, Books destroyed, Bibles rewritten,, Churches with the almighty dollar as their GOD.. Government of a foreign illegal occupier, and lobby AIPAC controlling our Media, Congress, Chain economy, OUR Country.

32° Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret

Originally the 32nd° was a Christian Order of knighthood like the Order of the Temple in the York Rite System, the object being to re-conquer the holy Land and plant the banner of Christendom once more on the ruined walls of Jerusalem. Today the degree teaches that the Freemason should ever be diligent in their war against the ancient enemies of humanity. They are taught to be lovers of wisdom and apostles of the notion of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity.

I have lived by such, and will die by such. ” 3-4 Million Brothers the same”

Sincerely;

Ronald L. Waldron

48 Hammond Street

Jamestown, NY 14701

Member of Frewsburg Lodge # 1147

Member of Jamestown Scottish Rite Consistory 32 .

Retired Police Officer.

I have spent the last 16 yrs fighting and writing about the issues, with no one paying attention.

I’m totally done right NOW. I have been monitored,censored, refused info by FBI, and Secret Service, on FOIL Twice.

Both political parties, and all major media sources have received copies of all I have written, no reply. Letters to Editors all over, all scrapped, shredded.

A member for 39 years, of a great fraternity, I will continue a Silent service to God & mankind. GOOD-BYE !!

I will continue.my life retired.

UNITED WE STAND

USA

PEACE FOR ALL

For the love of God, Country, Family, and Future Generations of Man Kind, Please consider doing ALL you can to insure a greater tomorrow for ALL REGARDLESS of Race, Sex, Religion. I pray that we can once again believe in EACH OTHER , Respect, for-give, and LOVE Each Other.

ALL MAIN MEDIA HAS BECOME BIAS, WHAT A SHAME FOR AMERICA

WHAT A Mis- characterization of our president.

America we need to revert to ALTERNATIVE NEWS FOR TRUTH and
respect for both sides. ALL main line media has become VERY Biased .

Washington, D.C. — This year’s edition of CREW’s Most Corrupt Members of Congress report contained both familiar faces and brand-new entrants to the congressional hall of shame, but a few transgressors stood out from the pack. CREW’s voters chose two House members, Reps. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) and Vern Buchanan (R-FL), whose conduct has spawned multiple investigations, as well as Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY), to share the title of the Most Corrupt Members of Congress.
MOST CORRUPT IN CONGRESS:

MICH McConnell, Michele Bachmann, and Vern Buchanan. Many, Many more are corrupt.

Special interest puppets.

Lefty Wright
September 7, 2017
Reply

Following Charlottesville,

Following Charlottesville, the fervently pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League (ADL) reaped a 1,000% spike in donations from people opposed to racism.

The problem, of course, is that the ADL enables Israeli racism against Palestinians and others. We have posted an article about this: After Charlottesville, racist organization ADL? sees 1000% spike in ?anti-racism? donations

We also created an image post about it (see it on Facebook and Twitter), which directs people to the article:

We hope you’ll share this with others through email and social media!

Below are other articles we’ve recently published on our blog:

These ?social issues? videos get billions of views ? here?s what they?re not telling by Alison Weir
?Religious freedom? nominee Sam Brownback and the commission?s dirty little secret by Kathryn Shihada
Brownback?s Pro-Israel Rolodex Spells Trouble for Palestinians by Kathryn Shihada
Tillerson Caves, Will Appoint Special Anti-Semitism Envoy Who Monitors Criticism of Israel by Alison Weir
AIPAC video describes its decades-long role in creating US laws against BDS [VIDEO]
As always, thank you for your support! Your contributions are essential to our work to give Americans the facts on Palestine and to counter the misinformation of the Israel lobby.

Gratefully,

Alison Weir

Lefty Wright
September 7, 2017
Reply

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW:

This site as you know has been changed. It was Fighting Terrorism at Home & Abroad–Peace Actions. Such
was true until Sept 3 Td.. Now it is this site of PEACE ACTION. All postings from May-17 until Sept.17 were
removed. Approximately 25 postings from Ronald L. Waldron, Also no posting by him are accepted.
Such is certainly CENSORSHIP. Censorship of the true issues we are facing.
American’s must start paying attention to the actions for foreign interest. Russia is not the interference
in our Election process. It is Israel and its lobby AIPAC. They own & control the Media and Congress.

WATCH_OUT. The reality of Fascism is here in America to stay until the coming revolution..

Lefty Wright
September 18, 2017
Reply

NY State Senator John J. Flanagan sick from alcoholism :

ALBANY — The Republican leader of the State Senate, John J. Flanagan, announced on Sunday that he had sought help for an alcohol problem after realizing that drinking “was becoming a crutch to deal with pressure I was under related to my responsibilities as majority leader.”

Mr. Flanagan, 56, made the announcement in a four-paragraph statement after queries from Newsday, the Long Island newspaper that reports in the majority leader’s district.

“This is a step I needed to take for myself and for my family, and it will allow me to continue to serve and to give back to my community and state,” Mr. Flanagan said.

In response on Sunday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo offered his support via Twitter, writing: “Alcoholism is a disease. @LeaderFlanagan deserves our respect & support for seeking help & for talking about it as an example for others.

Certainly ” Alcoholism is a common problem” among politicians up and down the scale. As majority leader of the Senate, there is an added responsibility and respectability to the TAX-PAYERS.

Such ends up on the back burner. Special interest groups & lobbies love to “PARTY-WITH” and influence leaders decisions. Of the 365 days in a year, the New York Senate is in session 60 days during the first SIX months. then off for SIX months. Accountability to the people is never an issue, which should be expected by the Governor, and the other members of the Senate.

The lack of leadership is evident, when the Senate left June 21. 2017 with items still on the table. To return January of 2018.

The Republican leader of the State Senate, John J. Flanagan, under such dire pressure & sickness, should respectfully step down from the leadership position . The tax-payers deserve a competent leader in the position.

Lefty Wright

Lefty Wright
November 9, 2017
Reply

Watching and Listening to the Country Music Awards, wakes us up to what is missing from Hollywood, Media, and the SWAMP in Government.
Country People, Country Music, Country Entertainers, UNITE with Ethics, Integrity, Moral values, & HELP make AMERICA Great Again : Do all we can to support what is right, to eliminate the corrupt politicians, lobbyist, and duel citizens that occupy positions with-in ” OUR GOVERNMENT” — “Drain The Swamp” the rest will come much easier.

Rigged System: This Might Be the End of the Democratic Party

The Democratic Party has been in crisis mode since the election, though they’ve done an excellent job of hiding the internal panic from the public. Broke, lacking in public enthusiasm, and utterly failing to unite behind any agenda other than “We hate Donald Trump,” this is a party that can hear the tolling of the bells in the background every day of the week. For all their talk about taking back Congress next November, it’s hard to imagine who they think they’re actually fooling.

In fact, it’s not even clear what “taking back Congress” would actually mean, since it’s not quite clear what “being a Democrat” really means anymore. Half the party wants to throw away any vestiges that might remain of a pro-American, pro-capitalism, center-left agenda in favor of a wildly Communist strategy that will essentially make the term “Democrat” poisonous for a generation. The other half thinks it can succeed if it just panders a tiny bit more to minorities. And then there are one or two halfway sensible stalwarts who are begging the party to drop the extremist nonsense and actually start talking about things that make sense, like the economy and jobs. But so far, no one’s much listening to them.

Crooked Hillary Rigged the Primaries, But Did She Break the Law?

THE SWAMP—Democrats and Republicans that say NO to America. but YES to AIPAC & ISRAEL, accepting Thousands in campaign funding in .exchange for BILLIONS in foreign aid to illegal Occupation & human rights violations..Those American corrupt politicians that voted to make supporting BDS a crime in America.

NOTICE: The above message is not Conspiracy Theory, or Fake news letter, or from a Foreign Government interfering in coming elections. Facts are facts research it..

PINGBACKS / TRACKBACKS
Apple Introduces the iPad

Apple Introduces the iPad…

The Magic Bullet System…

January 17th, 2011 09:53 PM
LEAVE A COMMENT
Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

WHO WE ARE
WHAT WE DO
MEDIA CENTER
CONTACT

P.O. Box 8637
Silver Spring, MD 20907
ph (301)565-4050

GET INVOLVED

DONATE
Take Action
Blog

FOLLOW

Sign up for action alerts

Crafted by Cornershop Creative

FRIENDLY FIRE? FOREIGN FIGHTERS IN IRAQ ARE TIED TO US ALLIES
IRAQ
MURTHA AND WEBB RETURN FROM IRAQ WITH DIFFERENT VIEWS ON THE “SURGE”
IRAQ
