Title: Measles in Wisconsin Update—May 24, 2024

URL Source: https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/WIDHS/bulletins/39e4875

Markdown Content:
Measles in Wisconsin Update–May 24, 2024 ---------------------------------------- _This message is being sent to infection preventionists._ Since Wisconsin recorded a case of measles on April 26, 2024, **there have been no new measles cases reported in Wisconsin.**We are now beyond the incubation period of when we would expect to see secondary cases and have had none. Due to heightened awareness, testing for measles increased exponentially and all results have been negative to date. Given ongoing measles activity in the U.S., the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) urges health care providers to consider measles in individuals who are unvaccinated and may have traveled recently, and to review infection prevention and control best practices related to measles. We urge health care providers to use every opportunity to assess patients and ensure they are up to date with the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine. In recent years, the rates of MMR have dropped in school aged children, leaving pockets of our communities vulnerable to infection. Reports for reminder and recall efforts can be generated from the Wisconsin Immunization Registry (WIR) to indicate which patients are not vaccinated. Additionally, it is important to ensure all existing health care staff are immune to measles and that documentation is readily available and processes are in place to ensure new employees are immune as well. ### Measles testing When a patient presents with rash and fever without any travel or known exposure to an individual with measles, please consider differential diagnoses. If truly suspecting measles, ensure the recommended testing is obtained: PCR (combined throat and nasopharyngeal swabs), serology (IgM and IgG). See the WSLH website for more information. Please contact your local and Tribal health department(LTHD), who will work with the DHS immunization program for testing approval and to arrange logistics for transportation of the specimens. ### Resources View this webinar by Dr. Joe McBride, Assistant Professor of Infectious Disease with UW-Madison, on the clinical presentation of measles. A GovD bulletin was sent out at the end of February with additional measles information on measles infection prevention and control, testing, and reporting. The Wisconsin Immunization Program can be reached at 608-267-9959 or after hours at 608-258-0099.
