Title: Youngkin mobilizes Virginia National Guard for anti-Trump 'No Kings' protests

URL Source: https://www.vpm.org/news/2025-10-17/youngkin-virginia-national-guard-no-kings-protest-donald-trump

Published Time: 2025-10-17T04:00:00Z

Markdown Content:
Gov. Glenn Youngkin has mobilized the Virginia National Guard ahead of Saturday's "No Kings" protests opposing President Donald Trump's policies.

Organizers say more than 2,000 demonstrations are planned across the country for the "No Thrones. No Crowns. No Kings" protest. More than 60 will be in the commonwealth, per organizers, including ones in Charlottesville, Richmond, Roanoke, Newport News and Northern Virginia.

In an email, VNG spokesperson A.A. "Cotton" Puryear told VPM News, "The Virginia National Guard has not received any formal requests for assistance, but VNG personnel will be on state active duty conducting training."

Youngkin spokesperson Peter Finocchio said the governor's office is coordinating with both protest organizers and law enforcement.

"The Governor has authorized state active duty for training to help ensure the Guard will be ready to respond if needed to help keep people safe," Finocchio wrote in a statement.

State code allows the governor to call Virginia National Guard personnel "on state active duty to conduct necessary training in order to be prepared for potential response operations," Puryear added.

An internal Virginia National Guard document obtained by VPM News shows a task force made up of a "Quick Reaction Force" and "Ready Reaction Force" are set to be staged outside of Richmond on Friday, including a "Non-Lethal Weapons Platoon."

The task force "may be employed as a unit to a single incident site, or by distributing squads to multiple incident sites, dependent on the needs of the supported agency," the document reads.

It adds that the task force will deploy from its staging areas if requested.

"The VNG is maintaining an increased state of readiness in order to be able to rapidly respond if needed," Puryear added.

"The VNG does not discuss details of operational plans for security reasons, but the VNG has been part of the coordination and planning across governmental agencies to help preserve peace, protect life and property and maintain public safety."

Puryear told VPM News that VNG typically responds in support of lead agencies such as Virginia State Police for domestic operations. A state police spokesperson declined to confirm or discuss any plans for Saturday's protests with VPM News due to "operational security reasons."

"Virginia State Police is respectful of all Virginians who desire to exercise their constitutional rights to free speech and to assemble. We work closely with our local law enforcement partners to ensure the safety of everyone who attends a public event," a VSP spokesperson wrote in an email.

The Virginia chapter of the national grassroots 50501 movement, RVA Indivisible and the Party for Socialism and Liberation in Virginia will host the Saturday's rally and march in Richmond.

"It's been a challenging few months," the 50501 Virginia chapter said in a statement. "Our government shut down. Freedom of speech attacked. Dissent silenced. Our neighbors disappeared."

National organizers said the "No Kings" demonstrations "adhere to a shared commitment to nonviolent protest and community safety," adding that they are trained in de-escalation and are working with local partners.

Republicans have criticized the protests, including House Speaker Mike Johnson of Louisiana, who recently described it as the "hate America rally."

"Fearful Republican politicians, eager to draw attention away from this spineless acquiescence to fascism, are now attacking the upcoming 'No Kings' protests," 50501 Virginia's statement continued.

Youngkin mobilized the Virginia National Guard to be on duty for the first "No Kings" protests on June 14 — which organizers estimated drew more than 5 million people across the U.S. — during Trump's military parade in DC.

That event, which Trump had long sought and was estimated to cost up to $45 million, commemorated the US Army's 250th anniversary and coincided with Trump's 79th birthday.

At the time, Youngkin noted people's right to assemble but warned attendees that they would be arrested if they broke the law.

Finocchio echoed that view in a similarly worded statement: "With planned protests across the country this weekend, including in Virginia, the Governor reiterates that Virginians have fundamental rights to free speech and peaceful assembly, and will protect those. However, those rights do not include the destruction of property, looting, vandalism, disruption of traffic, or violence of any kind—for which there will be zero tolerance."

No violence or other incidents between attendees and Virginia National Guardsmen were reported during June's demonstrations.

The Richmond rally will be held at Capitol Square with a slate of speakers before attendees march to Monroe Park. 50501 Virginia said more than 10,000 people attended June's "No Kings" protest in Richmond, and organizers hope to have more attendees Saturday.

Several advocacy groups are working to organize the protests, including the American Civil Liberties Union, the American Federation of Teachers, Common Defense, United We Dream and others.
